 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA 856 COURSE TITLE: ISSUES AND PROBLEMS IN HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA i  COURSE GUIDE EDA 856 ISSUES AND PROBLEMS IN HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA Course Developer/ Writer: Dr. M. N. Amadi Department of Educational Administration University of Lagos Course Editor: Prof. J. K. Adeyemi Faculty of Education, UNIBEN, Benin Staff in Charge: Dr S O Ogundiran School of Education N O U N Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr Bolanle Awe School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos ii  CONTENTS Introduction .
What you will Learn in this course .
Course Aims Course Objectives Working through this Course ..
Course Materials .. Study Units ..
The Assignment File Presentation Schedule .. Assessment .. Tutor-Marked Assignment ...
Final Examin ation and Grading ...
Course Marking Scheme ..
Course Overview .
How to Get the Best from the Course .. Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials .. Summary .. iii None Introduction EDA 856: Issues and Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria is a semester course.
It is a two (2) credit units course.
It is a 700 level course designed for all students offering M.Ed (Educational Administration and Planning).
This course will expose you to an understanding of the issues and problems in Nigerian higher educational system.
It will assist you to be able to handle these tasks as these are the major issues and challenges faced by the school administrators in carrying out their functional roles in the school setting.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will need and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also gives you hints on your tutor-marked assignments; the details will be given to you, at your study centre.
There are tutorial sessions that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend these tutorial classes.
The time and venue will be made available at the centre.
The course consists of 15 units plus a course guide and they include: Concept of Education; Concept of Higher Education; and Concept of Policy; Historical Development of Higher Education in Nigeria; Some aspect of General University Governance; Issue of Autonomy and External Control; Issue of Academic Freedom in Higher Education; Issue of Relevance of Higher Education Curriculum and Programmes; Issue of Student Activism and Administration; Issue of University Committee System; Issue of Accountability; Issue of Quality and Quality Assurance in Higher Education; Other Issues in Higher Education in Nigeria; Problems in Higher Education; and Solutions to the Problems in Higher Education.
What You Will Learn in This Course The overall aim of EDA 856: Issues and Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria is to acquaint you with the concept of Higher Education and more especially the historical development of higher education in Nigeria and that Nigerian higher education is bedeviled with issues and problems.
During this course, you will learn about these issues and problems and how they can be managed.
The course will expose you to an understanding of the some general aspect of university governance and committee system which serve as a i  framework for the practice of Administration and the principal officers that are involved in university governance.
Issue of Curriculum Relevance and Programmes which has a specific mission of producing a critical mass of Nigerians, it is against this background that it becomes pertinent to highlight for innovative curriculum structures and methods.
The course will also refresh your knowledge on the issue of autonomy and academic freedom, autonomy which is the tenet upon which higher institutions system rests.
Issues of Accountability and academic freedom in higher education will be broadly spelt out.
Other issues in higher education will be discussed.
Problems in higher education and solutions to them will be explained.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to introduce you to the basic fundamental issues and problems encountered by the institutional administrators in Nigerian higher educational system.
Specifically this course will aim to: 1.
Explain the meaning of higher education 2.
State the policy of higher education in Nigeria 3.
Discuss some general aspects of University Governance 4.
Examine the issue of relevance of curriculum content and delivery in Nigeria higher education 5.
Identify issues in higher education system 6.
Discuss the problems in Nigerian higher education system 7.
List and explain the solutions to the problems in higher education Course Objectives There are overall objectives set out in order to achieve the aims set out for this course.
Each unit of this course has some performance objectives.
These are included at the beginning of every unit.
You may wish to refer to them as you study the unit in order to help you check your progress.
You should also look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In doing so you will ensure that you have done what are required to do by the unit.
ii  Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course you should be able to: • Explain the meaning and aims of higher education.
• Discuss the historical development of higher education in Nigeria • State the policy of higher education • Enumerate the goals of higher education • Identify and explain some general aspects of University Governance • Explain governance in university management • Identify the principal officers in the university • Discuss concisely the issue of higher education autonomy and academic freedom • Discuss the historical overview of autonomy in Nigerian universities • Explain the concept of curriculum • Appreciate the issue of relevance of curriculum • Identify curriculum contents and delivery in the pre-colonial and post-colonial period.
• Discuss why major curriculum adjustment and procedure never succeed in Nigeria • Identify issue of student activism and administration • Appraise each of these administrative areas • Define the concept of accountability • State the reasons for issue of accountability in higher education • Discuss the issues facing Nigerian higher education • Outline the issue in higher educational institutions in Nigeria • Discuss the problems in higher educational institutions • Discuss the solutions to the problems of higher education Working Through This Course To complete this course, you are required to read each study unit and read the set of books and other relevant materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercise and at certain points in this course you will be required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is final examination.
The course should take iii  you about 17 weeks to complete.
Below, you will find the list of all the components of the course.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Unit There are 15 study units divided into three modules as follows: Module 1 Introduction to Higher Education Unit 1 Concepts of Education, Concept of Higher Education, and Concept of Policy Unit 2 Historical Development of Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 3 Some Aspects of General University Governance Unit 4 Issue of Autonomy in Higher Education (HE) Unit 5 Issue of Academic Freedom in Higher Education (HE) Module 2 Issue of Relevance of Higher Education Curriculum and Programmes Unit 1 Issue of Curriculum and Course System Unit 2 Issue of Student Activism and Administration Unit 3 Issue of University Committee System Unit 4 Issue of Accountability in Higher Education (HE) Unit 5 Issue of Quality and Quality Assurance in Higher Education (HE) Module 3 Other Issues in Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 1 Issues in Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Issue of Funding in Higher Education Unit 3 Problems in Higher Education iv  Unit 4 Solutions to the Problems in Higher Education Assignment File There are seventeen (17) Tutor-Marked Assignments in this course, covering all the units.
The file will be made available to you at your study centre.
The file will contain details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you in due course.
Also to be communicated to you are details of completing the study units and dates for examination.
Assessment There are three aspects of the assessments.
First is the Self Assessment exercise, second is the tutor-marked assignment and third is the written examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercise, while attempting the assignments.
You are expected to apply knowledge, information and techniques you have acquired while reading the course.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the final examination you will sit for two and half hours durations.
This examination will count for 70% of your course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are seventeen (17) tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit four assignments.
You are encouraged to submit all the four assignments as the best three out of the four will be considered.
Each of the best three assignment counts 10% towards total course marks.
v  Apart from your course materials provided, you are advised to read and research widely using other references which will give you a broader view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Assignment questions for each unit in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
Ensure all complete assignments are submitted before each deadline.
If for any reasons, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor to discuss the possibility of an extension before the assignment is due.
Except in exceptional circumstances contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension, extensions may not be granted after due date.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for this course will be three hours duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be assessed and the examination will consist of questions which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor marked assignments you have previously encountered.
Utilize the time between the conclusion of the last study unit and the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your assignments exercise and comments on them before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 Four assignments, best of the four, count 10% each 30% of course Mark Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course work As indicated in the table above, the work you submit will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course however, you will be required to sit for a final examination, which will also count for 70% of your total marks.
Course Overview vi  The table given below brings together the units, the number of weeks you should spend to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Module/ Title of Work Weekly Assessment Unit Activity (end of Unit) Course Guide Module 1 Introduction to Higher Education Unit 1 Concept of Education; Higher Education; and policy 1 1 Unit 2 Historical Development of Higher Education in 1 1 Nigeria Unit 3 Some General Aspects of University Governance 1 1 Unit 4 Issue of Autonomy and External Control 1 1 Unit 5 Issue of Academic Freedom in Higher Education 1 1 Module 2 Issue of Relevance of Curriculum and Programmes Unit 1 Issue of Curriculum and Course System 1 1 Unit 2 Issue of Student Activism and Administration 1 1 Unit 3 Issue of University Committee System Unit 4 Issue of Accountability in Higher Education (HE) 1 1 Unit 5 Issue of Quality and Quality Assurance in Higher Education (HE) Module 3 Other Issues in Higher Education Unit 1 Issues in Higher Education 1 1 Unit 2 Issue of Funding in Higher Education 1 1 Unit 3 Problems in Higher Education 1 1 Unit 4 Solutions to the problems in Higher Education 1 1 Revision 1 Total 1 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study materials are specially developed and designed to replace the lecturer.
You can work through these materials at your place, and at a time and pace that are convenient for you.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Each of the study unit follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the vii  subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objects will let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
Use these objectives to guide your study.
On completion of a unit, go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If made a habit, this will further enhance your chances of completing the course successfully.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course: 1.
Read this course guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule, which you must adhere to religiously.
The major reason students fail is that they get behind in their course work.
If you encounter difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know promptly.
3.
Turn to each unit and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
4.
Work through the unit.
The contents of the unit itself have been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
5. Review the objectives of each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them, if you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult with your tutor.
6.
When you are confident that you have achieved unit objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
7.
After submitting an assignment to your tutor for grading, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor s comments.
8.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives listed in this course guide.
viii  Facilitators There are seventeen (17) hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
Your tutor will mark and comment on the assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter, and provide assistance where necessary.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignment to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor and return to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or your discussion group (board) if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: 1.
You do not understand any of the study units or the assigned readings.
2.
You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
3.
You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutors comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should endeavour to attend tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefits from course tutorial, always prepare your questions, list them before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating.
Summary The course EDA 856 intends to acquaint you to problems and issues in higher education in Nigeria.
The course guide has given you and overview of what to expect in the course.
We therefore, sincerely wish you the best and that you enjoy this stimulating course with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
ix  COURSE MATERIAL DEVELOPMENT COURSE GUIDE EDA 856 ISSUES AND PROBLEMS IN HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA Course Developer/ Writer: Dr. M. N. Amadi Department of Educational Administration University of Lagos Course Editor: Prof. J. K. Adeyemi Faculty of Education, UNIBEN, Benin Staff in Charge: Dr S O Ogundiran School of Education N O U N Lagos x  CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Introduction to Higher Education Unit 1 Concepts of Education, Concept of Higher Education, and Concept of Policy Unit 2 Historical Development of Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 3 Some Aspects of General University Governance Unit 4 Issue of Autonomy and External Control in Higher Education (HE) Unit 5 Issue of Academic Freedom in Higher Education (HE) Module 2 Issue of Relevance of Higher Education Curriculum and Programmes Unit 1 Issue of Curriculum and Course System Unit 2 Issue of Student Activism and Administration Unit 3 Issue of University Committee System Unit 4 Issue of Accountability in Higher Education (HE) Unit 5 Issue of Quality and Quality Assurance in Higher Education (HE) Module 3 Other Issues in Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 1 Issues in Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Issue of Funding in Higher Education Unit 3 Problems in Higher Education Unit 4 Solutions to the Problems in Higher Education xi None MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION TO HIGHER EDUCATION Unit 1 Concept of Education; Higher Education; and Concept of Policy Unit 2 Historical Development of Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 3 Some Aspects of General University Governance Unit 4 Issue of Autonomy in Higher Education Unit 5 Issue of Academic Freedom in Higher Education UNIT 1 CONCEPT OF EDUCATION: HIGHER EDUCATION AND POLICY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Education 3.2 Meaning of Higher Education 3.3 Aims of Higher Education 3.4 Ways to Pursue Higher Education Goals 3.5 Concept of Policy 3.6 Concept of Educational Policy 3.7 The Policy of Higher Education in Nigeria 3.8 Stated Policy on Higher Education in Nigeria 3.9 Strategies for the Realization of Higher Education Goals in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The importance of education to human being cannot be over-emphasized.
Education is a human right that should be provided to all human beings solely by reasons of being human.
The need for higher education is partly based on the fact that those with higher education qualifications have a better chance of securing a job in a tough market compared to those without higher education qualifications.
The delivery of education in Nigeria has suffered from frequent strives staged by students, faculty and teachers.
Much of the difficulty lies in the fact that the sector is poorly funded by the 1  Federal, State and Local Governments.
These results in shortages of materials and human resources for education: lack of qualified teachers; a brain drain; few instructional inputs; and libraries.
The physical conditions of most schools are pathetic.
Some of these challenges are the bedrock upon which the course is addressed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define education • define the concept of policy • discuss issues surrounding the meaning • explain the concept of higher education • identify the various institutions that make up higher education • discuss the aims of Higher Education in Nigeria • state the policy of higher education 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Education Education concerns the individual and society.
It is the act of systematic development or training of the mind, capabilities or character through instruction or study.
Education varies as widely in its forms, philosophy, contents, and methods as there are different societies in the world.
Education is a life-long process that has interpretation in purpose, type and level.
It is a means of socializing people into the community, for upholding customs and traditions as well as for the modification or changing of same in conformity with existing ideologies, ideological expansion or reformation.
Education is an instrument for effecting national development.
Education can be defined as production and reproduction of knowledge of people s way of life (i.e.
their culture) with the aim of preserving and maintaining the social structure that will be able to guarantee social order and changes in the society.
Oni (1978) drives this point home further when he stated that education is one of the basic means of human and cultural self-realization as well as a means of realizing the productive power of a nation.
The very concept of development according to him implies the constant improvement in the quality of life in a nation through the improvement of the productive 2  capabilities of individuals.
Education is one of the decisive tools for achieving this.
Since culture differs from one society to another, every society ultimately has its own system for training and educating youth.
Accordingly, the goal of education and the method of approach may differ from place to place, nation to nation and people to people.
For example, the Greek idea of an educated man was one who was mentally and physically well balanced.
The Roman, on the other hand, placed emphasis on training.
During the middle Ages in England, the Knight, the Lord and the Priest were considered classical examples of a well educated elite.
In France, the Scholar was the hallmark of excellence.
In Germany, it was the Patriot.
In old Africa, the warrior, the hunter, the noble man, the man of character or anyone who combined the latter feature with a specific skill adjudged to be well-educated and well-integrated citizen of his community.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 1.
What do you understand by education 2.
How do various nations, and people perceive an educated man 3.2 Concept of Higher Education The definition of higher education differs according to the context.
Almost all definitions agree that higher education refers to post-secondary education (or study beyond the level of post secondary education) where a degree, diploma, or certificate is awarded at the end of study.
Higher education builds on the level of competence, knowledge and skills normally acquired in secondary education.
The exact definition of this level, of higher education institution or programme varies from one country to another.
Consequently, the concept of higher education institution may also vary.
For example, in some countries, teacher education is considered to be a field of higher education.
In some countries, it is considered to be part of post-secondary education but not part of higher education.
The Association of African University s (AAU) Working Group on Higher Education recommends that higher education should include tertiary education institutions other than universities.
In addition, at the second African Union (AU) Meeting of Experts, higher education was described as including all post secondary education, including universities, polytechnics 3  and technical colleges, teachers training institutions, institute for medical training and agriculture (and other fields), distance education centers, and research centers and institutes, with the possibility of expanding to include other forms of post secondary education.
In this context, the National Policy on Education (FGN, 2004), defines Higher Education as the Post Secondary Section of the National education system, which is given of Universities, Polytechnics and Colleges of Technology including courses as are given by the Colleges of Education, Advanced Teachers Training colleges, Correspondence Colleges and such Institutions as may be allied to them.
The National Policy on Education (FGN, 2004) provides a guide at attempting to fulfill the nation s objectives.
This nation has five major objectives as stated in the Second National Development plan namely:- • a free and democratic society • a just and egalitarian society • united strong and self-reliant nation • a great and dynamic economy • a land of bright and full of opportunities for all citizens.
From these broad policy objective were derived the National Policy on Education which spelt out the philosophy of Nigerian Education.
Each level of education derived its purpose from this philosophy.
Since higher education is the main concern of this unit, suffice to say that it drew its purpose from the broad philosophy of Nigerian education for the attainment of the specific objectives.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 Highlight the concept of Higher Education 3.3 Aims of Higher Education Higher education, including professional education has the following aims: • the acquisition, development and inculcation of the proper value- orientation for the survival of the individual and societies; • the development of the intellectual capacities of individuals to understand and appreciate environment; • the acquisition of both physical and intellectual skills which will 4  enable individuals to develop into useful members of the community; • the acquisition of an overview of the local and external environments (FGN, 2004).
3.4 Ways to Pursue Higher Education Goals The National Policy on Education again stated that higher educational institutions should pursue these goals through: • Teaching • Research • the dissemination of existing and new information • the pursuit of service to the community; and • by being a store- house knowledge (FGN, 2004).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 3 1.
List the five major national objectives as stated in the National Policy on Education 2.
What are the aims of higher education in Nigeria?
3.5 Concept of Policy Policies are written or unwritten statements that guide present and future thinking, initiatives, actions and decisions of managers.
They are written when there are documents somewhere for reference purposes and are unwritten when they are made in form of pronouncements i.e.
policy statements by people in power or position of authority.
Policies are guides that usually provide the latitude of operations of managers.
It makes managers understand the extent to which they can go in the process of decision making.
3.6 Concept of Educational Policy 5  The Educational Policy of Nigeria is a general statement containing principles, regulations and rules, that govern many of the decisions on how to educate children, where to get them educated, where to get them employed, who to teach them, how to finance their education, what to teach, how to impart skills, goals, objectives and even the philosophy.
The National Policy on Education, revised in (1989; 1998; 2004), contains every necessary ingredient for the achievement of the goals of the education system.
The planning for the education system takes its root from the policy of the education.
Alternative courses of action would then be taken with due cognizance of the objectives, philosophy and goals of each level of education to make comprehensive plans for the education system.
3.7 Concept of Higher Education From a global perspective, economic and social developments are increasingly driving the advancement and application of knowledge.
Education in general and higher education in particular, are fundamental to the construction of a knowledge economy and society in all nations.
The nation looks up to higher education to through its traditional functions of teaching, research and community service to develop manpower and disseminate necessary knowledge that are needed in industry and other sectors.
The Nigeria higher education system comprised of universities, polytechnics, and colleges offering programmes in teacher education and agriculture.
Higher education is a community of scholars, free to pursue knowledge without undue interference from anywhere.
3.8 The Policy of Higher Education in Nigeria The policy for higher education in Nigeria is embedded in the National Policy on Education.
So also other issues approved from time to time by the National Council on Education (NCE) which is the highest decision- making body on education related matters.
Again, are the other policies legislated and passed into law in respect of higher education operations and management in the country.
The policy for higher education in Nigeria is based on what the government approves as the practice to be promoted in Nigeria or what the government of the day legislates within the overall goal of higher education.
Higher education in Nigeria has seven goals, The National Policy on Education document specified how these goals shall be pursued by higher educational institutions in Nigeria SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIC E 4 6  Write short notes on the following: 1.
Concept of policy 2.
Educational Policy 3.
Policy on Higher Education in Nigeria 3.9 Policy on Higher Education in Nigeria Various policies on higher education in Nigeria emanated from the Longe Commission Report of 1992.
They addressed: • Education Tax Fund (ETF); • The problem of advancement and progression of polytechnic graduates receives attention; • Quality and access Government through the instrumentality of the various supervisory agencies in the higher education sector, namely NUC, National Board for Technical Education (NABTE), National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE), set up Basic Minimum Academic Standard (BMAS) for all academic programmes and courses run in universities, polytechnics and colleges of education in Nigeria.
The issue of access and equity in Nigeria higher education has a constitutional backing and the National Policy on Education also affirms it; • Deregulation policy of the government on higher education on the National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS), policy trust.
NEEDS document represent new dimensions in the policy for achieving the goals of higher education; • Institutional audits of all universities and associated parastatals; • Revocation of the Vice-Chancellors former privilege of personally selecting 10% of each year s student intake; • Reconstitutions of all university governing councils with broader representation; • Exemption of university staff from public service salary scales and regulation, 180% increase in funding of the university system that raised per student allocations from the equivalent of USD 360 to USD 970 per year; • Government Policy on Autonomy for Universities; • Policy on update and restructure curricula to meet the demands of the national economy.
3.9 Strategies for the Realization of Higher Education Goals in Nigeria 7  • Teaching research and development; • Virile staff development; • Generation and dissemination of knowledge • A variety of modes of programme including full-time, part-time, sandwich etc.
• Access to training funds.
Such as those provided by the Industrial Training Fund (ITF); • Student industrial Work Experience scheme (SIWES); • Maintenance of Minimum educational standards through appropriate agencies; • Inter-institutional cooperation, dedicated services to the community through extramural and extension services; • Establish effective monitoring of public and private universities to ensure strict adherence to standards; • Develop innovative approaches to ensure continuous retooling and capacity building of lecturers so that they operate at cutting edge of their discipline; • Increasing move towards a decentralized and competitive wage bargaining system, which promotes a performance-based reward system.
SELF ASSESSMENT 5 1.
What are the stated policies on Higher Education in Nigeria?
2.
Some strategies can be used for the realization of Higher Education in Nigeria.
List them.
4.0 CONCLUSION Education is indispensable of human progress.
Education in general and higher education in particular, are fundamental to the construction of a knowledge economy in all nations.
We have explained in detail the meaning of policy as a statement of action or purpose/goal and administrative directives.
Educational Policy-makers, therefore, have to understand the principles of policy analysis if they and the people they delegate have to explore the best way to make rational decisions.
8  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the meaning of education, meaning of higher education, and concept of policy, in Nigeria have been discussed.
We are able to see that education is the production of people s way of life.
We also discussed the composition of higher education system.
The National Policy on Education objectives, aims and ways to pursue higher education were highlighted.
The policy of higher education in Nigeria, strategies for the realization of higher education goals and aspect of higher education policy were also enumerated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Higher Education is the bedrock upon which the Nigerian society can develop economically, socially and politically.
Discuss.
2.
There are some aspects of higher education policy, list and explain four (4).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS African Union, (2007).
Harmonization of Higher Education Programmes In Africa: Opportunities and Challenges.
Third ordinary session Of the conference of Ministers of Education of the African Union 6th -10th August 2007.
South Africa: AU/EXP/EDU/2 (111) part 1 Babalola, J.
B, A.O.
Ayeni, S. O. Adedeji, A.
A. Suleiman, & M. O. Arikewuyo (2006) (ed).
Educational Management: Thoughts andPractice.
Ibadan: Codat Publication Biodun, O.
(2000).
Crises of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Books Farm Publishers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) National Policy on Education, Lagos: FRN.
[ National Planning Officer, Fourth National Development Plan Federal Republic of Nigeria: (1981 -85), vol.
1.
1981.
9  Ndu, A., Ocho, L. O., Okeke; and B. S. (1992) (ed).
Educational Policy and Implementation in Nigeria.
Anambra: Mekslink Publishers (Nig).
Ndu, A., Ocho, L. O., and Okeke, B. S. (1997) (ed).
Higher Education in Nigeria: A status Report.
Washington, D.C: Published in Higher Educatio n Policy, 2003,16. pp.259-281 (http://174.125.47/32/earching?4.eacheij5x.541b9QQJ:www.beedu/b c-orglavp/soe/cihelinhea/profiles/heni..accessed of May, 2009.
William, S, A. Teresa, Hartnett, & E. Strassner (2003).
Higher Education in Nigeria: A status Report Washington, D. C: Published in Higher Education Policy, 2003, 16, pp.
259-281 (http://174.125.47./32/searching?4.cacheijsxr41b9QaJ: www.be.edu/bc-orglavp/soe/clhe/inheal/profiles/he-ni... accessed 8 may, 2009).
10  UNIT 2 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Development of Higher Education in Nigeria 3.2 Goals of Higher Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we treated the concept of education, higher education and policy.
In this unit, discussion will be on the historical development of Higher Education in Nigeria.
Higher education is in travail, the system is riddled with crises of various dimensions and magnitude.
A number of multi-faceted problems have inhibited goal attainment and are raising questions, doubts and fears, all of which combine to suggest that the system is at a cross road.
You will therefore learn about the genesis of events that led to higher education in Nigeria.
The goals of higher education would equally be discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • discuss the historical development of higher education in Nigeria • distinguish between the aims and goal of higher education in Nigeria • list the goals of higher education 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of Higher Education in Nigeria The Nigerian higher education system is comprised of Universities, Polytechnic and Colleges of Education offering programs in areas such as teacher education 11  and agriculture.
It is the largest and most complex higher education system on the continent.
The literature reviewed focused mainly on Universities with minimal reference to other components of the system.
Issues raised are mainly issues affecting the University system.
It is assumed that the trends observed in the Federal Universities are similar to those that are found in some State Universities and other components of the higher education system.
The first higher educational institution, the Yaba Higher College, was established in 1932.
The agitation of Nigerians for a more comprehensive higher education provision led to the constitution of Asquith and Elliot Commissions on Higher Education.
Their reports in 1943 favoured the establishment of universities in Nigeria.
Consequently, in 1948, the University College Ibadan was founded as an affiliate of the University of London.
University College continued as the only University Institution in Nigeria until 1960 (Jubril, 2003).
In April 1959, the Nigerian government commissioned an inquiry (Ashby Commission) to advise it on the higher education needs of the new nation for its first two decades of Independence.
Before the submission of the report in 2 September, 1960, the Eastern Region government established its own university at Nsukka.
(University of Nigeria Nsukka in 1960).
The recommendation of the Ashby Report includes among others: 1. the Federal Government should give support to the development of new Universities of Nigeria, planned in 1955 and open a few weeks before the publication of the Ashby Report in 1960; 2. a university should be established in the north using the old site of the Nigerian college in Zaria as its base; 3. a university should be established in Lagos with day and evening courses in business, commerce and economics; 4.
University College Ibadan, should move away from its conservative position, widen its curriculum and develop into a full university; 5. all universities in Nigeria should be national in outlook; 6. there should be wider diversity and greater flexibility in university education; 7. all the universities should have B.
A.
(Education) degree courses; 8. courses in engineering, medicine, law, commerce and agriculture should be offered; 9. all new Nigerian universities should be independent of one another and each should confer its own degrees; 10. a National Universities Commission should be set up to have undisputed control over the affairs of the universities, particularly in terms of finance, staff and courses.
12  In the Eastern Region, the University of Nigeria, Nsukka was founded in 1960; in the West, the Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile Ife (formerly, the University of Ife came to be in 1961; and Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria was established in the North in 1962.
In 1962, the University of Lagos was born, while in 1962, the University College Ibadan transformed into a substantive university.
This made UCI, Ibadan and University of Lagos became the first two federal universities in Nigeria while other three were regional.
In 1970, the newly created Bendel State established a university known as University of Benin.
The 6 universities established during this period 1960 1970 are referred to as first generation universities.
In 1975, all the six universities mentioned above became federal universities while seven new ones were in existence by 1977 to reflect the nineteen states structure of Nigeria as at 1976.
These second generation universities as they were referred to include the University of Calabar (1975); the University of Illorin (1976); the University of Jos (1975); the University of Sokoto (1977); the University of Maiduguri (1977); the University of Port Harcourt (1977); and Bayero University Kano (1977).
They became federal universities by virtue of Decree 46 of 1977 which provided for Federal Government take-over of all universities in Nigeria.
The 1979 constitution s transfer of university education from the exclusive to the concurrent legislative list is meant that states governments were free to establish state-owned universities if they so desired.
As a result of this development, between 1979 and 1983, the following universities were founded: Bendel State University, Ekpoma; Anambra State University of Technology, Enugu; Imo State University; Etiti; Ogun State University, Ago-Iwoye; Ondo State University, Ado-Ekiti; Rivers State University of Science and Technology, Port Harcourt; Cross River State University, Uyo; and Lagos State University, Ijanikin.
Seven Federal Universities of Technology emerged between 1981 and 1985.
These were the Federal Universities of Technology Bauchi (1982 / 1982); Markurdi (1981 / 1982); Owerri (1981 / 1982); Yola (1982 / 1983); Akure ( 1982 / 1983); Abeokuta (1983 / 1984); Minna ( 1983 / 1984).
The Federal University of technology, Yola, became an out-post of University of Maiduguri.
The University of Jos absorbed the Federal University of Technology, Makurdi as the out-post of the former, while the Federal University of Technology, Abeokuta became a campus of the University of Lagos (Okon, 2006).
Following the dawn of the third republic (from May 29, 1999 till date), there has been increase in universities establishment across the nation.
The fourth generation universities are those ones established between 1991 to date.
They included more state universities, National Open Universities and private universities.
Students numbers are in scores of thousands.
As for Polytechnics and Colleges of Education, they are in excess in number respectively.
13  Okebukola (1998) insists that reviewing trends in higher education should centre on programme development; access and equity (enrolment), facilities; teaching; research; community service and financing.
Clearly, these constitute the quality benchmarks of a typical higher education system.
Nigeria s higher education is beset more by evidences of systemic maladies rather than salutary breakthroughs.
The predicaments commonly characteristic of Nigerian higher institutions of learning since the 1980s, and especially in the 1990 s and in this 21st century include obvious inadequacy of funding; low staff motivation; the brain drain syndrome; disproportionate staff-student ratio; and scanty research feats.
The educational malpractices easily identified in higher institutions are examination fraud; students versus host community clashes; cultism; students indecent dress code; drug abuse; violent behaviour and sexual harassment; shallow teaching; financial exploitation of students by lecturers; among others.
On the issue of higher education quality assurance, Akintoye (2004) states that only few programmes run in Nigerian universities had full accreditation.
A similar experience says Akintoye (2004), Polytechnics have expired accreditation.
In fact, the Polytechnics appear to be in a quandary over the worth of their certificate in comparison with the more society- preferred university degree.
The Colleges of Education do not seem to fare much better.
Research work, the main plank of higher education s knowledge generation has been roundly pilloried for being far below expectation in quantum and novelty.
The rise of private universities coupled with the re-opening of the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) on 29th March, 2004 after a 20- year ban is apparently a measure intended to absorb the teeming Nigerian youngsters whose quest for university education in particular, and higher education in general, is monolithic.
This might just be an answer to admission problems into higher institutions of learning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 Explain the history of higher education in Nigeria 3.2 Goals of Higher Education in Nigeria 14  The main purpose and relevance of higher education in Nigeria is the provision of much needed manpower to accelerate the socio economic development of the nation.
Such specialized education at the higher level is regarded as an instrument of social change and economic development.
All over the world, higher education are recognized as centres of excellence, where knowledge is acquired and disseminated to those who require it.
They are formal institutions set up by the society to be centres of learning.
The universal idea of the higher education is a community of scholars, free to pursue knowledge without undue interference from any quarters.
It is also a place where instruction is given and received without harassment and undue interference from the outside world.
Higher institutions are enterprises that produce and distribute public good, which is knowledge.
The production of knowledge has always been the focus of higher institutions through teaching and research.
Higher institutions also advance and diffuse consciousness of the entire society.
Their outputs are critical factors for the maintenance and adaptive structures of the society.
Therefore, the role they play in the society cannot be ignored.
Specifically, the goals of higher education (including university education) in Nigeria are to: (1) contribute to national development through high level relevant manpower training; (2) develop and calculate proper values for the survival of the individual and society; (3) develop the intellectual capability of individuals to understand and appreciate their local and external environments; (4) acquire both physical and intellectual skills which will enable individual to be self reliant and useful members of the society; (5) promote and encourage scholarship and community service; (6) forge and cement national unity understanding and integration (FRN, 2004, section 45) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 What are the goals of higher education in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION The history of higher education in Nigeria started with the Elliot Commission of 1943, which moved the establishment of University College Ibadan (UCI) in 1948.
Higher education in Nigeria were saddled with a 15  number of problems, such as rigid constitutional provisions, poor staffing and low enrolment to high dropout rate that which precipitated the commissioning of the Ashby Commission in 1959.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt the historical development of education in Nigeria and that higher educational institutions comprised of Universities, Polytechnics and colleges of Education.
We also discussed the goals of higher education in Nigeria.
They contribute to the national development through high level relevant manpower training; forge and cement national unity and develop and culcate proper values for the survival of the individual and society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Trace the origin and the historical development of higher educational institutions in Nigeria.
2.
What are the goals of tertiary education in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.
A. and Ekundayo, H. T. (2006).
Management of University Education in Nigeria: Problems and Possible Solutions.
Being a paper presented at the National Conference of National Association of Education Administration and Planning.
Enugu State University of Science and Technology.
Akintoye, S. (2004, Dec .2).
Saving varsity education from collapse.
The Punch, p.15.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) National Policy on Education, Lagos: FRN.
Jubril, M. (2003).
Country Higher Education Profiles.
www.google.com Accessed 16 September, 2009.
Olalekan A. M. (n.d).
University Management and Staff Unions in Nigeria: Issues and Challenges 16  (http://www..puk.ac.za/opencms/export/puk/htm/fakulteite/opvoed/e duc.artikels/gekeurde/nigeria.pdf.
(Access 5 August, 2009).
Okebukola, P. (1998).
Trends in Tertiary Education in Nigeria.
In UNESCO (Ed.)
The State of Education in Nigeria.
Lagos: UNESCO Lagos Office.
Okon, E. J.
(2006).
Educational Management: Thoughts and Practice (Ed.)
Ibadan: Codat Publications Ltd. UNIT 3 SOME ASPECTS OF GENERAL UNIVERSITY GOVERNANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Governance 3.2 Constitution and Functions of the University 3.3 Powers of the University and their Exercise 3.4 Governance and Management of University Education in Nigeria 3.5 University Governance 3.6 Statutory Organs of the University Conclusion Summary Tutor-Marked Assignment References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION University is an autonomous public institution with general function of providing liberal higher education, and encouraging the advancement of 17  learning throughout Nigeria.
University governance is the management of men and women with most highly developed and developing minds and intellects.
The ultimate aim of University activities is application of affairs of men.
The active agents are the academic staff and students.
This study unit will give you an insight to know the constitution and functions of the University; powers of the University and their exercise; the principal officers of the universities are: the Chancellor, Pro-Chancellor, Vice- Chancellor, Registrar, Bursar and the university Liberian.
You must be prepared to learn the governance and management of universities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of university governance • outline the constitution and functions of the University • list and explain the powers of the University and their exercise • outline the duties of the principal officers in the university • discuss governance and management of universities 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Governance Governance refers to the means by which higher educational (also tertiary or post secondary) institutions are formally organized and managed, though often there is a distinction between definitions of management and governance.
Simply, university governance is the way in which universities are operated.
Governing structures for higher education are highly differentiated throughout the world.
Altbach (2005) notes that the different models for higher education throughout the world do share a common heritage.
Coldrake, Stedman and Little (2003) also discuss the shared traditions and history of higher education worldwide.
Internationally, tertiary educations are governed by differentiated structures of management.
The concept of governance for university education refers to the internal structure, organization and management of autonomous institutions.
The organization of internal governance is generally composed of governing board, the university chief executive with a team of administrative 18  chancellors and staff, faculty senate, academic deans, departmental heads and usually some form of organization for student representation.
Governance by Kezar and Eckel (2004) who define governance at the macro-level of policy decision making.
Both suggest that governance is a multi-level concept, including several different bodies and processes with different decision-making functions.
Generally, institutions are recognized as autonomous actors with varying degrees of interdependence and commitments to the external stakeholders, state and national government.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 What do you understand by university governance?
3.2 Constitution and Functions of the University • to provide courses of instruction and learning in the faculties of arts; law; medicine; science; education; commerce; and business administration, engineering, and any other faculties which may, from time to time , be approved by the University Act; • the University shall be a body corporate and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal; • the objects of the University shall be • to encourage the advancement of learning and to hold out all persons without distinction of race, creed, sex or political conviction the opportunity of acquiring a higher education; • to provide courses of instruction and other facilities for the pursuit of learning in all its branches and to make those facilities available on proper terms to such persons as are equipped to benefit from them; • to encourage, promote and conduct research in all fields of learning and human endeavour; and • to undertake any other activities appropriate for a University of the highest standard (UNILAG, Act).
3.3 Powers of the University and their Exercise • to establish such colleges; faculties; institutes; schools; extra-mural departments and other teaching units within the University as may from time to time seems necessary or desirable; 19  • to institute professorships, readerships and other posts and offices and to make appointments thereto; • to institute and award fellowships; scholarships; exhibitions; bursaries; medals; prizes and other titles, distinctions; awards and forms of assistance; • to provide for the residence, discipline and welfare of members of the University; • to hold examinations and grants degrees; diplomas; certificates and other distinctions to persons who have pursued a course of study approved by the University and have satisfied such other requirements as the University may lay down; • to grant honorary degrees; fellowships or academic titles; • to demand and receive from any student or any other person attending the University for the purpose of instruction, such fees as the University may from time to time determine; • to acquire; hold; grant; charge or otherwise deal with or dispose of movable and immovable property whenever situate; • to accept gifts; legacies and donations, but without obligation to accept the same for a particular purpose unless it approves the terms and conditions attaching thereto; • to enter into contracts; establish trusts; act as trustee, solely or jointly with any other person, and employ and act through agents; • to erect; provide; equip and maintain libraries; laboratories; lecture halls; halls of residence; refectories; sports grounds; playing fields and other buildings or things (whether in Nigeria or elsewhere) necessary or suitable or convenient for any of the objects of the University; • to hold public lectures and to undertake publishing and bookselling; • subject to any limitations or conditions imposed by statute, to invest any moneys appertaining to the University by way of endowment, whether for general or special purposes, and such other moneys as may not be immediately required for current expenditure, in any investments or securities or in the purchase or improvement of land, with power from time to time to vary any such investments, and to deposit moneys for the time being uninvested with any bank on deposit or current account; • to borrow, whether at interest or not and if need be upon the security of any or all of the property movable or immovable of the University, such moneys as the council may from time to time in its discretion find it necessary or expedient to borrow; • to make gifts for any charitable purpose; 20  • to do anything which it is authorized or required by the Act or by statute to do; • to do all such acts or things, whether or not incidental to the foregoing powers, as may advance the objects of the University.
3.4 Governance and Management of University Education in Nigeria The main aim of the university management is the coordination of the activities of staff and students without interfering with academic decisions.
University governance is the management of academics, human (management of men and women) and material resources in the production of persons that are found worthy both in character and learning.
Management of university education can be looked at from two dimensions: the external and the internal dimensions.
The external dimension is the control by the federal government through the National University Commission (NUC), a body charged with the coordination of university management in the country.
On the other hand, the internal management of each university is represented by a simple organogram.
The first is the visitor who is usually the head of State or the Head of government that established it.
(The president in case of federal universities and the governors in case of state universities).
He usually comes to grace the convocation ceremonies where he uses the occasion to address the academic communities on matters of the moment.
3.5 University Governance The principal officers of university are: • Vice Chancellor • The Chancellor • Pro-Chancellor • Registrar • Bursar 21  • University Librarian 3.6 Statutory Organs of the University • The Visitor (Head of State) • Deputy Vice Chancellor (Administration) • Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic) • Governing Council • Senate • Congregation • All graduates of the university • Undergraduates of the university 1.
The Vice- Chancellor The Registrar is responsible to the Vice- Chancellor for the day to day administration of the University while the Bursar is responsible to him for the day- to- day administration of the financial affairs of the University.
The Vice- Chancellor is the Chief Executive and Academic Head of the university.
He is vested by law with the general function of directing the activities of the university for which purpose he is advised and assisted by the Deputy Vice- Chancellors, Registrar, Bursar, University Librarian, the Provost, Deans and Heads of Department.
Unlike the President, however whose cabinet is his cabinet and the members are only in an advisory capacity, the Vice-Chancellor is an ordinary member of Council with the Pro- Chancellor as Chairman.
Admittedly, since the Pro-Chancellor is on a part-time appointment, most of the policies of council are normally carried out by the Vice-Chancellor and his staff.
Moreover in all his dealings with outside bodies, organizations and individuals, the Vice- Chancellors are the accredited university representative.
The Vice-Chancellor is the Chairman of Senate and all its statutory committees.
However because of his involvement in numerous committees, he is represented in some of these by his Deputy Vice- Chancellor, the Deans and at times by his personal representative.
The Vice-Chancellor could remove a person appointed as external examiner for any examination organized by senate if proved wanting and appoint 22  another examiner in his place.
Few Vice-Chancellors have assistants trained to document issues in areas of controversy in the application of rules.
If any decision involves waiving rules, the Vice-Chancellor has to approve this on behalf of Senate and later seek Senate ratification for the measure.
Where it appears to the Vice-Chancellor that any student has been guilty of misconduct, the Vice-Chancellor may, without prejudice to any other disciplinary powers conferred on him by regulations direct that the student shall not participate in the activities of the University; make use of the University Facilities; be rusticated; or be expelled from the University.
2.
The Chancellor The Chancellor in relation to the University, take precedence before all other members of the University, and when he is present shall preside at all meetings of congregation held for conferring degrees and at all meetings of convocation.
The Chancellor takes office on the date when notice of his appointments is published in the Federal Gazette and, subject to the provision of the University Act, and shall hold office for a period of seven years beginning with that date.
If it appears to the Visitor that the Chancellor should be removed from office on the ground of misconduct or of inability to perform the functions of his office, the Visitor may by notice in the Federal Gazette remove the Chancellor from the office.
The Chancellor is appointed by the Visitor.
3.
The Pro-Chancellor The Pro-Chancellor in relation to the University, take precedence before all other members of the University except the Chancellor and except the Vice-Chancellor when acting as Chairman of Congregation or convocation and except the Deputy-Vice-Chancellor when so acting; and the Pro-Chancellor shall, when he is present, be the Chairman at all meetings of the Council.
The Pro-Chancellor is appointed by the Head of State for a period of 4 years.
Be the amendment of the University Act, the Pro-Chancellor was appointed by the Chancellor on the recommendation of Council.
There is no specific qualification for an appointment to the post of Pro-Chancellor.
Many of those who are so appointed have no previous experience in University administration while a few are either retired Professors or former Vice-Chancellor.
It is 23  in this regard that efforts should be made to recruit top quality men for such jobs.
Mere political jobbery should not be the main yardstick since some of those who came in through party patronage have failed woefully because they were unwilling to understand the ethos of the University system.
4.
The Registrar The Registrar is the Chief Administrative Officer of the university and is responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for the day to day administration of the affairs (except financial affairs) of the University.
Some University Acts have spelt out the Registrar s functions to be the Chief Administrative Officer of the University, and shall be responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for the day- to- day administrative work of the University, except as regards matter for which the Bursar is responsible.
The Registrar is by the virtue of that office, Secretary to the Council; the Senate; Congregation and Convocation.
The Registrar overseer s the administration of affairs such as academic; establishment; information; public relations; student s affairs; recruitment and promotion of staff; keepers of records and Secretary to committee and as from time to time assigned to him by the Vice-Chancellor.
The Registry is presently organized into three main divisions: § Academic § Personnel § General Administration 5.
The Bursar The Bursar is the Chief Financial Officer of the university and is responsible to the Vice- Chancellor for the day-to-day administration and control of the financial affairs of the university.
6.
University Librarian The university Librarian is responsible to the Vice Chancellor for the administration of the university library and the coordination of all library services in the university and its colleges, faculties, schools, and institute and other teaching units.
The Bursar is appointed in such manner as may be specified by statute and hold office for such period and on such terms as to 24  the emoluments of their offices and otherwise as may be specified in their instruments of appointment.
The scope of the responsibilities of the Bursar is determined by the Vice-Chancellor.
Statutory Organs of the University The statutory organs of the university are: • The Visitor (Head of State) • The Governing Council • The Senate • The Deputy Vice-Chancellor • Faculties and College • Congregation • The Student Affairs 1.
The Visitor (Head of State) Bone of contention in the universities is the place of the Visitor in the university governance.
All the university Acts in Nigeria have reserved functions for him.
In Nigeria the Head of State is automatically the Visitor of all Federal Universities, while the Governors are the Visitors for State Universities.
The Head of State was to be the Visitor and he was to, as often as circumstances may require not being less than once every year, conduct a visitation of the University or direct that such a visitation be conducted by such persons and in respect of any of the Affairs of the University as the Visitor may direct.
The President shall be the visitor of the University.
It shall be the duty of the bodies and persons comprised in the University to make available to the visitor, and to any other persons conducting a visitation in pursuance of this, such facilities and assistance as he or they reasonably require for the purpose of a visitation.
Also to give effect to any instructions consistent with the provision of the University Act which may be given by the Visitor in consequence of a visitation?
In the event of any doubt or dispute arising at any time as to the meaning of any provision of a statute, the matter may be referred to the Visitor, who shall take such advice and make such decision thereon as he shall think fit.
25  The decision of the Visitor on any matter referred to him shall be binding upon the authorities, staff and students of the University, and where any question as to the meaning of any provision of a statute has been decided by the Visitor.
No question as to the meaning of that provision shall be entertained by any court of law in Nigeria.
2.
The Governing Council The governing council is the supreme governing authority of the university.
It is responsible for decision and policy making which could have financial implications.
It is also responsible for the general management of the affairs of the university.
It controls the expenditure of the university.
The Council has power to do anything which in its opinion is calculated to facilitate the carrying on of the activities of the University.
In some Universities like Lagos; Bayero; Ahmadu Bello; Sokoto; Ilorin; Calabar, the Council is also vested with the power over the University s public relations; a job which is generally performed by the Vice-Chancellor on behalf of Senate in most of the Nigerian Universities.
The Council is vested with the power to call for reports from the Senate on any matter relating to instructions and teaching in the University; although this function is better performed by Senate since Senate is in charge of academic matters.
Under this heading, Council might even insist on having a look at the curriculum vitae of all the teachers appointed in the University in order to ensure the appointment of good caliber teachers.
This might be a tedious job for Council since most of its members may not be competent to evaluate them.
Many members of Council are drawn from the general public.
The pro- chancellor is the chairman of the council.
Its membership is the Vice- Chancellor and Deputy Vice Chancellor as well as representatives of the university and the congregation.
Most of the work of the Council is carried on by a number of standing committees.
The federal government as specified by the university decree appoints the pro-chancellor and chairman of council, and outside members of council.
The representatives of the university on the council are elected from the senate and congregation.
3.
The Senate The formulation of academic policies including the organizations and control of all academic activities of the university is the responsibility of the university senate.
The Senate is presided over by the Vice Chancellor.
The Senate is, however, advised in academic matters by Boards of Colleges 26  and Faculties.
It consists of the Vice- Chancellor; the two Deputy Vice- Chancellors; Provost; Colleges of Health Sciences; Deans of Faculties; Heads of Departments; Directors of Institutes; all professors; the University Librarian; and members of academic staff elected by the faculties of congregation or those appointed by the Vice Vice-Chancellor as specified in the university Act.
It has the paramount responsibility of organizing and controlling teaching in the university, the admission of students, and the discipline of students and of promoting research.
It receives and decides on the recommendations and reports from the Board of Faculties and all other academic units.
4.
Faculties and College Each faculty is governed by a Faculty Board, which broadly controls the academic programmes of the faculty, subject to senate approval.
In order that Senate may not be over-burdened by details, a good deal of the functions is delegated to the Faculty Boards.
The Chairman of the Faculty Board is the Dean who is elected for a specified period of time from among the professors in the particular faculty, while the provost heads the College.
Part of the functions of the Dean and the Provost is to present at convocation for the conferment of degrees, persons who have qualified for degrees of the university at university examination held in the various Department within the faculty or College.
5.
Congregation Congregation is the general assembly of all graduate members of the university staff, both academic and non-academic.
The Vice Chancellor is its chairman.
The congregation has the general function of serving as a forum for discussing any university problem or issue and making recommendation to council and senate on which two bodies it is represented.
6.
The Deputy Vice-Chancellor The Deputy-Vice-Chancellor assist the Vice-Chancellor in his duties and act in the place of the Vice-Chancellor when the office of the Vice Chancellor is vacant or the Vice-Chancellor is for any reason absent or otherwise unable to perform his functions as Vice-Chancellor.
The Deputy 27  Vice Chancellor is appointed in manner specified by statute.
The Deputy Vice-Chancellor hold office for a period of two years beginning with the effective date of his appointment, and on such terms as to the emoluments of his office and otherwise as may be specified in his instrument of appointment.
A person who has held office as Deputy Vice-Chancellor for a continuous period of four years or longer, or would so have held it but for his resignation, shall not be eligible for appointment as Deputy Vice- Chancellor during the two years immediately following the end of that period.
7.
The Student Affairs Division The Student Affairs Division is responsible for the quality of the informal learning environment that students experience in the university community.
Their functions which are administrative, educational and supportive include: • meeting students basic needs such as accommodation, feeding arrangement and transport; • providing essential services such as financial assistance through information on bursaries, scholarships and loans; • promotion of healthy environment on campus by caring for the psychological and developmental needs through sporting activities and professional counseling and advising; • augmenting the academic experience through the provision of productive, recreational, cultural and social activities; • orientation of students welfare and development; • the Student Affairs Division maintains an active partnership with students in the development of new extra-curricular programmes and the enrichment of those already in existence.
The activities of the students union and all other student clubs and societies are coordinated through the Division.
The objective is to provide an enriching cultural, physical, social and morally uplifting environment for the student as a rewarding complement to their academic work.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 List all the principal officers of the university and critically discuss on any Four (4).
28  4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that University is established to encourage the advancement of learning and to provide courses of instruction and other facilities for the pursuit of learning in all its branches.
Universities are governed by differentiated structures of management as to do anything which is authorized or required by the University Act or statute.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have seen university governance in different perspectives as advanced by the edict governing Nigerian universities.
Constitution and functions of the University; and powers of the University and their exercise were highlighted.
Governance and management of university education in Nigeria was also discussed.
The principal actors in the university system were enunciated.
Part of the discussion was also on statutory organs of the university.
However, both have good intentions for the university system, but their conflicting views have not made the university administration governable.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the structure of a higher institution in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Altbach, G. P (2005).
Pattern in Higher Education Development .
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Arikewuyo, M. O.
(n.d).
University Management and Staff Unions in Higher Institution: A Choice between Participation and Efficiency.
Unpublished Paper.
Babajide, E. O (n.d).
Effectiveness and efficiency in the Administration of Higher Education in Nigeria the 21st Century.
www.google.com Accessed 12th August, 2009.
Daudu, P. (1986).
Committee Versus Centralized System of Managing Higher Institution: Between Participation and Efficiency.
29  Unpublished Paper.
Ede, S. A.
(2000).
Educational Administration and Management, Jos.
Nigeria: Spectrum Publication Nigeria, Ibadan, Nigeria, Spectrum Books Ltd. Ekundayo, H. T.& Ajayi, A. I.
(2009).
Towards Effective Management Of University Education in Nigeria.
www.google.com accessed 17th September, 2009.
Kezar, A. and Eckel, P. D. (2004).
Meeting Today s Governance Challenges.
The Journals of Higher Education: Vol.
75, no.
4: 371 398.
Mgbekem, S. J.
A.
(2004).
Management of University Education in Nigeria.
Calabar: UNICAL Press.
Nwachukwu, C. C. (1988).
Management Theory and Practice.
Onitsha; Africana Feb Publishers Ltd. Ojo, J. D. (1990).
Laws and University administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Malthouse Press Ltd. Ogunmodede, A.
(1981).
The Community System of the University of Ibadan Management.
Unpublished M.Ed dissertation, University of Ibadan Olorode, L. (2001).
Democratic Imperatives and Higher for Social Justice.
Proceedings of the 12th General Assembly of the Social Science Academy of Nigeria 29 -36.
Sanda, A. O.
(1992).
Managing Nigerian Universities.
Ibadan, Nigeria: Spectrum Books Ltd.
The Laws of the Federation of Nigeria, (FRN, 1967) University of Lagos Act, vol.
24. pp.15456-15477.
Wikipedia.
The free encyclopedia, Governance in Higher Education www.google.com Accessed 17th September, 2009.
30  UNIT 4 ISSUE OF AUTONOMY AND EXTERNAL CONTROL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptualization of Autonomy 3.2 Historical Overview of Autonomy in Nigerian Universities 3.3 Autonomy in Higher education in Nigeria 3.4 Government Mechanisms to undermine University Autonomy 3.5 Problems of Autonomy 3.6 Strategies to Ensure Ideal Higher Education Autonomy 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Summary 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Autonomy is a principle upon which the higher education system normally operates and through which operational stability and actualization of goals of the higher educational institutions are ensured.
When autonomy is enthroned in the right perspective, it then facilitates academic freedom and accountability.
The survival of the higher education system is directly proportional to, or to a large extent dependent on the institutionalization of autonomy.
Higher education exists to generate and disseminate knowledge and information, which are critical to the development of the individual and the society at large.
In order to accomplish these noble goals, autonomy must of necessity be enshrined in the system.
This has been the position in place since the inception of the higher education system in the middle ages.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 31  discuss concisely the meaning of autonomy identify the trends of erosion of autonomy in Nigeria analyse the specific government interference in institutional autonomy enumerate the strategies for ensuring an ideal institutional autonomy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Autonomy Higher education autonomy can be viewed from two dimensions, namely: • Institutional autonomy • Individual autonomy 1.
Institutional Autonomy Fourie (2004) defines institutional autonomy as referring to the relative freedom of the institution to conduct its own affairs free from outside interference, whether from the state, the market, donors or other stake- holders.
She further states that institutional autonomy has two dimensions: • Substantive autonomy • Procedural autonomy i.
Substantive Autonomy This has to do with the power of the institution to determine its own goals and programmes.
ii.
Procedural Autonomy This refers to the power of the institution to determine the means by, which its goals and programmes will be pursued, the how of academy.
Justifying her position on this subject, she cited Berdahl (1990) who holds the essential ingredients of institutional autonomy to include: • Freedom to select staff and students; • Determine the conditions under which they remain in the university; • Freedom to determine curriculum contents and degree standards; • Freedom to allocate funds across different categories of expenditures.
32  • The Confederation of Indian Universities (2004), dwelling on this concept as well, defines the principle of university autonomy as: • the necessary degree of independence from external control that the university requires in respect of its internal organization and governance; • the internal distribution of financial resources; • staff recruitment; • the setting of the condition of study; • the freedom to conduct teaching and research.
In the same vein, Ajayi (1989) holds that the autonomy principle envisages the freedom of the institution to make its own decisions on broad complex issues without interference from external or non-university agencies.
Anya (1982) defines institutional autonomy as the ability conferred on institutional arrangements of the state on each university to manage its affairs and consists usually of the corporate freedom of institutions to exercise its prerogatives in the areas of appointment of its staff and of its governing authorities; pursuit of institutional goals as defined for itself under the rules of the law of the land; insulation of the institution in the management of its routine affairs from political, administrative; religions and other authorities.
Indeed, autonomy in higher education implies that each institution must be governed according to the law that establishes it.
Every institution has its law, edict or even decree which spells out the functions of the various organs, such as: council, senate, congregation, faculty, department and institute etc.
2.
Individual Autonomy The Confederation of Indian Universities (2004) refers to this as academic freedom.
Individual autonomy has to do with members of the academic community.
That is, scholars, teachers and students pursuing their scholarly activities in respects of ethical rules, international standards and without outside pressure.
Furthermore, they maintain, that academic freedom engages the obligation of each individual member of the academic profession to excellence, innovation and advancing the frontiers of knowledge through research and diffusion of its results through teaching and publication.
33  According to Fourie (2004), academic freedom or individual autonomy pertains to the who, the how and the whom of teaching and research by the individual academic.
While Berdahl (1990) views academic freedom as freedom of the individual scholar in his/her teaching and research to pursue truth whenever it seems to lead to without fear of punishment or termination of employment or having offended some political, religious or social orthodoxy.
From the above, institutional autonomy has been regarded as the corner - stone of the higher education system.
An institution without autonomy has consequently been regarded as not being an institution in the real sense.
An institution that has no autonomy and academic freedom is, therefore, regarded as a contradiction in terms.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 Define autonomy and list the types of autonomy 3.2 Historical Overview of Autonomy in Nigerian Universities Contentions and related disputes on university autonomy in Nigeria can be traced back to the 1970s when the sanctuary model of universities in Nigeria, which began, with the establishment of the University College (later University of Ibadan) came under pressure with military dictatorship.
A trade dispute between the Governing Councils of Nigerian universities and the local branches of the National Association of University Teachers in 1973, on the review of conditions of service led to a strike by the university teachers.
The demand for the review was necessitated by the high inflationary trend aftermath of the deplorable conditions left behind by the Nigerian civil war (1967-1970).
The Federal Ministry of Education, however, stood against the efforts of the University Councils to secure improved pay and conditions, even after the Councils and the local teacher s associations had and agreed on specific increase.
This marked the beginning of the violation of the power of the Council to negotiate and determine the conditions of employment at the local level.
It also became the point of contention in the University teachers strike of April 1973, especially as it became obvious that the reluctance of the Ministry was as a result of contentions regarding the status of the top Ministry officials vis-a- vis university professors.
The government s handling of the 1973 conflict was coercive.
The then military ruler (Yakubu Gowon) in a national broadcast simply ordered the 34  university teachers back to work or face dismissal and ejection from their official residence.
The Ministry officials were to have an upper hand when the erosion of university autonomy became formalized in 1974 when the university teachers conditions of service was brought under the civil service structure following the recommendations of the 1974 Udoji Commission Report on the Review of the Public Service (Adesina, 1998).
The event signaled the beginning of the bid by the ruling class to capture the university terrain.
The university teachers union in Nigeria, now named the Academic Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) has always insisted on the sanctity of university autonomy and academic freedom that state responsibility in the area of university funding notwithstanding, this must not translate into undue government meddling in university affairs: Education has to do with the unfettered acquisition of knowledge and its Use for the benefit of society.
Universities as schools of education should Be committed to this twin freedom in relation to the search for and use of Knowledge.
To be faithful to this commitment, a university worth its salt Is in duty, bound to recognize the connections between knowledge and the Innumerable dimensions of the concrete realities of our time, by allowing A free interplay of different opinions in the pursuit of learning (ASUNU, 1979).
Three aspects of the violation of university autonomy are particularly noteworthy: • the violation of procedures for the appointment of University Vice- Chancellors; • the erosion of the powers of Council as statutory employers; and • the erosion of the powers of the Senate as the supreme organ in academic matters.
The altering of the enabling laws of the universities in Nigeria especially in the area of appointment of Vice-Chancellors, which has implications for other aspects of university autonomy, began in the Yakubu Gowon era.
In 35  1975 when the Federal Government began to take over regional universities, it promulgated Decree No.
23, which among others vested the power to appoint and remove Vice-Chancellors on the Head of the Federal Military Government, in contrast with the Joint Committee of Council and Senate that was exercising the responsibility on behalf of the Council in the universities.
Thus far, the appointment of the Vice-Chancellor had remained the primary responsibility of the university community as provided for in the enabling laws.
With the above, however, Governing Councils of the universities lost their power to appoint and remove Vice- Chancellors.
Over time the position of the visitor became substantially altered from a largely ceremonial one to that in which empowered the visitor intervened in the routine administration of the universities.
As a result of this change Vice-Chancellors over time became increasingly accountable to the Head of Government (Federal or State) instead of the university community, as expressed in such institutions as the congregation, Senate and Council.
That was the situation in Nigerian universities until 1992 when the question of university autonomy became one of the major issues in the industrial action embarked upon by the academic staff union, ASUU, which culminated in the promulgation of the University (Miscellaneous) Act of 1993- that is now in dispute.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 Discuss the historical overview of autonomy in Nigerian universities 3.3 Autonomy in Higher Education in Nigeria The issues of institutional autonomy and academic freedom have been a vexed matter between government and ASUU in recent years.
The struggle for institutional autonomy has been a long-standing issue in the university system in Nigeria.
Since the military rule, academics have canvassed for autonomy in higher education system.
The Academic Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) has been more vociferous in the demand for autonomy for universities in Nigeria so as to allow institutions in the country take clue from global trend; especially in the developed countries.
Autonomy in higher education is essential to the advancement, transmission and application of knowledge.
Autonomy in higher education in Nigeria became almost an impossible request because of government ownership of the institutions in Nigeria.
It has been incomprehensible to government to hands-off its control of its investment.
A major chunk of recurrent and capital fund for public institutions (federal and state) is obtained from 36  government.
This has made government to be more inclined to the adage that says who pays the piper dictates the tune .
The fact that bulks of funds for institution operations comes from the government and the duty to be accountable for the public funds have made successive governments to be reluctant and thus institute mechanisms to undermine the autonomy in higher education.
In addition, Arikewuyo (2004) recounted how past and present governments have encroached on university autonomy as follows: staff and student unions were banned and un- banned at various times.
The ASUU and NANS were the most affected.
Many Vice Chancellors have been removed for not complying with directives from the government.
A Major General was even appointed as the Sole Administrator in a first generation University.
Many academics have been dismissed, retired and unjustly jailed for teaching what they were not employed to teach ( ).
Forty-nine academic staff of the University of Ilorin was dismissed for taking part in a nation-wide strike called by ASUU in 2001.
In the same vein, Professor Jubril Aminu the then Minister of Education, observed in his address to the Governing Councils of Federal Universities in 1986 that: While we are absolutely committed to allowing the governing councils to carry on with their lawful business, we need to agree that university autonomy, such as we understand it, is no charter for privilege, and does not detract from government the responsibility of protecting public interest and in ensuring proper accountability Aminu contended that academic freedom and university autonomy should not be the excuse for maladministration and outright lawlessness SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 Discuss autonomy in higher education in Nigeria 37  3.4 Government Mechanisms to Undermine University Autonomy In the past, universities in Nigeria were to large extent autonomous.
The military government in Nigeria in 1973 started what would be called first threat letter or threat signal to university autonomy.
A trade dispute between the Governing Council and the Universities Teacher in 1973 on the review of the condition of service led to a strike by the university lecturers.
The Governing Council saw the need for the review of the condition of service and made effort to secure government approval, which was thwarted by top officials of the Federal Ministry of Education.
The crisis reached a height when the then visitor, General Yakubu Gowon in a national broadcast ordered the university teachers back to work or face dismissal and ejection from their official residents.
The mechanism used was as follows: • the integration of the universities into the civil service, which lowered the prestige, status and effectiveness of the university as the Federal Ministry of Education began to see itself as the Landlord of the newly constructed structure .
• Government s promulgation of decrees after the order and through these decrees some bodies were empowered in such a way that the activities of the universities hitherto conducted internally by the university without interference became willed to some other bodies; • creation of Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) in 1978) eroded the power of universities to determine student intakes and criteria for admission; • expansion of scope of operations of National Universities Commission (NUC) usurped the powers of the university Senate to regulate curriculum and syllabus; • the promulgation of the Decrees 49 of 1998 and 10 of 1993 strengthened NUC s power and stripped the universities of their power to develop new programmes and made to realign their courses to match labour market requirements except with the approval of NUC; 38  • the appointment of Sole Administrators to some universities in Nigeria by the Federal Military Government between 1992 and 1998.
The decrees that brought the Sole Administrators to power suspended the power of the Council, Senate and Vice- Chancellor and confer these powers on the Sole Administrators; • the military government in 1975, promulgated decree No.
23 of 1975, which back up government to take over the regional universities; • decrees, which altered the enabling laws, reduced the powers of the Governing Council and altered the position of the Visitor from being ceremonial to that of someone who can intervene in daily administration of the universities; • decrees No.
23 of 1975 vested the power to appoint and remove the Vice-Chancellor by the Head of the Federal Military Government instead of a Joint Committee of Council and Senate on behalf of university Council; • decree No.
23 of 1975, also eroded the powers of Council as statutory employers and erosion of powers of the Senate as the highest decision making body over academic matters.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 3 Government used a lot of mechanisms to undermine university autonomy, discuss.
3.5 Problems of Autonomy Problems confronting university in Nigeria, particularly from the external perspective are identified as follows: a. Centralization of the University System b. Centralization of Admission c. Council Dominance a. Centralization of the University System 39  At the inception of the university system in Nigeria, the thought of a centralized system was not paramount.
The universities then existed as entities conducting their affairs independently.
The growth of the university system over time necessitated the establishment of National Universities Commission (NUC) in 1962 to play an advisory role and act as a buffer between the Federal Government and the Universities and not to control the latter.
The commission was saddled with the responsibility of receiving and disbursing subventions to universities.
Overtime, NUC has metamorphosed from a coordinating functioning body to a full fledged commission of its own, exercising such powers as: • accrediting programmes; • approving the establishment of departments and faculties; • insisting on a minimum academic standard; • engaging in the teaching function of academic staff through the virtual institute for higher education pedagogy (VIHEP); • undertaking sabbatical placement; • assessing academic journals; • ranking of universities; • evolving a draft curriculum on entrepreneurial studies.
No doubt these functions exercised by NUC are noble.
But the fact remains that it has constituted itself into an external agency infringing on the individual university s autonomy to chart its courses in such areas as: • creation of academic programme; • curriculum determination; • programme standardization; and • training of academic personnel.
b. Centralization of Admission The idea of a centralized board engaging in the conduct of matriculation examinations and placement of qualified candidates into Nigerian established institution was never thought of when the early institutions were established.
At that time each institution conducted its entrance examinations and selected qualified candidates.
This situation prevailed until when the Joint Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB), and JAMBPOLY were established to conduct matriculation examinations.
40  Assessing the existence of JAMB/JAMBPOLY overtime, one can clearly see that both JAMB/JAMBPOLY has trespassed into the individual autonomy of higher education to select their students.
The common malaise associated with this body in relation to higher education is the growing trend in examination malpractices, and creating serious selection credibility problem.
It is a common sight in our higher institutions to see students with high JAMB/JAMBPOLY scores, but performing poorly academically.
This situation has compelled several universities into setting aptitude tests to confirm the credibility of the students.
c. Council Dominance The domination of university council by government-appointed officials to the detriment of minority representation of university community members serve as another avenue of autonomy breach in Nigerian universities.
The issue is that the council normally exists to protect the interest of the university, then it should naturally follow that its membership should be dominated by university community members, but in our setting the reverse is the case, politicians and non-stakeholders in education industry are preferred over stakeholders.
Government s own position regarding her dominance of the Councils is that since she is the primary source of funding the system, she must control it through her agents to ensure accountability in such areas as financial and physical resources, programme quality, student admission and staff recruitment.
3.6 Strategies to Ensure Ideal University Autonomy • It must be free from the shackles of external interference which is currently impeding its growth.
• The current reform in the higher education sector should address the problem of centralized admissions through JAMB, where candidates now write JAMB examinations and later subjected candidates to another examination by the various universities.
The right to admit should rest with the institutions; • The interfering role of the NUC should be reviewed, while allowing the Commission to function in its original advisory capacity; • There should be an increase in the number of university community members in the Council as a sustainable way of protecting the institutional autonomy.
41  4.0 CONCLUSION Autonomy in higher education relates to the protection of the institutions from interference by government officials in the day to day running of the institutions especially on the issues related to the selection of students; the appointment and removal of the academic staff; including the Vice- Chancellors/Rectors/Provost; the determination of contents of higher education and the control of standards.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of autonomy, types of autonomy and autonomy in higher education in Nigeria.
Also highlighted is the government s mechanism to undermine university autonomy; the problems of autonomy and external interference; and the strategies to adopt ideal autonomy in higher education in Nigeria.
Whichever position taken, it seems that certain degree of autonomy is crucial for the provision of adequate environment for teaching, public service, learning and research in higher education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the ways through which government can undermine university autonomy?
2.
What are the strategies needed to ensure ideal institutional autonomy?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Academic Staff Union of Nigerian Universities (ASUU) (1979).
The University Crisis: Mohammed Commission.
The White Paper and University Reaction.
Ibadan: Claverianum Press.
Adesina, J.
(1998).
Civil Society and the Abacha State: Reflection on the 1996 ASUU Strike Review of Economy and Society, Vol.
1.
No.
3.
January- 42  March.
Ajayi, K. (1989).
Educational Development and Management in Nigeria since Independence.
Ibadan: Vintage Publishers.
Ajayi, K. (1990).
Academic Freedom and University Autonomy in Relation to Human Liberty: Nigeria as a Case Study.
In Kaba, B. D. and Rayan, L. C. A.
(Eds).
Relevant Education in Africa.
Younde: Professors World Peace Academy Aminu, J.
(1986).
Assailing the Threat to the Quality of Higher Education Address at the Inauguration of the Governing Councils of the Federal Universities, Senate Chamber, Tafawa Balewa Square, Lagos, 10 September.
Anya, A. O (1982).
Science Development and the Future: The Nigerian Case reflections and essays on the Nigerian Socio Cultural experience.
Enugu: Industrial Enterprise Ltd. Arikewuyo, M. O.
(2004).
Democracy and University Education in Nigeria: Some Constitutional considerations, Higher Educational Management and Policy.
A Journal of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 16: 121 134.
Berdahl, R. (1990).
Academic Freedom, Autonomy and Accountability in British Universities.
Studies in Higher Education.
15 (2).
Confederation of Indian Universities (2004).
Autonomy of Academic Freedom (www.google.com): March, 2005 Fourie, M. (2004).
Autonomy and Accountability: Keeping the balance in South African Higher Education.
(www.google.com): March, 2005.
Onyeonuoru, I (2005).
University Autonomy and Cost Recovery Policies: Union Contestation and Sustainable University System in Nigeria.
www.portal.unesco.or/education.tr.enu.php retrieved June, 2005.
Sanda, A. O.
(1992).
Managing Nigerian Universities.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 43  UNIT 5 ISSUE OF ACADEMIC FREEDOM IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Academic Freedom 3.2 Scope of Academic Freedom 3.3 Academic Freedom and Human Rights 3.4 Assaults on Academic Freedom 3.5 Ways of Achieving Academic Freedom.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the issue of academic freedom.
Academic freedom is a worldwide phenomenon in the academic circles and higher institutions.
It is a core value of higher education everywhere and without it quality of teaching and research are constrained.
Universities are key engine of knowledge in society and are most effective where there is academic freedom.
You will therefore learn the scope of academic freedom, Academic Freedom and Human Rights, aspects of government interference with academic freedom and ways academics can fight for intellectual freedom.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define academic freedom • explain what academic Freedom and Human Rights are all about • discuss specific government interference on academic freedom • list ways academics can fight academic freedom 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 44  3.1 Meaning of Academic Freedom Academic freedom has been defined as the principle designed to protect the teacher from the hazards that tend to prevent him from meeting his obligations in the pursuit of truth.
This definitions, however, appears to be in favour of the scholar.
The goals of teaching, research and public service certainly require an academic setting in which the scholar can express himself freely and without avoidable inhibitions.
In concrete terms, academic freedom connotes freedom to organize the university, design and teach courses or subjects, associate with others.
It is also to project, imbibe exchange and hold ideas without any fear of harassment or victimization.
It encourages challenge of established orthodox practices without any fear of contradiction, all in the pursuit of truth.
Researchers can only do their work best where there is an atmosphere that is free from constraints.
Some countries have made laws about academic freedom.
There exist confusion on what should be the academic freedom scope and limitations.
From country to country, authors have exercised varying perspective of what academic freedom is all about.
In Germany, it is the right of the faculty to teach any subject and this is related to two concepts, namely: • freedom of scientific research and the right of students to attend lectures; and • the absence of class roll-call.
Whereas in America it is compulsory for students to attend all required classes.
In America, academic freedom has been a subject of litigation.
A New York Court has described it as not implying academic license.
America Association of University Professors defined academic freedom based on the ideas that human knowledge is a never ending pursuit of truth, that there is no humanly accessible truth that is not in principle open to challenges and that no party or intellectual faction has a monopoly of wisdom.
Academic freedom covers the protection of the intellectual independence of professors, lecturers, researchers and students in pursuit of knowledge and the expression of ideas from interference by legislators and authorities within the institution itself.
For this background, the National Policy on Education (FRN, 1998) recognizes academic freedom for university staff in four different areas.
They are: 45  Selecting their students, except where the law prescribes otherwise; • Appoint their staff; • Select areas of research and; • Determine the contents of lectures.
It added that government shall continue to respect this freedom as long as these areas are in consonance with national goals.
Higher education teaching personnel are entitled to the maintaining of academic freedom.
These include: • the right without constriction by prescribed doctrine; • freedom of teaching and discussion; • freedom in carrying out research and disseminating and publishing the results thereof; • freedom to express their opinion about the institution or system in which they work; • freedom from institutional censorship; • freedom to participate in professional or representative academic bodies; • right to fulfill their functions without discrimination of any kind and without fear of repression by the state or any other source.
Higher education teaching personnel can effectively do justice to this principle if the environment in which they operate is conducive.
This requires a democratic atmosphere hence the challenge for all to develop a democratic society.
Higher education teaching personnel have the right to teach without any interference, subject to accepted professional principles, including professional responsibility and intellectual rigour with regard to standard and methods of teaching.
Higher education teaching personnel should not be forced to instruct against their own best knowledge and conscience or be forced to use curricula and methods contrary to national and international human rights standards and should play a significant role in determining the curriculum.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERSISE 1 Explain the term academic freedom 46  3.2 Scope of Academic Freedom The scope of academic freedom has been a controversial issue.
Altbach (2001) explained that academic freedom was constructed as a freedom of the professor to teach, do research and publish without fetters in his field of expertise.
In this case academic freedom was limited to classroom only and laboratory and did not extend to the public sphere nor did it save university teachers the right to speak out on topic outside of their scholarly specialization.
However, academic freedom has become expanded to cover the public sphere in many countries.
In United States, professors are protected not only with regard to teaching and research in the classroom and laboratory but also enjoy their right to speak out on any topic in any form and to publish their views without any restriction.
There are certain recommendations made by UNESCO on the status of higher education teaching personnel which countries all over the world are expected to observe.
The basic components of the recommendations are: • academic freedom; • the basic freedom determine the curriculum; • to carry out teaching research and publication without an interference; • to freely express their opinions; and to undertake personnel activities outside their employment, in so far as these do not impinge on their duties with their home institution.
3.3 Academic Freedom and Human Rights The promotion and defence of academic freedom and the autonomy of research institutions are the central elements of the Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa (CODESRIA) as stipulated in the charter of the council.
Although the CODESRIA Academic Freedom Programme, such as it is known presently, was formally launched in June 1994.
The Council has been involved in the promotion of academic freedom since it was founded in 1973.
The earliest beneficiaries from this Council were the first exiled academics from the erstwhile settler colonies of South Africa.
In November, 1990, in preparation to the formal launching of the programme, the Council convened a major Pan-African conference on academic freedom which, among other things resulted in the adoption of the Kampala Declaration on 47  Academic Freedom and Social Responsibility.
The Declaration recommended: • the creation of a mechanism for monitoring and promoting academic freedom in Africa; • Research programme; • A small fund for assisting scholars in distress.
Council intervened in various ways to rescue or assist scholars faced with various threats, ranging from authoritarian governments, intolerant university administrators and unruly student cults to situations of civil war and religious zealotry that involved a direct targeting of academics.
The problems experienced by researchers in seeking to exercise their academic freedom in full were compounded by the imposition of structural adjustment programmes and the downgrading of higher education and research in the hierarchy of government priorities.
Within this environment, the CODESRIA Academic Freedom programme inevitably expanded to become a major area of work and encompassing the following: • research; • research dissemination; • sensitization; • advocacy; • dialogues and modest support to scholars and other intellectuals under attack.
In the period 2000 to the date, CODESRIA, through the Academic Freedom Programme, has organized several conferences and dialogues in different countries.
These include: • academic freedom in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC); • academic freedom, Social Responsibility and the state of Academic Freedom in Tanzania, co-organized with the University of Da es salam Academic Staff Assembly (UDASA); • reforming the higher education system in Nigeria, co-organized with the Academic Staff Union of Nigerian Universities (ASUU); • Egypt on Intellectual and Academic Freedom in Africa and the Arab World, Co-organized with the UNESCO forum on Higher Education Research and Knowledge; • The Swedish Institute in Alexandria and the Arab and African Research Centre in Cairo.
48  Organizing these activities was a conscious decision aimed at solidarising with and strengthening the local communities of scholars in their daily work for the protection of their freedom.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 3 Compare academic freedom in terms of scholars and human rights?
3.4 Assaults on Academic Freedom Whenever restrictions are placed on the research and publication activities of academics, then academic freedom will be assaulted and this has been the stock in trade of repressive governments.
Recent trend in the world has shown that academic freedom is under assault.
In Nigeria, a Lecturer was prevented from traveling to South Africa and his passport seized from the representative of the Senate.
In the same vein, a Professor was sacked for a statement made on the pulpit.
In the international scene, in Kenya, lecturers and students are required to obtain official clearance from the ministry of education and lastly the office of the president before traveling out of the country.
Human Rights watch produced 107 page reports on repression of academic freedom in Egyptian universities.
The Egyptian government stifles academic freedom by censoring course work, outlawing research about controversial issues and student activism.
Academics in Egypt, at present cannot discuss freely on issues that touch on politics, religion and sex.
State security forces detain and sometimes abuse activists who run for student s union office or demonstrate on campus.
State sometimes appointed deans; interfere with classroom discussions and selection of research topics.
Similar attacks on academic were reported in Turkey, Russia and India.
In Russia, the 53,000 scientific researchers are expected to report all contacts and co-operations between them and outside institutions.
Attack on academics in Iran has even led to brain drain.
In China, between 2000 and 2001, quite a number of Chinese scholars were arrested, detained, tried and expelled from their countries on trump- up charges of espionage.
This trend should be resisted steadfastly and checked on time, as knowledge in the society will ultimately become permanently jeopardized in the event of the successful spread of this trend across nations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 49  Discuss the following: 1.
Scope of Academic freedom 2.
Assaults on academic freedom.
3.5 Ways of Achieving Academic/Intellectual Freedom • Establishment of academic associations to champion the intellectual freedom that is so vital for the future wellbeing of our academic institutions.
Academics need to begin to discuss the establishment of Nigerian academics associations; • There should be a constitution for the association, and a democratic means open to all academics in Nigeria s higher educational institutions to elect a senate every two years; • This senate should deliberate on principles of intellectual freedom and interrogate specific scenarios that affect intellectual freedoms of our universities, from government legislation affecting higher education institutions, to internal university statutory rules and regulations, codes of conduct, as well as subsidiary university legislation and policy; * Issues of access, financial aid, and any other matters that impede students free intellectual development should be eliminated; • The association should be viewed as an independent body that plays a crucial watchdog role within the higher education sector, and should consist primarily of university academics.
It is not meant to be a staff union.
This body should interact with the government, other statutory bodies and the public to promote intellectual freedom within our universities; • The ethos of the association should be of high academic quality .The decisions and opinions of its senate should be deeply analytical, and relevant.
The American Association of University Professors should be an inspiration; 50  • There should be the Freedom of Expression Institute, which play should important watchdog role on issues related to academic freedom in Nigeria.
Other associations of academic staff unions should be part of this process.
Other stakeholders, such as the government, national academic bodies and various student too.
However, this new organization should be for the academics and by the academics.
4.0 CONCLUSION The foregoing discussion has thrown light on the issue of academic freedom in Nigeria s higher educational institutions.
Academic freedom applies to both teaching and research.
Freedom in research is fundamental to the advancement of truth.
Academic freedom is fundamental to the protection of the rights of the teachers and the students.
It carries with it duties that are correlative with rights.
5.0 SUMMARY From the above, we have learnt the concept of academic freedom; the scope of Academic Freedom; Academic Freedom and Human Rights; and various assaults to academic freedom.
Also highlighted are ways academics freedom can be attained.
You are to know that Academic Freedom is a constitutional right that is accorded to academics, so it is the academics that have the obligation to uphold the principles of academic freedom, and to strive to sustain it.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the ways of achieving academic freedom?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Altbach, (2001).
Academic Freedom: International Warning signs www.bc.educ/bc-org/aup/soe/cihe newsletter/News24/text/text001.htm accessed 5th June 2005.
CODESRIA, (2007).
Academic Freedom and Human Rights (hhtp://www.codesria.org/links/Research/academic-freedomhtm 51  Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
National Policy on Education (3rd edition).
Lagos: NERDC Press.
Human Rights Watch (2002).
Academic Freedom www.hrw.orgwr2k2/acadmic Freedom accessed 15th June, 2005.
Nithaya, C. (2009).
South Africa: Academics Need Body to Fight for intellectual Freedom (http://allafrica.com.stories/200902190073.html.
Standler, (2000).
Academic Freedom in USA: www.rbs2.com/afree.htm accessed 15th June 2005.
Peter, O. and Gboyega, I.
(2006).
Planning and Policy of Higher Education in Nigeria in Babalola, J.
B. et al (eds) Educational Management: Thoughts and Practice.
Ibadan: CODAT Publications.
MODULE 2 ISSUE OF RELEVANCE OF HIGHER EDUCATION CURRICULUM AND PROGRAMM ES Unit 1 Issue of Curriculum and Course System Unit 2 Issue of Student Activism and Administration Unit 3 Issue of University Committee System Unit 4 Issue of Accountability and Academic Freedom Unit 5 Issue of Quality and Quality Assurance in Higher Education 52  UNIT 1 ISSUE OF CURRICULUM AND COURSE SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Curriculum 3.2 Curriculum Relevance 3.3 The Course System 3.4 Curriculum Contents and Delivery in Higher Education in Nigeria 3.5 Challenges to Major Curricular adjustment and Procedures In Nigeria 3.6 Needs for Change in the Curriculum Structure and Methods In Educational Practice in Nigeria 3.7 A Pragmatic Approach in Enriching Curriculum Contents And Practices of Nigerian Higher Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The need to have an indigenous curriculum that is critically relevant to the needs of the learner s and that of the society is the background for this unit.
A feature of the Nigerian social landscape today is that higher education no longer confers career advantages on its recipients.
This is a situation in which large number of university graduates find themselves unemployed after the completion of their one-year mandatory National Youth Service.
Not quite a few Nigerians see the nature of the courses and programmes offered in Nigerian universities a crucial factor in this situation.
Many of these courses and programmes are not particularly relevant to the society.
However we want to see a higher education system that has immediate relevance to the needs of the society.
The extent of the knowledge you will acquire from this unit is specified in the following objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 53  • explain the concept of curriculum • appreciate the relevance of curriculum to National development • Explain the course system • identify curriculum contents and delivery in the pre- colonial and Post-colonial period • discuss why major curriculum adjustment and procedures never • succeed in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Curriculum In its broadest sense a curriculum may refer to all programmes offered at a school.
This is particularly true of the higher education level, where the diversity of curriculum might be an attractive point to a potential student.
A curriculum may also refer to defined and prescribed courses of study, which students must fulfill in order to attain certain level of education.
An individual teacher might also refer to his or her curriculum, meaning all the subjects that will be taught during a school year.
Curriculum is the broad programme of activities designed by the government or school in order to help achieve the general goals or objectives of education.
It must embrace all activities that will lead to effective teaching and learning outcomes in the school system.
According to Snyder and Anderson (1986), the curriculum serves as the standard for guiding teachers planning for learning and for measuring teacher effectiveness in fostering expected learning outcomes.
In colleges, specific courses make up the individual s curriculum, allowing one to obtain a degree or certification in a certain field.
Usually an individual will have to complete a certain amount of general education courses, and then specialized courses within a chosen field.
In this way, the curriculum is individualized to the person s desire for a certain type of expertise.
Oyeka (1997) refers to curriculum as planned actions for instruction.
It is also referred to as the life and programme of the school and an enterprise in guiding the young people and their elders.
Adepoju (1998) agrees with Edem (1982) that the curriculum should be derived from the needs of the neighborhoods in which the school is located, reflecting the neighborhood s interests and changes in living.
54  The need for periodic review of school curriculum by the government is highly desirable in view of the fact that, modern technology and innovation can make school curriculum outdated and out-fashioned hence, the need for a change.
Adepoju (1999) contends that good curriculum should be made to be dynamic and flexible.
A systematic approach should therefore be taken in order to effect a change in both the content and context of the school curriculum.
This calls for the involvement of the curriculum experts who should inject into the new curriculum the needs and aspirations of the country as well as the demands of technology and innovation.
3.2 Curriculum Relevance Curriculum relevance either in philosophical sense or practical sense or both is used as a measure of the relationship between the curriculum content and the needs of the individuals, the society and the nature of the discipline.
If the relationship seems to be poor, then the curriculum suffers from impoverishment and imbalance.
Relevance is the keyword that should drive the ideology of any curriculum content and practice that can benefit a society.
They are crucial ingredients of achievement and are always in the mouth of people pursuing and worthwhile endeavour that can succeed.
Without relevance an instrument designed to engineer progress and development stands invalid and of course unreliable.
The idea of curriculum relevance in education is to make our higher education more responsive to the needs of the country, and to update and modify our curricula for relevance to both national needs and global demands.
This concerns the national needs which can be seen in the fixing of the ratio of Science to Liberal Arts to 60:40 and the establishment of some universities of technology and agriculture.
3.3 The Course System The Nigerian National Policy on Education seems to have Nigerian in mind when it states that: 1) the education of higher professionals will continue within the university system, and it will be rooted in a broad-based, strong, scientific background.
2) the curriculum will be geared towards producing practical persons, and the course content will reflect our national needs, not just a hypothetical standard(FGN, 2004).
55  There is an urgent need for a new orientation in Nigerian higher education.
The course system should be broad-based and multidisciplinary in nature and with a strong methodological content.
The course system being multidisciplinary in nature the curriculum shift from the focus in which students graduate in one discipline like, Economics or political science, geography or sociology.
The point is to draw attention to the need for graduates who have the capacity to relate to a broad range of problems, rather than so-called specialists who are unable to see the social or human problems.
The course system requires that student takes certain elective courses outside their major or core disciplines.
This is an attempt to broaden the scope of higher education.
It has failed because courses in the various disciplines have not been primarily designed to promote the intercourse of the disciplines .
The elective courses most students are inclined to patronize are those they think can enhance their grades, thereby improving the face value of their certificates.
The course system failed to bring about the desired changes in our society due to its weak methodological base.
As a remedy for this, the National Universities Commission (NUC) had stipulated that each student must pass at least six units of general studies courses (GSC).
These courses include among others: Use of English, Philosophy and Logic and History, Philosophy of Science, the last two being the ones with a methodological component in their design.
The NUC stipulation leaves out courses which can enhance the capacity of our graduates for discernment, good judgment and logical articulation.
We need a general scheme of education whose methodological orientation is along the lines of the national, analytical and scientific orientation .
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 1.
Define curriculum 2.
Explain curriculum relevance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 The course system in Nigerian higher education failed to bring about the desired changes in our society.
Discuss.
56  3.4 Curriculum Contents and Delivery in Nigeria Higher Education The history of curriculum contents and delivery in Nigeria is filled with a lot of stories.
Much has been done over the years within the context of curriculum dynamics.
There had been improvements, development, innovations, adjustments and changes and all sorts without realizing the ultimate goal of development via education.
One could easily recall that curriculum contents and delivery in Nigeria at every level of education parade some major developments and milestones.
There is hardly any difference noticeable among the levels of educations: whether primary, secondary and tertiary.
They all speak about failure and disappointments.
These major developments and milestone could be grouped under three important headings: 1.
Curriculum Contents and delivery in the Pre-colonial Period 2.
Curriculum Contents and delivery in the Colonial Period 3.
Curriculum Contents and delivery in the Post-colonial Period 3.1.1 Curriculum Contents and Delivery in the Pre-colonial Period The purpose of indigenous education during this era was functionalism, which was the main guiding principle irrespective of the levels of indigenous education.
The indigenous education was essentially functional because its curriculum was relevant to the needs of the individual and the society.
The pre-colonial period was marked majorly by the absence of formal schooling and hence unwritten curriculum.
Surprisingly, this period of education was described as the most successful system in the annals of educational developments in Nigeria and then among African societies.
For example, Read (1956); Cameron and Dodd (1976); Lewis (1964); and Ashby (1968); were vehemently critical of the Colonial masters who they believed brought the African communities they met to a great ruin by substitution their enterprising pragmatic educational system with their irrelevant system.
The general opinion from these researchers is that the pre-colonial educational system is the best.
It is learning on the job (as it is described) is the best, but faulting the lack of documentation and some other shortcomings of the system.
57  The emphasis of the fluid curriculum content of indigenous education was on social responsibility, job orientation, political participation and spiritual and moral values.
The subjects include: Practical farming, fishing, weaving, carving, wrestling, cooking, knitting etc.
The recreational subjects include: wrestling, dancing, drumming, acrobatic display, racing etc.
There is also provision for intellectual training through the study of local history, legends, the environment (local geography, plants and animals), poetry, reasoning, riddles, proverbs, story-telling story-relays etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 3 Discuss curriculum contents and delivery in the pre-colonial period 3.1.2 Curriculum Contents and Delivery in the Colonial Period The second period, which is the colonial period, has a system of education that was summarily described as totally irrelevant to the needs and aspirations of developing nations.
The content of education offered was said to be bookish, irrelevant and incoherent.
The content of the Colonial education was the reading; writing and arithmetic (3R s) which was merely training the African beneficiaries to be shopkeepers, interpreters for the white-men and village catechists.
The major aim of education during the colonial period was the supply of cheap semi-literate and semi-skilled labour.
The missionary programme of educating the natives was restricted initially to the limited objective of producing marginally literate Nigerians.
The Colonial period was the beginning of formal education in Nigeria.
It offered the African to transit with reasonable modification directly from the effective pragmatic pre-colonial system to a manageable and more effective one which was a brilliant offshoot of the older one.
This period was the beginning of documentation and formal schooling.
Without the period, the post colonial period would have been a beginning of everything from the scratch and not a consolidation period.
Consequently, the curriculum was mainly on religion, reading, writing, and arithmetic, which presumably were sufficient to enable the children to operate under the missionary banner.
Each Christian denomination had its own curriculum.
The basic curriculum in most of the schools attached very great importance to moral instructional and character building.
The curriculum was essentially literacy, classical and with religious inclination.
58  The intervening period of colonization is seen as the mason that laid the very bad foundations and precedents in education practices that would for a long period over- shadow and retard genuine efforts at national development via the formal education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 4 Education during the colonial period was said to be reading; writing and arithmetic (3 R s).
Discuss.
3.1.3.
Curriculum Contents and Delivery in the Post-Colonial Period The post colonial period extends to the present time beginning from 1960 when Nigeria gained independence.
The bad precedents, the poor foundations and the huge irrelevances acquired from the colonial period continued to deal blows on the education enterprise.
The content and practices of education today are both implicitly and explicitly irrelevant.
They have not been founded on realistic philosophical principles.
By 1960 the major criticisms at the system were that; • the school curricula were biased toward literacy and academic subjects; • most of the teachers were academically and professionally unqualified to teach; • the curricula were foreign and british in orientation and consequently irrelevant to the needs of the individuals and the society; • the teacher training curricula were poor in terms of contents and modern techniques; • gross imbalance existed in primary school curriculum; • lack of suitable textbooks; • structural ineffectiveness of secondary education etc.
Consequently, it was the governments wish in the era of independence that any existing shortcomings, contradictions, ambiguities, and lack of uniformity in educational practices in the different parts of the federation 59  should be removed.
This was to ensure an even and orderly development of the country.
The contents and delivery of higher education were seen as alienating the people from the rich tradition of manual labour, recognition of the dignity of labour and sound hard- work that characterized the pre-colonial Africa.
The recipients of such education were becoming strangers and aliens to a community of hard- working and disciplined people.
University training was said to be completely supporting and producing job seeking elites who were described as a scavenging white collar job dependent robots rather than assisting the development of creative self reliant people that are much needed to consolidate meaningful economic and technological development in the countries.
Despite all the post independent attempts of curricula improvements; innovations; and adjustments; many changes and innovations were never accompanied by concrete physical adjustments; constructions and changes in the school system.
The most recent curricula restructuring the 6 3 -3 4 system, which is currently transforming into 9 3 4 entity could be described as a new wine in an old bottle.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 5 Write briefly on curriculum contents delivery and in the post-colonial period.
3.5 Challenges to Major Curricular Adjustment and Procedures in Nigeria It is pertinent to point out why major curricular adjustment and procedures have never succeeded in Nigeria.
Some of the challenges include: 1) Most curricular contents and delivery since the colonial period to the present are deeply seated in European cultures and are very alien to the traditional African culture.
The salient ingredient, that can make them work are conspicuously missing in the African context; 2) Curricular changes and adjustments have been generated and driven by extraneous and selfish motives ranging from attempts to pacify critics of alien friendly policies of selfish colonial governments to the spirited maneuvering of thoughtless and visionless parasitic 60  indigenous governments trying to create impression of being serious to home crowds; 3) Many curricular adjustments and innovations were merely ink and paper master-pieces but mere shadow and ghosts in execution.
Many of these changes and innovations were never accompanied by concrete physical adjustments, constructions and changes in the school system.
Could we believe that the school building, the teacher and the time-tables that operated the grammar schools fifty years ago are still the same set of instruments that are offered to operate the new system?
; 4) Government policies on education and the functioning of it are not sincerely dynamic over the years.
Successive governments keep destroying governments creativity in order to win supports from antagonistic environments.
The inadequate trends meant for educational development constantly disappear into private pockets.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 6 Explain why major curricular adjustment and procedures failed to succeed in Nigeria.
3.6 Needs for Change in the Curriculum Structure and Methods of Educational Practices in Nigeria Areas of Change In recent times, the Nigerian educational system has experienced series of scientific, technological, economic, political and social upheavals such as: • the introduction of computer education; • literacy education; • the use of ICT in education and modern economic theories, ideas, techniques and methods such as: • MBO, PERT, PPBS etc and economic order in the school curriculum.
The rationale behind the involvement of Nigerian educational system in change programme is an indication of a major force in shaping the objectives and methods of the programme.
3.3.2 Reasons for Curriculum Reform and Innovation in the Nigerian Educational System 61  What is needed today apart from enriching the contents of curricular activities are numerous and could be listed as follows?
1.
Need to improve on the standard of education 2.
Future need of change 3.
Exogenous factors 4.
Achievement 5.
Creativity/ingenuity 3.3.3 Need to Improve on the Standard of Education Standard is the most discussed issues in the Nigerian educational system today.
The educational standard has been criticized by the general public.
Where the standard of the system is declining or the existing state is generating public outcry or conflict, there is need for change as it will be relevant in the Nigerian setting.
3.3.4 Future Need of Change There is a desire for change when there is a clear programme about the future.
The education system in Nigeria is said to be performing different roles which may be expressed in terms of nation-building and national promotion.
In order to cope with such future demands, nation education curriculum must be changed.
3.3.5 Exogenous Factors The presence of some exogenous factors may influence the system, and which may also be the sources of educational changes.
For instance, in Nigeria, government may introduce a new method of operation, such as the deployment of military officers to inculcate discipline in the schools that might not be ideal for the public who may advocate for a course that will benefit their children and the society at large.
3.3.6 Achievement An educational administrator would always like new programmes that will improve teaching-learning situation in the school.
Achievements will always allow a positive change to take place.
3.3.7 Creativity/Ingenuity 62  An educational change may be precipitated by the desire of the members of staff, to be more creative by introducing new ideas which may lead to the realization of the school objectives and their own individual goal.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 7 Discuss the reasons for introducing reform and innovation into Nigerian educational curriculum structure.
3.7 A pragmatic Curriculum for Nigeria Higher Education To solve the challenges facing curricular adjustment and procedures in Nigeria higher education the following pragmatic approach could be summarized as: • A look into the contents of the curriculum; • A compulsory general courses for all students in the various faculties and departments; • Existing courses in the faculties and departments should be restructured to reflect local ideas and practices; • The schooling environment should be re-structured with good facilities that will support effective learning; • Construction of meaningful physical plant in the tertiary institutions, such as buildings, workshops, conference rooms, modern lecture rooms, lecture halls with public address systems and other communication gadgets.
Modern office complexes; beautiful lawns and layouts; hostels; and relaxation centres; • Establishing computer centres and information communication centres and other modern facilities for fast processing and assessing of information globally; • Formation of policies that will make higher education learning more pragmatic; meaningful and effective.
For example, renown local artisans; craftsmen; technicians; and other professional could be contracted to teach their trades in the institutions and could be allowed to take students to their work places outside the institution for on the job learning.
Examinations could take new dimension other than paper and pen procedures; • Constant review of contents and delivery every five years with comparative studies to balance and update curriculum practice via standards and benchmarks obtained all over the world; 63  • Encouragement of honest and sincere academic activities totally devoid of political maneuverings in higher education.
For example, staff promotion should be based on objective measuring devices whereby people are promoted because of their political learning s should not be the predominant features; • Existing stereotyped rules, procedures and bureaucracies concerning various aspects of higher education should be overhauled.
For example, students should be allowed to change courses freely when and where useful counseling and career guidance indicate testimonials; curriculum virtues and transcripts should count in planting students to courses and careers.
Repetitions and addition of unnecessary details should be avoided; • Students should be placed where their skills and aptitudes will be explored; and • The duration for courses could be extended where it is found to be inadequate but plans and procedures should be put in place to see that students spend maximum time in meaningful study since students do not spend one quarter of their school days in active learning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 8 Explain the pragmatic approach for Nigeria Higher Education 4.0 CONCLUSION Higher education in Nigeria is in state of crisis and most of the highlights are definitely pointing to the fact that the content and delivery of curriculum in Nigeria have never been relevant to the prevailing circumstances and the people of Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been introduced to the concept of curriculum and course system.
You have seen that we need a curriculum that will be geared towards producing practical persons, and the course content that will reflect our national needs, and not just a hypothetical standard.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
The course system in Nigeria s higher education failed to bring about 64  the desired changes in our society.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adegoke, K. A.
(1987).
The Curriculum: A Balance Sheet and Outlook.
(Ed.)
Emergent Issues is Nigerian Education.
Vol.
Lagos: JOJA Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. Pp.
129 144.
Adepoju, T. L. (1998a) Managing Educational Change in Nigeria Guba s Two-dimensional Change Strategy.
Mimeograph.
Dept.
of Educational Foundations and Management, Adeyemi College of Education, Ondo.
Ajayi, P. O.
(2007).
Evaluation of the Implementation of Physics Curriculum in South West Secondary Schools in Nigeria Unpublished Research Monograph of the University of Ado-Ekiti.
Akinlua, A.
A.
(2006).
Driving Curriculum Content and Practices in Higher Education in Nigeria Towards Relevance.
www.google.com accessed 28 August.
2009.
Ashby, E. (1964).
African Universities and Western Tradition In Tropical Areas.
London: George Allen and Union.
Coombs, E. B.
(1968).
The World Education Crisis.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Ehindero, O. J.
(1986).
Curriculum Foundations and Development for Nigerian Students.
Lagos: Concept Publications.
Fadipe, J. O.
& Adepoju, T. L. (2006).
Planning for Educational Reform and Innovation (Ed.)
Educational Management: Thoughts and Practice.
Ibadan: Codat Publications.
Federal Government of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education Lagos.
NERDC Oluwatelure, T. O.
(2007).
Evaluation of Scientific Literacy Among Graduates of Senior Secondary School in South West Nigeria .
Unpublished Research Monograph of the University of Ado-Ekiti.
65  Oladipo, O.
(n.d).
Liberal Versus Practical Orientation of Curriculum Development.
http://www.crvp.org/book/series 02/11- 11/prologue.htm accessed 28 August, 2009 66  UNIT 2 ISSUE OF STUDENT ACTIVISM AND ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1 Administration of Student Affairs 3.1.1 Student Admission 3.1.2 Participation in University governance 3.1.3 Management of Information 3.1.4 Maintenance of University Facilities and Equipment 3.1.5 Examination Malpractices 3.1.6 Student Organizations 3.1.7 Prevention of Students Violence 3.1.8 Solutions to the Administrative Problems of Students in Higher Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having discussed the issue of relevance of higher education curriculum and programmed in unit 1 of this series, it becomes necessary at this point to examine the issue of student activism and administration.
It is an incontrovertible fact that students are at the heart of all higher education s activities.
They play a critical role in enhancing the smooth functioning of an institution, hence proper management of student matters is a necessary condition for the stability of any institution.
In this unit, there is need for a re-engineering of management of student affairs, such that the management posture will be geared towards meeting the needs of the students and nipping problems in the bud .
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 67  • identify areas of student administration • describe succinctly each of these areas with emphasis on implications of their management in the education system • appraise each of these administrative areas.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Administration of Student Affairs There has been preponderance of students related crisis in the Nigeria s higher education system, which is becoming worrisome to many stakeholders.
This development is so recurring that many people think that crisis is an inevitable factor in higher education.
Each of these elements is discussed briefly in this unit.
3.1.1 Student Admission The increasing demand for education has forced educational institutions to adopt policies of selective admission based on various criteria, such as quota system, catchments areas, JAMB examination, Post UME etc.
Some are prompted by the desire to maintain educational standards and others by political motives.
There is assumption that the political and economic health of society is enhanced if its individual citizens are enlightened.
In Nigeria, however, the resources are so meager that these ideals cannot be attained.
In consequence, this leads to competition for the limited places in the few educational institutions.
3.1.2 Participation in University Governance Students play an important role in the overall functioning of the university.
The have a major influence in decisions that affects the school culture.
They are responsible for providing quality leadership opportunities that transcend the college experience and are applicable in one s future career path.
One of the methods of assisting students to develop political awareness and sensitivity is to give them the chance to participate in school governance.
Under effective guidance, they can learn to vote intelligently; respect and tolerate others point of view; develop self restraint; and accept 68  responsibilities.
The contribution of well-organized student participation in the maintenance of internal discipline can be immense.
The open-door policies of the university administration, coupled with a committee system approach will facilitate an enabling environment for progress.
Students should be represented in some management committee e.g.
disciplinary committee, appeal committee etc.
It is proved to be rewarding because students have helped the management in anticipating problems that may arise from fellow students and other sources and proffering solution to the anticipated problems.
3.1.3 Management of Information Information is essential for harmony, growth and understanding.
In the event of scanty or no information, rumour mongering exists.
Rumour has the tendency of breeding suspicion, doubts, fears and trepidation which, if not properly checked, might lead into violence.
It is in realization of the importance of communication that some higher institutions and NOUN in particular established a vibrant DMI Media and public affairs unit as well as information and communication technology unit to constantly manage information.
Many institutions have established an Edu portals, where course are registered, students applied for registration, school fees paid, examination results accessed, course material accessed and downloaded, and facilitators communicate with students online.
NOUN and many universities have invested heavily on ICT and Information Management System.
This approach has facilitated more dialogue rather than confrontation.
3.1.4 Maintenance of University Facilities and Equipment One of the banes of higher education in Nigeria is the collapse of facilities due to lack of maintenance.
The attendant result is an uninviting environment for teaching and learning, leading to falling standards and culminating in student crisis.
The existing buildings are in a state of decay due to lack of maintenance and repair.
The present conditions of buildings could impact negatively on the quality of education offered.
Such conditions have encouraged a brain drain of teaching and administrative personnel leaving the education system to other sectors of the economy or out of the country.
Dilapidated school environment has contributed to the high drop of learners from school.
The amount of funding needed for new facilities is high and the estimated cost 69  of the rehabilitation of the existing infrastructure is even higher.
The need for the provision of adequate facilities to higher education is urgent 3.1.5 Examination Malpractice Increase enrolment and crash in the value system have led to widespread cheating in examinations for the purpose of obtaining higher scores to improve the chances of passing semester examinations.
Cheating takes place in all areas for which examinations are required.
Laws have been made to discourage these behaviours, but enforcement has not been effective in addressing this problem.
Another factor contributing to examination malpractice is the early channeling of students into specific areas of study based on examination scores.
The literature that raises questions about the benefits of channeling students at an early stage need to taken into consideration.
Other issues that need to be looked into in channeling processes are problems relating to factors such as of inequalities in the provision of education and uneven quality of education offered especially in situation where the future welfare of students may be determined.
3.1.6 Student Organizations Student organization involves overseeing student clubs and organizations.
This area is responsible for providing organizations with leadership opportunities through students council representative.
The area of student organizations also works closely with the faculty advisors in order to provide them with the positive learning experience for the student.
The university management, right from the onset, believes in training the whole man.
That is why co-curricular activities are as important as curricular activities.
Through the campus life committee of the universities, clubs and association activities are promoted and regulated.
Students are encouraged to initiate and create service-oriented clubs and associations must be dully registered in the student affairs through their various representatives.
If all activities are submitted for scrutiny before they are run, such clubs and organizations could positively benefit the university and the social cohesion and cultural integration will be well fostered.
3.1.7 Prevention of Student s Violent Outbursts One of the banes of effective university management in Nigeria in recent times is the unbridled student violent reaction to national issues and internal 70  problems.
The result of student militancy and violent unionism has been the constant closure of universities, removal of vice chancellors among other.
Secret cult is also one of the challenges facing tertiary institutions in Nigeria especially on how to handle the menace and members aggressiveness.
Never before has the potential for the destruction of lives and properties on campuses been great or escalated as fast and horrible as now.
The issue of cultism among the students has opened a new and very dangerous dimension to the situation of things in our educational institutions.
Where cultism exists, academic programmes and activities are disrupted, and university closed, leading to feeling of fear on campus, killings, and deaths and campus disturbances.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 List and discuss the issue of student activism and administration in higher education.
3.1.8 Solutions to the Administrative Problem of Students in Higher Institutions.
Some suggested solutions to the challenges faced by students in Nigeria higher education include: 1. establishing fledging counselling and chaplaincy centres, fully furnished with different psychological instruments and other spiritual devices that could assist students to realize their dreams to the fullest.
2. the university management should always adopt an open-door policy, where students are represented in some management committees.
3. the management should set aside a day in each semester, tagged vice-chancellor student forum, when students can discuss freely, ask questions from the management on issues that concern them.
This will ensure a transparent, uninhibited and efficient 71  communication system among all stakeholders within the university system.
4. the university should earmark some percentage of recurrent budget to service all facilities and equipment, knowing fully well that it is far more expensive to repair than to maintain.
There is need for a serious expansion of physical facilities and equipment to meet the increasing student population.
5.
University management should stop channelling students at the early stage into specific areas of study based on examination scores.
This will help to reduce cases of examination malpractices as students are determined to obtain higher scores to improve their semester s examinations scores.
6. management should invest in student- oriented programmes and clubs.
This could promote student learning by providing opportunities for involvement in a wide variety of organizations programmes and training.
7. management should provide leadership to advance a campus community that is actively engaged and promotes experiential learning, healthy decision-making and life skill development.
Students should also be encouraged to maximize opportunities, both on and off the campus and promote community interaction and collaboration.
8. both the state and the management of Nigerian universities should maintain standing committees on riot prevention.
Such committees would be charged with the responsibilities of identifying potential causes of riots on the campuses and of maintaining a permanent channel of communication with all student organizations on the university campuses.
About 40% of the membership of such a committee should be students and youth.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing, it therefore stands to reason that the education of students forms the core of the mandate of universities in Nigeria.
The ideal is that these students, after graduation, will ultimately assume leadership positions in the future, and thereby foster nation building, and fight ethnicity.
Any shortcoming in the education of these students will portend danger to the economic, social and cultural development of Nigeria.
72  5.0 SUMMARY From the above, we have seen that effective management of students will promote a high degree of sanity in the university system and consequently create a conducive environment suitable for the university system to pursue her cardinal objectives of acquisition, development and inculcation of the proper value orientation for individual and societal survival; and the development of intellectual capacities to enable the individual understand and appreciate his environment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the possible solutions to the problems of administration of student s affairs in higher education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ademola, S. T. (2006).
Towards a Pro-active Management of Student Affairs in the Nigerian University System: A case study of Babcock University (Eds).
Educational Management: Thoughts and Practice.
Ibadan: Codat Publications.
Edem, D. A.
(1982).
Introduction to Educational Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. Ekundayo, H. T. and Ajayi, I.
A.
(2009).
Toward Effective Management of University Education in Nigeria.
International NGO Journal vol 4 (8), pp.
342 347, http://www.academic journals.org/NGOJ accessed 4th September, 2009.
FGN, (1976, 1981).
National Policy on Education, Lagos: NERC Moja, T. (2000).
Nigeria Education Sector Analysis: An Analytical Synthesis of Performance and Main Issues.
New York: Being a document produced for the World Bank in 2000.
Olurode, L. (2001).
Democratic Imperatives and Higher Education in Nigeria: the Quest for Social Justice in Paths to sustainab at Pioneers Hotels, Wuse Zone 4, July 3 7, 2001.
73  Sanda, A. O.
(1992).
Managing Nigerian Universities.
Ibadan Spectrum Books Ltd. UNIT 3 ISSUE OF UNIVERSITY COMMITTEE SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Committee System 3.2 University Committees 3.3 Elements of Committee System 3.4 Composition of Committees 3.5 Leadership of Committees 3.6 Challenges Faced in Committee System 3.7 Suggestions to Committee Challenges 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 74  7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The committees are working groups organized in clusters, allowing policy development and advise senate and council on all aspects of teaching and learning in the university.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of committee system • list the university committees • discuss the challenges facing the university committee system MAIN CONTENT Meaning of Committee System The use of committees was entrenched in the Laws/Acts establishing Nigerian universities as indicated in the University of Ibadan Act of 1962 which states that: Anybody or persons established by the Act shall without prejudice of the generality shall have power to appoint committees consisting of members of that body and subject to the provisions of sub-section (7) of section four of this act to authorize committee established by it to exercise, on its behalf, such of its function as it may determine .
In the management of higher institutions, committees play very important roles in the decision making process.
As a democratic establishment, university decisions on governance must reflect the opinion of a cross section of the staff if such decisions are to be accepted.
Many institutions in the country established many committees to assist in arriving at useful and meaningful decisions that can facilitate the proper management and growth of the university education.
Ede (2009) describes universities as international committees engaged in the daily business of the search for knowledge and truth.
Ogunmodede 75  (1981) states that authority of governance of Nigeria universities is derived from an external source.
The visitor is the President in the case of a Federal Universities and the Governor in the case of a State Universities.
According to Daudu (1986) the management of such complex organization requires participation through the committee system because of the bureaucratic, collegial and political models that are applicable in them.
Nwachukwu (1988) describes a committee as a device for achieving coordination of activities and sharing information among various departments and divisions of an organization.
He further states that committee decisions help to promote better coordination in an organization.
Ikenwe (1998) highlighted the work of Foxworthy (1971) and reported that the primary motive of instituting the committee system in institutional governance has grown out of the motive concern for democratizing decision making in those institutions and a recognition of the need for more broadly based decision making as universities become more complex.
Many institutions in the country established many committees to assist its management in arriving at useful and meaningful decision that can facilitate the proper management and growth of the university system of education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 Explain the concept of committee system in university education.
3.2 University Committees Universities in Nigeria are run through committees which are either responsible to the Council or the Senate.
Some of these committees are: 1.
Finance and General Purpose Committee 2.
Development Committee 3.
Appointment and Promotion Committee (A&PC) 4.
Admissions Committee 5.
Academic Planning Committee 6.
Committee of Deans 76  7.
Research Grants Committees 8.
Research and Publication Committee 9.
Ceremonies Committees.
etc Each of the universities has between twenty and sixty committees.
Each of such committees is supposed to specialize with regard to the terms of reference and focus of activities.
In practice however, there are disturbing overlaps and duplication of efforts.
The principles of delegation and limited authority are operated to enable the apex committee the Senate and the Governing Council to coordinate the various activities of the subordinate committees, which are brought to their attention.
The thrust of committee activities is decision making.
Such decisions of committees may have to do with providing solutions to specific problems such as: • the problem of examinations; • top heavy structure of staff in some departments; • decisions on broad and recruitment issues; • financial allocations for research or for teaching or field work or maintenance; • staff or student discipline; • examinations results; • academic programmes • awards of honour and certificates; and • appointments and promotions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 Discuss the university committee system.
3.3 Elements of Committee System From the qualitative data, which were obtained on the committee system, it was apparent that eight main elements are of the utmost significance.
These are: 1. the membership or composition of the committee; 2. the leadership, chairmanship or convenership; 3. the frequency or regularity of committee meetings; 77  4. the time taken for a particular decision to be reached (one month, one year, four years, etc); 5. the records or minutes of proceeding (accuracy of documentation); 6. the adequacy or inadequacy or availability of administrative support (e.g.
competent secretary, information bank or precedents regulations, etc); 7. consistency or inconsistency of application of rules and regulations, or other basis of reaching decisions; 8. the timeliness or frequency of follow-up actions and implementations of decisions, decision extracts: communication of decisions etc).
9.
One thing that runs through all the listed elements is the fact that, as the enhancement or measurement of administrative capacity is concerned, the factor of the quality of the individual (as chairman, convener, member, or secretary of the committee is crucial).
3.4 Composition of Committees For most of the committees in the universities, the Vice Chancellor is the chairman.
He could, however, delegate the chairmanship to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or to any other person.
Consequently, the personal and administrative competence of the Vice- Chancellor will reflect on the leadership and general membership of the major committees.
This is why it is important to appoint Vice-Chancellors with experience, knowledge of, and ability in university administration.
He will therefore be in a position to appoint committee chairman with requisite qualifications or abilities.
3.5 Leadership of Committees The leadership requirements of an efficient committee are in the direct province of the chairman or the convener.
The chairman or convener dictates the direction of arguments and the guiding or overriding considerations in any issue under debate.
The chairman and the secretary are the most important; they provide necessary leadership for the committees in punctuality, alertness, recollection of precedents and other numerous regards.
Where the chairman is unable or afraid to give leadership to the committee, the secretary will, inevitably drift away from its terms of reference.
The chairman who introduces irrelevant or frequent digressions into the agenda of a meeting will find the meeting very long and often boring.
Other members may turn the business of the committee into story telling sessions.
78  It is to note that committee effectiveness and effiency vary with the quality of its membership, especially its leadership.
3.6 Challenges of the Committee System • the Vice- Chancellor chairs too many committees to allow for maximum efficiency and the optimization of his abilities; • considerable delays and postponement/cancellation of meetings occur to the detriment of quick decision making and speedy implementation of needed administrative decisions; • frequent cancellation of meetings by the Vice-Chancellor due to conflict of engagements within the university or the fact that the Vice- Chancellor travels or deliberate manipulation by the chairman to discuss certain issue, or due to other reasons connected with the chairman.
• Overlapping membership of some committees and pre-occupation of committee members.
As such some meetings may not form quorum, which often results in cancellation and postponement of meetings.
3.7 Suggestions to Committee Challenges The preceding situation suggests the necessity for a careful composition of committees to ensure that: i the chairman should have no different and conflicting committee responsibility, or where the chairman is absent an acting chairman can conduct the meeting; ii.
the members should be able to participate fully in the activities of the committee; iii.
the chairman can be assured by a properly coordinated advance planning or scheduling of meetings and the chairman s adherence to the publicized schedules; iv the members may be assured through the involvement of as many 79  different people of diverse persuasion and the avoidance of concentration of membership of committees on essentially the same set of people; v. of great importance is the quality of members, their known competence and their ability for unbiased objectives and dispassionate analysis of issues; and vi.
the quality of decisions taken at any committee meeting should be a reflection of the quality of membership in the committee.
4.0 CONCLUSION The central attribute of the committee s procedure is concerned with democratization of the decision making process.
This democratization ensures the promotion of a high level of involvement and participation of the members of the school community, such as teachers, administrators, and students in the process of deciding or resolving problems that usually attend the consideration of various issues in the system.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has been able to explain the university committee system, looking at their elements; composition; leadership and highlighting possible solutions to the challenges facing the committee system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCSE 3 Briefly discuss the elements of the committee system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Suggest solutions to the problems confronting the committee System in the higher institutions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Daudu, P. (1986).
Committee versus Centralized System of Managing Higher Institution: A choice between participation and efficiency, unpublished paper.
80  Ikenwe, E. (1988).
The Use of Committees in Higher Institutions in Bendel State.
An unpublished Ph.D thesis of the university of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Ekundayo, H. T. & Ajayi, A. I.
(2009).
Towards Effective Management of University Education in Nigeria.
www.googl.com accessed 17th September, 2009.
Sanda, A. O.
(1992).
Managing Nigerian Universities.
Ibadan, Nigeria: Spectrum Books Ltd. 81  UNIT 4 ISSUE OF ACCOUNT ABILITY IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Accountability 3.2 Reasons for Accountability in Higher Education 3.3 Institutional Accountability 3.4 Higher Education and Environment for Institutional Accountability 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Government involvement in assessing quality in Nigeria higher education is ever increasing.
Higher education today receives a tremendous government funding from the Local, State and Federal levels.
This has led to an increasing pressure on governments to account for how tax payers money is being spent.
The very reasonable public questions are: what are we receiving for our money?
Is higher education delivering on its promises?
What are students learning?
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define accountability and freedom in higher education • state the reasons for accountability in higher education • enumerate the factors that can enhance institutional accountability • discuss institutional accountability 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Accountability Accountability emanates from the view that public institutions and those working in them should be sensitive to social and community prescriptions.
82  Formally, accountability refers to the duty to render account of work performed to a body that has authority to modify the performance by the use of sanction or reward (Leveille, 2005).
Accountability means different things to different people and it has been defined in many ways.
Government needs access to relevant information on the operation of the education system to determine whether the state is getting good value for its investment.
The investment is normally high.
The society specifies certain expectation that the educational sub-system will provide to meet certain educational needs of the society.
The higher education providers in Nigeria, and perhaps else- where in the world, have come under increased scrutiny by various stakeholders, such as government agencies, accrediting agencies, alumni, politicians, general public and the media.
In a modern global economy, a premium is placed on higher education.
A nation is less competitive if its population is not well educated.
That means that a nation s higher education system has become an integral element of its larger economic plan and a crucial determinant of future economic growth.
Therefore, government has a responsibility to ensure that the higher education sector is functioning well.
The question of autonomy, freedom and accountability need three areas for consideration, namely; • the individual within an institution or organization; • the institution or organization within a system, and • the system within the society.
Autonomy and accountability can be balanced to maintain a vibrant intellectual environment through several approaches.
An important first step is building public trust among the key stakeholders: i.e.
faculty, institutional administration, governing and coordinating boards, elected policy makers, state budget officials, the media, and ultimately the public.
This can happen when there is leadership vision and trust among, and between the various important players in the state and its higher education.
It requires understanding, foresight, clarity, and communication.
It also requires that stakeholders have a clear understanding of the dynamics of the past, develop the skills necessary to successfully navigate through the problems and issues of the present, and acquire a vision and understanding of the future through collaboration, communication, and the identification of a common vision.
83  SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 Explain the concept of accountability?
3.2 Reason for Accountability in Higher Education.
Reasons for accountability in higher education can be summarized as: • cost/value ratio of higher education; • higher expectations of technology and scientific breakthrough; • focus on educating the masses for higher revenues and prestige rather than educational core and academic standards; • responsibility for local community outreach and participation; • accountability demands from internal and external audits for educational quality; • the general effort by the government to reduce federal domestic spending, especially for education and other social programmes; • the concurrent devolution of responsibility for education to the states-at a time when our economy was in recession due to increasing international economic competition, high unemployment, demographic and technological changes; • reduction in federal aid and revenue; • skyrocketing cost of higher education, which is increasing much faster than inflation; • the public function of higher education i.e.
the preparation of students to assume professional roles and the connection to societal issues, and • public funding/accountability versus academic freedom and institutional autonomy.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 3 State the reasons for accountability in higher education 3.3 Institutional Accountability Higher education institutions should endeavour to operate open governance in order to be accountable.
They should be accountable for the following reasons: • Effective communication to the public concerning the nature of their educational mission.
84  • Commitment to quality and excellence in their teaching, scholarship and research functions, and an obligation to protect and ensure the integrity of their academic mission.
• Effective support of academic freedom and fundamental human right.
• Ensuring high quality education for as many academically qualified individual as possible subject to the resources available to them.
• Commitment to the provision of lifelong learning consistent with mission of the institution and the resources provided.
• Ensuring that students are treated fairly and justly, and without discrimination.
• Ensuring that higher education personnel are not impeded in their work in the classroom or in their research capacity by violence, intimidation or harassment.
• Honest and open accountability.
• Efficient use of resources.
• Ensuring that they address themselves to the contemporary problems facing society; to this end, their curricula, as well as their activities, should respond, where appropriate, to the current and future needs of the local community and society at large, and they should play an important role in enhancing the labour market opportunities of their graduates.
• Ensuring up-to-date libraries Access without censorship, to modern teaching, research and information resources.
Providing information required by higher education teaching personnel or by students for teaching, and research.
• Systems of institutional accountability should be based on a scientific methodology and be clear, realistic, cost-effective and simple.
In their operation they should be fair, just and equitable.
Both the methodology and the results should be open.
• Higher education institutions, individually or collectively, should design and implement appropriate system of accountability, including quality assurance mechanism to achieve the above goals, without harming institutional autonomy or academic freedom.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 4 What is institutional accountability?
85  3.4 Higher Education And Vibrant Environment for Institutional Accountability Successful accountability starts with a shared vision, common set of goals, and clearly defined, easily measured performance indicators which are made available to the public.
Institutional accountability can be enhanced through the following: 1.
Performance indicators 2.
Promoting a culture of transparency 3.
Partnership and outreach efforts 3.5.1 Performance Indicators Example of performance indicators include: - number of degrees awarded; - average time for the completion of degree programmes; - graduates performance in external licensure examinations; - faculty success in attracting research grants; - faculty reputation with peers; - employability of graduates; - student and public satisfaction as measured by surveys; - student cost per programme.
These accountability performance indicators can be developed by utilizing effective communication tools such as presentations, discussions, resolution of disagreements, negotiations, compromise, etc, by all stakeholders.
Stakeholders include university administration partners, such as business people, publicly appointed and elected officials, and community members.
To facilitate communication, higher education stakeholders should seek out cross-cultural partnerships with private business, school districts, and community statewide organizations.
These partnerships are essential as they implement their programmes, embrace a clear understanding of accountability requirements and student success, and build an assessment models to measure outcomes and results.
This effort would replace higher education institutions as a self- centered control agency or coordinating agency.
86  3.5.2.
Promoting a Culture of Transparency Higher education administrators and governing council members need to promote a culture of transparency, meaning providing partnership stakeholders with sufficient information to make decisions.
This information include the source of financial resources and how they are being consumed, student achievement reporting procedures and data sources, and policies that document programme decisions.
The governing council needs to make decisions and be forthright in sharing the problems and challenges facing higher education.
The formation of advisory committees with stakeholders as member will enhance higher education image.
Deans and faculty members should celebrate their achievements and report performance indicators of their academic programess to the public through local media and their own print material resources.
Community members, local and state- appointed and elected officials, along with the business community should be invited to attend notable academic events in higher educational institutions.
Deans and faulty members through appropriate organizations can host state, national or international conferences in partnership with financial sponsors on their campuses Such efforts are an excellent way to advertise and introduce a university campus to conference participants not previously familiar with such campuses.
3.5.3.
Partnership and Outreach Efforts Partnerships can be formed by school of education in teacher education, special education, pupil personnel services, and educational administration programmes with public schools.
Assistance from business and industry is another partnership component that higher education administration and faculty members could promote for research and development, or by designing a training programme that meets the unique needs of business.
Faculty members could promote grant partnership opportunities of public or private funding for a specific research project.
Conducting research, reaching out and participating in appropriate community and civic activities for overall community improvement is constructive.
It is in turn, encourages greater community support 87  of higher education.
This is another positive step that can be undertaken by faculty members.
These activities serve to improve public trust and place on higher education the role of being more transparent and accountable to the public.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 5 List and explain one way higher institutions can enhance its environment for institutional accountability.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have explained in detail the meaning of accountability as the duty to render account of work performed to a body that has authority to modify the performance by the use of sanction and reward.
The government needs to access relevant information on the operation of the education system to determine whether the State is getting good value for its investment.
5.0 SUMMARY From the above, freedom and accountability can be enhanced to maintain a vibrant intellectual environment through several approaches.
An important first step is building public trust among the key stakeholders of higher education: i.e.
faculty, institutional administrator, governing councils, elected policy makers, state budget officials, the media and ultimately the public.
6.0 TUTOT-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Enumerate the reasons for institutional accountability 2.
What are the three vibrant environmental factors that can enhance institutional accountability?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Altbach, P. G. (2001).
Academic Freedom: International Realities and Challenges.
Higher Education 41 (1-2): 205 -19.
88  Castel, A.
(1964).
The Founding Fathers and the Vision of a Nation University.
History of Education Quarterly 4 (4): 280 -302 Cliford D, E. T and Sidney, C. (2007).
Promoting A Stimulating, Intellectual Environment Despite Increased Accountability Requirement: submitted to Improvement of University Teaching 32nd Annual Conference.
Jean Spain.
July 4 -7, 2007.
Leveille, D. E. (2005).
An Emerging View on Accountability in American Higher Education .
University of California, Berkeley: Research and Occasional Paper Series: CSHE.8.05, May 2005.
Marily, G. (n.d).
Accountability in Higher Education: Are there Fatal Errors Embedded in Current U. S. Policies Affecting Higher Education www.google.com accessed 4th September, 2009.
UNESCO, (1997).
Recommendation Concerning the Status of Higher Education Teaching Personnel: www.unesco.org accessed 4th September, 2009.
89  UNIT 5 ISSUE OF QUALITY AND QUALITY ASSURANCE IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Quality 3.2 Concept of Quality Assurance in Higher Education 3.3 Theoretical Issues in Quality Assurance 3.4 Recent Developments in Quality Assurance in Nigerian Higher Education 3.5 Elements for Assessing Quality Assurance in Higher Education 3.6 Problems Associated with Quality Assurance in Nigerian Higher Education 90  3.7 Suggestions for Quality Assurance in Nigerian Higher Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is now an established fact that active participation in knowledge in societies is essential to economic growth and higher educational institutions are the potential engines for such growth.
The opportunities to access knowledge have increased tremendously in recent years and the stakes for success are very high.
Those who are unable to gain access and use it to full advantage will fall economically.
The condition of higher education in a nation becomes increasingly critical to its success.
This has informed the renewed interest Nigerian government placed on the quality of higher education.
Quality assurance has almost assumed the dimension of a cliché among the elite in Nigeria.
Everyone, the informed and the uniformed, talk about it, often times using it interchangeably with Corporate integrity.
The quest and agitation by stakeholders for its enthronement and observance in the country s higher education have become near-hysterical, given the often alleged cases of maladministration; fund misappropriation; bloated or fake invoicing; sexual harassment; bribery; etc; within the system.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of quality assurance in higher education • outline the theoretical issues in quality assurance 91  • discuss recent developments in quality assurance higher education • list and explain the elements necessary for assessment of quality assurance in higher education • discuss problems associated with quality assurance in higher education • suggest solutions for quality assurance in higher education MAIN CONTENT Concept of Quality Quality education has become one of the central issues accorded priority in the recent educational reforms going on worldwide, and quality assurance has become one of the mechanisms used in achieving it.
However, the understanding of quality and the possible ways and means of assuring quality in education varies.
While quality education is seen as a a set of elements that the input, process and output of the education system and provides services that completely satisfy both internal and external strategic constituencies by meeting their explicit and implicit expectations (Cheng and Tain, 1997).
Defining quality in higher education has proved to be a challenging task.
Some scholars believe that education quality is a rather vague and controversial concept and that quality is a notoriously ambiguous term.
At the broadest level, education quality can be viewed as a set of elements that constitute the input; process and output of the education system, which provides services that completely satisfy both internal and external strategic constituencies by meeting their explicit and implicit expectations (Pounder 1999; Cheng and Tarn, 1997).
If higher education is viewed as a system, then any quality management programme must therefore assess any inputs, process and outputs.
Internal and external stakeholders have been identified in the quality management process in which current students and front line forms the internal constituents and employers; government bodies; institutional management; prospective students; and professional bodies are external.
These stakeholders might have disparate definitions of quality as well as different preferences for how quality is assessed.
Hence Hughes (1988) suggests quality indicators may differ for internal and external stakeholders, and Cheng and Tarn (1997) are of the opinion that expectations of the different constituencies may not be only different 92  but contradictory.
According to Cullen; Joyce; Hassall; and Broadbent (2003), the challenge is to produce a performance evaluation framework that permits the equal expression of legitimate voices, though they may conflict or compete in some ways.
Harvay and Knight (1996) suggest that quality can be broken down into five different but related dimensions: • quality as exceptional (e.g.
high standards); • quality as consistency (e.g.
zero defects); • quality as fitness for purpose (fitting customer specifications); • quality as value for money; and • quality as transformative (an ongoing process that includes empowerment and enhancement of the customer satisfaction).
While the authors advise that quality as transformative incorporates the other dimensions to some extent, it can also be argued that different stakeholders are likely to prioritize the importance of these different dimensions of quality accorded to their motivations and interest (Owilia and Aspinwall, 1996).
For some quality initiatives therefore, there may be a preference for the monitoring of some quality dimensions at the expense of others.
Internal stakeholders, on the other hand, are more likely to be concern with quality as transformative where it is an ongoing process that includes empowerment and enhancement of customer satisfaction (Harvey and Knight, 1996).
The emphasis for these stakeholders is therefore not only on quality assurance, but additionally on quality enhancement which aims for overall increase in the actual quality of teaching and learning often through more innovative practices (Mckay and Kember, 1999).
Elton (1992) suggests that this approach focuses on the quality K s: Empowerment; Enthusiasm; Expertise; and Exellence .
Mckay and Kember (1999), reports that initiatives for quality enhancement tend to be less clearly defined and often more diverse than quality assurance initiatives.
Mechanisms adopted by internal stakeholders are likely to include self evaluation practices and student surveys.
As students are viewed as an integral part of the learning process (Wilklund et al.
, 2003), this approach tends to be more formative in nature and therefore more likely to lead to continual quality improvement efforts.
The involvement of internal stakeholders is also more likely to result in a culture of quality being embedded within programmes.
However, these measures are representative of a comparatively limited number of stakeholders and where self-evaluation 93  practices are employed there can be a tendency to paint a rosy picture especially when linked to appraisal or tenure decisions.
Meaning of Quality Assurance Quality assurance is meeting or conforming to general accepted standards as defined by quality assurance bodies or appropriate academic and professional committees (Hayward, 2006).
One could name different structures and institutions in the system of education which are supposed to assure quality.
Education reforms worldwide are aimed at providing better quality of education hence the previous structures and institutions are to be recognized in order to achieve this aim in the best possible way.
The nation of quality vary from that of providing a distinctive, special or even exclusive product or even exclusive product or service, to meeting or conforming to predetermined specifications or standard, to value for money or to fitness of purpose.
According to Whitely (2001), quality assurance in education has become an all-embracing concept that includes all policies, processes and actions through which the quality of education provided is developed and maintain.
Traditionally, external stakeholders have been associated with quality assurance procedures.
Quality assurance refers to the planned and systematic actions (deemed) as necessary to provide adequate confidence that a product or service will satisfy given requirements for quality (Borahan and Ziarati, 2002).
For higher education institutions this requires them to demonstrate responsible actions in their professional practices, be accountable for public funds received and demonstrate the results they achieve with the available resources (Jackson, 1998).
Elton (1992) refers to these as the quality A S: Accountability; Audit; and Assessment and suggests.
These are concerned with the control of quality and the people who control quality.
The particular mechanisms for assurance are usually imposed by external bodies such as university management and most commonly include accreditation; external examiners and quality audits (Mckay and Kember, 1999).
As a control tool therefore, the focus is predominantly on the extent to which the procedures and conditions that are perceived to result in procedures and conditions that are perceived to result in appropriate levels of quality are followed within institutions or programmes and are effective in meeting their purpose (Jackson, 1996, p. 39).
Prioritized dimensions of quality therefore include quality as consistency; quality as fitness for purpose; and quality as value for money.
As these 94  external stakeholders also assure that a minimum threshold of quality is maintained, quality as exceptional is also a relevant dimension.
To this extent, external quality assurance mechanisms have a pertinent role to play in quality assessment practices for a number of stakeholders.
However, the processes adopted are by nature summative providing only a snapshot of quality and therefore Mckay and Kember (1999) argue that quality control measures in isolation may have limited impact if not accompanied by appropriate educational development initiatives.
In addition, the legitimacy of these approaches for quality enhancement purposes has been questioned as the use of external change agent does not imbibe quality into the culture of programmes (Roffe, 1998).
Furthermore, there may be a tendency towards gaming the system where what gets measured gets done or fixed in the short term in order to meet assessment targets (Bradach, 1998).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 1 Define the concept quality and concept of quality assurance in higher education.
Theoretical Issues in Quality Assurance The need to assess quality in educational provision is now generally accepted as one of the tools of educational reforms.
There are two widely used systems of quality assurance in higher education.
The first, is the system Decertification of students by a renowned scholar in the field.
The value of the credentials awarded, are assured by the reputation of the scholar as well as his place in the genealogical succession of established scholarship in the field of study.
This brand of quality assurance has evolved into one of internal and external peer review of student performance and advancement of scholarship within the academia.
The other system is the accreditation of institutions or professional programmes.
The essence of accreditation system is that of meeting input standards in such areas as curriculum; library facilities; staff qualifications; student s entry qualifications; duration of study etc.
It should be noted that the two systems are mutually inclusive.
The current tendency is for the two approaches to be grafted into one another (Miller, 2002).
95  The actual measurement of quality is also approached differently by various stakeholders.
While some prefer to utilize quantitative data to produce quantitative ratings, others prefer to adopt a qualitative approach.
There are, of course, pros and cons to both approaches and benefits to be gained from other While quantitative ratings facilitate performance comparability especially on a longitudinal basis, they generally fail to provide any clear explanation as to be more suitable for quality assurance initiatives.
Qualitative data on the other hand, often provides richer data (Powell, Hunt, and Irving, 1997) which can more readily inform decision making for quality enhancement purposes.
However, it may prove less beneficial when benchmark for performance is used.
A quality management programme that utilizes a mixture of both types of data would seem most appropriate for both quality assurance and enhancement purposes (Brookes, 2003).
What is apparent from this discussion is that the concept of quality in higher education is complex and dependent upon different stakeholder s perspectives.
While Pounder (1999) suggests that we should be looking for another more appropriate concept than quality to benchmark performance in higher education; in reality, quality remains the key focus for higher education provision and shall continue to be assessed in a number of different ways by different stakeholders.
Recent Developments in Quality Assurance in Higher Education in Nigeria The subject of quality assurance in higher education in Nigeria can not be meaningfully addressed outside the context of the development of higher educational institutions.
The first higher education training institution established in Nigeria was Yaba College which was opened in 1934 by the British Colonial authority to help in the production of middle level technicians.
This was followed by the establishment of the University College, Ibadan as a degree awarding college of the University of London in 1948.
The Ashby Commission, which the pre-independence government set up to advise on higher education for the new nation in 1959 recommended the upgrading of the University College to a full-fleshed university in 1960.
The imperative to expand higher education came from the anticipated demand for local leaders, professionals and technocrats in the newly emerging nation- state Nigeria.
96  To inculcate the spirit of high standards and quality into higher education, a system of accrediting undergraduate programmes came into existence through the provisions of Decree No 16 of 1985.
The law empowers the National University Commission (NUC) to lay down minimum academic standards for all the academic programmes taught in Nigerian Universties and also to accredit them.
To established high standards and quality in higher education, the following approaches were adopted: • programme development; • access; • facilities development; • agencies/bodies for quality assurance; Programme Development The curricular or programmes of the higher education have witnessed transformation over the years.
Two major forces are responsible for this development.
The first force is the need for relevance to the needs of the Nigerian Society.
Hence programmes in most of the fields of study assumed dynamisms.
In agriculture; petroleum mining/engineering were packed and repacked in some cases to reflect the socio-economic needs of the society and for higher education to be able to produce managers; researchers and field practioners for the agricultural and mining industries.
The second force was borne out of changes in disciplinary knowledge.
The explosion of knowledge, advent of new technologies and rapid changes in the subject matter moved the boundaries and content of the disciplines into new directions.
This is witnessed in disciplines like architecture having a direction with the introduction of computer-aided- Design (CAD) technology; the science with the new found facts rendered the old ones obsolete necessitating the modification of the courses to reflect the new knowledge.
The traditional social sciences inherited from the British system were enlarged to reflect additional courses as accounting; management finance; business management; demography, urban and regional planning of the American Universities programmes between 1970 and 1980.
This has been reflecting in the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) brochure since 1988.
Faculties of 97  technology were not originally in the programme of the first generation universities, they were creation of the 1970s.
Access Access to higher education in Nigeria is restricted to those who are eligible and who can fit into the existing places.
Access is restrained by stringent admission requirements and by the number of institutions available.
The introduction of quota system of admission complicated the situations.
Apart from a high score in the matriculation examination, candidates are still subjected to catchment area; developmental consideration and discipline in the admission exercise.
The discipline quota ratio of 60: 40 of science to arts has made the competition to be stiffer and create high rejection rate for arts candidates.
In the non- professional courses, the cut off point is always low attracting high competition.
Facilities Development The facilities needed for teaching and learning process in higher institutions include classrooms; laboratories; workshops; staff offices and libraries.
Others are hostels; staff quarters; students and staff recreation centres; sports and games facilities; roads; electricity and water supply.
There are two trends in the provision and availability of these facilities in the Nigerian higher education.
There was steady improvement in the physical plans from the 60s and 70s to the mid-80s of the higher institutions that were established during this period.
The major phases of the master plans were implemented.
Good classrooms; libraries; laboratories; workshops and staff offices are part of the facilities earlier available in adequate numbers in the first and second generation higher institutions.
These institutions were able to support comfortable residential accommodation for students where laundry was free, and rooms were well laid out and three course meals served.
The collapse of oil boom in the early 80s made it difficult for higher education established since this period to compare with the pre-boom era ones in terms of quality and quantity of facilities available.
The second trend is the decay in the facilities in all our higher educational institutions, regardless of its generation.
This decay is so terrible that it has been a source of incessant strikes by the Academic Staff Union of Universities and condemnation by the parents and students.
Government 98  responded to it by setting up a 25- member committee in 1996 to examine the problem-among others- in great detail and make recommendations for improvement.
Government in 1992 pursued a face-lift programme for the higher education through a World Bank loan especially for the reactivation of higher education libraries.
Petroleum (special) Trust Fund in 1996 began its intervention by rehabilitating the decayed facilities in the higher institutions.
There are other interventions from development partners for rehabilitation of facilities and development of human resources in the higher institutions in the country.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 2 List and discuss the recent developmental approaches used to establish quality assurance in higher education institutions.
Agencies/Bodies used for Quality Assurance in Nigerian Higher Education In Nigeria the agencies and bodies that are responsible for quality assurance are: • National Universities Commission; • Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB); • professional Bodies; • proprietors and the Universities.
A.
National Universities Commission (NUC) The NUC established by Act No.
of 1985, has been deeply involved in the monitoring of quality assurance in the Nigerian Universities such as: 1.
Minimum Academic Standards and Subjects Benchmarks It has developed minimum academic standards for the thirteen broad disciplines taught in the Nigerian Universities in 1989.
A panel of experts from each of the thirteen disciplines came up with minimum standard in each discipline which were subjected to scrutiny from the faculties and departments in the Universities before they were formally approved by the Federal Government in July 1989.
They were expected to be reviewed 99  every five years to be able to update the standards of University education.
There was also a recent review which intends to incorporate into the curricula the acquisition of skills in University education.
NUC in April 2001 host a stakeholder conference on Curriculum Review made up of experts and professionals who drew up subjects benchmark statements for all undergraduate academic programmes in the Nigerian Universities.
The benchmark statements were sent to all the universities for their inputs and comments.
NUC is expected to merge the minimum academic standards with the benchmark statements as a single document for accreditation exercises in each of the disciplines.
2.
Accreditation of Undergraduate Programme This is the major quality assurance process done by the Commission.
This is a system of evaluating academic programmes in line with the laid down minimum academic standards.
After 1990/1991 accreditation exercise, the deficiencies highlighted in each programme and the recommended remedies were compiled into directories for each university and after its approval, they were circulated to proprietors of the universities for implementation.
2.
Postgraduate Accreditation NUC with the assistance of Deans of Postgraduate schools in Nigerian Universities has developed guidelines and modalities for the conduct of postgraduate studies in the Universities.
In October, 2006 NUC organized a 4- day meeting of Professors in all disciplines offered in Nigerian Universities and professional bodies to develop Benchmark Minimum Academic Standards (BMAS) for postgraduate programmes.
The draft BMAS will be referred to all Nigerian Universities and professional bodies for their review and comments where necessary.
At the end of the exercise, the panels produced the draft PD < BMAS for the following disciplines: Administration; Agriculture; Arts; Dentistry; Education; Engineering; Environmental Science; Law; Medicine; Pharmacy; Science; Social Science; and Veterinary Medicine.
This is a bold step toward the accreditation of all postgraduate programmes in Nigerian Universities (NUC, 2006).
3.
Programme Verification 100  In the pursuit of its role in quality assurance process, NUC established a policy of programme verification.
This involves verifying the readiness of University which intends to establish a fresh programme.
This is done by verifying the claim and its resources readiness through physical inspection usually conducted by a team of NUC staff and invited experts in the discipline concerned.
B.
Joint Admissions and Matriculations Board (JAMB) JAMB was established by the Act 2 of 1978 (as amended by Act 33 of 1999) to regulate the admission of students into Nigerian higher institutions.
The role of JAMB in quality assurance are ensuring high quality matriculation examinations and making only those who prepare well to benefit from university.
Allowing for high quality of administration of the examination to minimize examination malpractices and enhance the quality of new entrants to the institutions.
It has been conducting these examinations since its inception and efforts are being made to maintain high standard in the selection process.
C. Professional Bodies These bodies like Nigerian Society of Engineers (NSE), Institute of Chartered Accountant of Nigeria (ICAN), etc.
are involved in quality assurance process in the Universities.
They visit the Universities to verify the quality of their curriculum content; practical; physical facilities; staffing; laboratories and offer advise to the Universities on how to improve part of NUC s accreditation teams.
Some of these professional bodies conduct qualifying examinations for University graduates before they are registered.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 3 Enumerate and discuss the agencies/bodies used for quality assurance in Nigerian Universities.
Elements for Assessing Quality Assurance in Higher Education • programme development; • entrants; • educational resources human development; • stakeholders; governance and management; 101  • reporting; • quality assurance unit; • the quality audit process; and • stakeholder feedback.
3.5.1.
Programme Development The integrity of academic programme and examination system is to control quality in higher education.
A thorough procedure of course and programme development and approval is needed.
Also the continuing currency, relevance and appropriateness of the offerings must be ensured.
There is a need for a rigorously controlled examination system with clear procedures coupled with absolute confidentiality and impartiality.
In Nigeria s higher education, establishing and maintaining standards for the various qualifications is possibly the most difficult issues at hand.
An urgent solution must be found to this.
The problem could be tackled effectively by going the internal quality assessment way.
3.5.2.
Entrants A fundamental contributor to the quality of an educational institution is the entry levels of its students and thus matriculation requirements that must be made known and subject to regular review.
With the current pressure on institutions from government and the society to increase enrolment numbers, it is important that entry levels of students are appropriate for the programmes.
It is found in some of the higher institutions in Nigeria where students are being rusticated as a result of not meeting the required credentials for matriculation into higher education but just want to gain access by all means.
Many qualified candidates are also denied access into the institutions as a result of limited number of students the programmes can accommodate.
Offering a broad range of programmes is preferable to reducing entry standards on the basis of quota system.
The post-JAMB screening exercise is alright step towards admitting qualified and academic- inclined students into the Nigerian Universities and one of the sure ways of controlling quality in admissions internally.
3.5.3.
Educational Resources Human Resources 102  The most important resource in an academic institution is its academic staff.
The staff members must be appointed after a rigorous process of evaluation of their qualifications and past experience at work.
An annual appraisal of each member of staff must be conducted for formative and developmental purposes.
Regular professional development of all members of staff is important to maintain a high quality of service provision.
Hence enough resources must be committed to this process.
Adequate technical and administrative support staff should also be available physical resources.
There must be adequate provision of physical resources appropriate to the programmes being offered and the quality and adequacy of classrooms; library holding recent books and periodicals and other learning resources; well equipped laboratories; and information technology provision should be assessed at regular intervals.
The budgetary allocation must be adequate for the recurrent cost of materials for teaching.
Internal source of revenue generation should be intensified in the higher education.
3.5.4.
Stakeholders The stakeholders are the recipients of the services of higher institutions.
The stakeholders in this case are the government; students; employers; professional bodies; parents; and the society.
These stakeholders have responsibility for the quality of the institution s work.
The rights and privileges accorded students should be complemented with corresponding duties, obligations and responsibilities.
Sanctions should be affected anytime a student flouts the laid regulations that can threaten the Integrity and image of the institution.
One important element of quality assurance system is the consideration of feedback and opinion coming from the stakeholders.
The concerns of the students must be understood, accepted and responded to by the Institutions.
Institutions should also establish formal procedures and representational structures for receiving comments from students; graduates; employers; government and other interested parties.
3.5.5.
Governance and Management 103  Acceptance of quality assurance within institutions of higher learning depends upon a periodic review of all aspects of the work of the institutions, which include the governance and management.
These are to be handled by the Governing Council and the management of the institutions.
A.
Governing Council The criteria for good governance and management for members of Governing Council are that: • membership should have good representative of the community in which the institution is located; • the members must be knowledgeable about administration of higher education; • the members must be open and transparent in decision making; • membership should be of people who are willing to contribute in a regular and effective ways to the business of the Governing Council; • the Governing Council should oversee the development of the strategic plan for the institution; • ensure that government, institutional and community priorities are adequately reflected in the plan; • ensure that the institution is appropriately organized, managed and adequately resourced; • put in place a satisfactory quality assurance; financial and audit arrangements; closely monitor student enrolment; retention and achievement as well as being supportive of general welfare and development of all staff and; • have the responsibility for appointment; development; and appraisal of the senior staff in the higher institution.
B.
Senior Management It is also good to have seasoned administrators to handle the management of higher institutions of learning.
The management is to put into practice all 104  the policies and programmes of the institutions.
Hence for result oriented management.
The following activities must be performed by the management: • the senior management of each institution will be responsible for the implementation and initiation of policies agreed upon by the Governing Council; • create an effective and efficient organization and management of the work of the institution; • execute the elements of strategic plan and adhere to its periodic review; • enlist good communication within the institution and with stakeholders outside the institutions; • continue to monitor all aspects of works of the institution.
The Governing Council is statutorily expected to monitor the senior management s performance.
3.5.6.
Reporting Majority of educational institutions are working under a broad mission statement, from which a strategic plan is developed.
All existing programmes and new ones to be offered should contribute immensely to the achievement of the goals of the strategic plan.
The publication of mission statement; aims and objectives and the likes, demand a related and thorough system of public reporting.
The reports will allow the institution to demonstrate how it s short; medium and long term objectives are being achieved.
This will allow the stakeholders to examine and evaluate the institution s work and progress.
3.5.7.
Quality Assurance Unit For effective quality assurance system to be instituted in the campuses, each of the higher institutions in the country should as a matter of necessity create a quality (assurance unit within their institution.
The duties of the unit shall include: • encouragement and support for self-assessment; 105  • organization of quality assurance reviews of academic programmes; • conduct of audits of the learning/teaching milieu.
These audits could cover the following: • staff/student liaison committees and other facets of student participation; • careers advice systems; • academic and personal tutorial systems; • registration procedures; • provision of information technology resources; • operation of libraries; • operation of laboratories; and • staff development and training.
3.5.8.
The Quality Audit Process The need to access quality in educational provision is now generally accepted but, as Clarke (2000) points out, there can be very different aims for this assessment, with these aims varying according to the perspective of the stakeholder.
The purposes of the quality assurance in all the institutions need to be discussed and agreed upon (Brennan, 2000).
They may include: • ensuring accountability for public funds; • informing funding decisions; • improving the quality of the provision; • stimulating competitiveness between institutions; • ensuring equivalence across campuses; • informing students, parents and employers; and • allowing international comparisons.
106  For internal quality assessment to be effective in the higher institutions, it is imperative for a quality audit to be carried out in the departments or the faculty so as to know whether the quality procedures in place are adequate to assure quality.
Quality Audits should be conducted by Academic Board on an in-house basis to make it as comprehensive as possible and reference should also be made to external experts as required.
The following are important elements of formal quality assurance procedures: • publication of a set of clearly-defined aims and objectives and the systematic and effective monitoring of the achievement of these aims and objectives; • monitoring of the student learning experience, including teaching/learning methods; • collection and use of student feedback; • collection and use of quantitative data on student performance; • collection and use of external opinion; • rapid respond to issues identified; • appropriate and effective orientation arrangements for all new staff; • systematic approaches to identifying the training needs of all staff and the participation of staff in development activities; and • systematic documentation of involvement in quality assurance procedures.
Academic Board requires that the quality assurance procedures in a department should be fully documented in order to demonstrate that they are appropriate and adequate.
Overall, the quality assurance handbook of the Department should show clearly that all aspects of the department s provision are evaluated and improved on a continuous basis.
3.5.9.
Stakeholder Feedback An important element of all quality assurance systems in the higher education is the consideration of feedback and opinion from stakeholders in the institution.
There opinion should be formal procedures and representational structures that allow the receipt of 107  comment from students; graduates; employers and the governments.
This supplements the indirect feedback that is received by members of staff by their analysis of coursework and of examination results.
Comments on the teaching and the academic programmes can be collected in several ways.
At the end of each course the students complete a course evaluation instrument.
The campus administration will then collate the data from the instruments, Heads of Department and the member of staff concerned and return the summarized data for consideration.
Staff/Student Liaison Committee should be established in each department (or sometimes on a faculty-wide basis) and the committee should meet regularly to consider pedagogy; curriculum; assessment methods and other issues that impact on the student learning experience.
The nature and degree of the formal contact with industry or employers of higher education graduates varies, being to an extent dependent on the nature of the discipline taught within a particular department of Faculty.
For instance, the Faculties of Engineering and Social Sciences should have regular and extensive contact with the manufacturing industry.
The various departments should invite comments from related organizations at regular intervals.
The Academic Board should also conduct periodic surveys of the opinions of graduates and employers of the work of their institution.
The significance and value of stakeholder feedback must be documented in the results of the surveys.
Research in areas such as this is an important part of the quality exercise if the University intends to remain relevant and responsive to national needs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 4 Some elements are noted for assessing quality assurance in Nigerian higher education.
Discuss.
3.6.
Problems Associated with Quality Assurance in Nigerian Higher Education Quality assurance can best be understood as the process by which a goods or service provider can be happy and confident of its consistency; reliability; safety; and fitness for purpose or use.
108  Until very recently, the Nigerian Higher Educational system was woefully blamed for the growing size of unemployed and unemployable graduates, estimated at over one million (Bako, 2005); inability to meet the growing demand for skilled manpower in technology and science; non-recognition by international intellectual community of degrees awarded by Nigerian higher institutions; and dearth of researches that could drive the advancement of the nation.
State-owned universities are the most offenders in the quality assurance drive in the Nigerian higher education.
Relatively less funded by their proprietors (the state governments) whose major motive, ab initio, is political, these State higher institutions generally exhibit values of the market-place in their operations.
Even their admission of students is most often influenced by ethnic/state- of-origin and not so by merit.
Since education is on the Concurrent list of legislation not much can be done by the central admissions body, the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) and JAMBPOLY, to control quality of their intakes.
A cursory survey of the outreach/satellite campus programme of these higher institutions reveals some untoward practices including unmanageable population of mostly ill-qualified undergraduates; grossly unqualified lecturers most of whom are themselves graduate students of neigbouring Federal higher institutions; use of retired and obviously aged lecturers from Federal Universities in order to give a semblance of quality staffing; inadequate structures and facilities; and a cash- and carry value system.
Through such franchising schemes, higher institutions cleverly evade accreditation exercise by the quality assurance bodies.
The rip- of by the paper-minting higher institutions operating from across- the borders, making bogus offers of higher education just on-line, and for an abysmally short period of time, has a tendency of demoralizing the home-based institutions in their strict adherence to quality assurance procedures and processes.
• Other abnormal features of cross-border higher education include: applicants not eligible for admission are charged series of exorbitant fees; • applicants extorted by agents and aided to falsify documents that would eventually qualify them for admission; • indiscriminate enrolment of foreign students on cash-nexus basis; 109  • foreign students being permitted to repeat courses several times, even when it is certain they would hardly pass; and • lowering of academic standards for non-nationals.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 5 What are the problems associated with quality assurance in Nigerian higher education 3.7.
Suggestions for Quality Assurance in Nigerian Higher Education The following are recommended for further deepening of quality in Nigerian higher education operations, particularly at the satellite/outreach campus systems: • All institutions should of necessity institutionalize quality assurance units, whose memberships will include seasoned academics; technocrats; and the alumni.
Some institutions already have a virile one in place.
• Students at the outreach/satellite campuses should only be admitted on the same criteria as the students in the parent institution.
• To avoid unreasonable dispersal of resources, no higher education in all conscience should operate more than two outreach/satellite campuses, each of them headed by a nominee of the University Senate.
The tendency to outsource running of degree programmes has to be discouraged.
• Libraries and laboratories which are a luxury in Nigerian satellite campuses should be a major determining factor in the approval of such campuses for higher education studies.
• Overseas higher education should desist from lowering entry qualifications standards and graduating requirements for African students in their (overseas) institutions.
• A compendium of approved entry qualifications and graduating requirements in the higher education of each country should be posted on the internet for better appreciation of one another s system.
110  • Cross-border institutions must run programmes which in terms of standard are at least not inferior to the hosting nations quality.
Indeed they ought to see and perform at high standards.
As Hallak and Poisson (2005) insist, academic quality and standards of transnational education programmes should be at least comparable to those of the awarding institutions, as well as those of the receiving country.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 6 What are the key issues recommended for the deepening of quality in Nigerian higher education?
4.0 CONCLUSION As a result of the changing demands of this knowledge society, the structures and academic programmes of higher institutions in the country should build up international standards to be upheld in all the institutions.
Institutions need to ensure that their formal Quality Assurance procedures are maintained at a level that allows for the demonstration of the high quality of their work and also encourages the continuous enhancement of such quality.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, quality assurance has assumed the dimension of a cliché among the elite in Nigeria higher education.
Everyone; the informed and the uniformed; talk about it, often times using it interchangeably with Corporate integrity.
Therefore, for its actualization, the institutions should re-address the issue of quality assurance by making sure the NUC established Act is deeply involved in the monitoring of quality assurance in Nigeria higher education; and the higher institutions in the country should need some form of a national unit, which might also be involved in the national quality assurance mechanism.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSESSMEN T Several elements are noted for assessing quality assurance in Nigerian higher education.
List and discuss five (5).
7.0 REFERENCES/FUR THER READINGS 111  Akerele, W. O.
(2008).
Quality Assurance in Nigeria s University System from Emergent Issues in Nigerian Education .
5 (4), pp.
83-116.
Bako, S. (2005).
Universities Research and Development in Nigeria: Time For a Paradimatic Shift Bradach, S. (1998).
Franchise Organizations.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Borahan, N. G. and Ziarati, R. (2002).
Developing Quality Criteria for Application in the Higher Education Sector in Turkey Total Quality Management, 13 (7), pp.
913-926.
Brennan, J.
(2000).
Purposes of Quality Assessment.
Paper read at conference: The Uses of Quality Assurance.
London: Centre for Higher education Research and Information.
Brookes, M. and D. N. (2002).
Managing Change: The Value of Student Feedback, EuroCHRIE Congress 2002, Barcelona.
Brookes, M. (2003), Evaluating the Student Experience: An Approach Managing and Enhancing Quality in Higher Education , Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sport and Tourism Education, 2 (1), pp.
1-9.
Cheng, Y. C. and Tarn, W. M. (1997), Multi-models of Quality in Education , Quality Assurance in Education, 5 (1), pp.
22-31.
Cullen, J., Joyce, J., Hassall, T., and Broadent, M. (2003), Quality in Higher Education: from Monitoring to Management Quality Assurance in Higher Education, 11 (1), pp.
30-34.
Ejiogu, A. and Onyene, V. (2008) (ed).
Emergent Issues in Nigerian Education.
Lagos: Mukugamu and Brothers Enterprises.
112  Ejiogu, A.
(2008).
Quality Assurance of Cross-Border/Outreach Higher Education in Nigeria from Emergent Issues in Nigerian Education.
5 (4), pp.
251-259.
Elton, E. (1992).
Quality Enhancement and Academic Professionalism The New Academic, 1 (2), pp.
3-5.
Hallak, Jacques and Muriel Poisson (2005).
Academic Fraud and Quality Assurance: Facing the Challenges of Internationalization of Higher Education.
Paris: 11EP.
Harvey, E. and Knight, P. T. (1996).
Transforming Higher Education, Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press.
Hughes, P. (1988).
The Challenge of Identifying and Marketing Quality in Education, the Australian Association of Senior Educational Administrators, Sydney, NSW.
Jackson , N. (1997), Internal Academic Quality Audit in UK Higher Education: part 11 Implications for a National Quality Assurance Framework , Quality Assurance in Education, 5 (1), pp.
46-54.
Jackson , N. (1998), Academic Regulation in UK Higher Education: part 1 Current Practice and Conceptual Frameworks , Quality Assurance In Education, 6 (1), pp.5-18.
Mckay, J. and Kember, D. (1999), Quality Assurance Systems and Educational Development: part 1 the limitations of Quality Control Assurance in Education, 7 (1), pp.
25-29.
Miller, K. (2002) Quality Assurance in Higher Education in the 113  Commonwealth Carbbean , paper presented at Seminar on Higher Education, and Science and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean Responding to Expansion and Diversification, Fortile/a, Bra/11 March 8, 2002.
National Universities Commission (2006).
National Universities Commission (2008).
Approved Minimum Academic Standards Documents, Abuja July, 1989.
Owilia, M. S.and Aspinwall (1996).
A Framework for the Dimensions of Quality in Higher Education, Quality Assurance in Education, 4 (2), pp.
12-20.
Powell, A., Hunt, A., and Irving, A.
(1997), Evaluation of Courses by Whole Student Cohorts: a case study, Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 22 (4), pp.
397-404.
Pounder, I.
(1999), Institutional Performance in Higher Education: is Quality a Relevant Concept?
Quality Assurance in Education, 7 (3) , pp.
156-163.
Roffe, I. M. (1998).
Conceptual Problems of Continuous Quality Improvement and Innovation in Higher Education, Quality Assurance in Education, 6 (2), pp.
74-82.
Whiteley, P. (2001).
Quality Assurance: Its Centrality to the Administration of Caribbean Tertiary Level Institutions The Caribbean Education Annual VI: 13-24.
Wiklund, H., Klefso, B., Wiklund, P., and Edvardsson, B.
(2003), Innovation and TQM in Swedish Higher Education Institutions Possibilities and Pitfalls, The TQM Magazine, 15 (2), 114  Module 3 OTHER ISSUES IN HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Issues in Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Issue of Funding in Higher Education Unit 3 Problems in Higher Education Unit 4 Solutions to the Problems in Higher Education UNIT 1 ISSUES IN HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Issues in Higher Education in Nigeria 3.1.1 Issue of Capacity Building in Higher Education 3.1.2 Issue of Access and Equity in Higher Education 3.1.3 Issue of Literacy and Community Education 3.1.4 Issue of Science and Technology Revolution in Higher Education 3.1.5 Issue of Teacher Education 3.1.6 Issue of Brain -drain 3.1.7 Issue of Cultism and Campus Brigandage in Higher Education 3.1.8 Issue of Falling Standard of Education 3.1.9 Issue of Union Activism and Irregular Academic Calendar 3.1.10 Issue of Education and Self Reliance 3.1.11 Issue of Ownership of School 3.1.12 Issue of Examination Malpractices 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 115  You have successfully completed the first and second modules of this course material.
In this study unit, you will learn more issues in higher education system in Nigeria.
I hope you will find the unit as fascinating as others.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the issues in Nigeria s higher education • appreciate the issues in higher educational institutions in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Current Issues in higher Educational Institutions in Nigeria The story of higher education in Nigeria higher institutions today has largely been a story of mixed fortune.
These institutions initially laid claims in making respectable impact on the socio-political and economic advancement of Nigeria.
Today, there are doubts whether Nigerian higher education under the present condition will be able to continue to lay claims on being central to National Capacity to connect with the new international knowledge system, and to adapt and further develop the new technologies needed in the wider society.
Perhaps no other social services in Nigeria have attracted so much public discussion as education in recent years.
This is because the society and the government realize that the nation s overall development is inextricably tied to its education system.
Such issues that have been widely debated and some which have been identified by the World -Bank (1994), and the traces are noticeable as: 3.1.1 Issue of Capacity Building in Higher Education The development of human resource capacity for the delivery of an effective education is critical.
There are human resource needs for administration, management, research and teaching as well as for support and technical staff.
Lack of well- trained human resources is a problem in almost every area of higher education.
There is an urgent need for capacity building in the various Commissions charged with responsibility for governing and managing different aspects of education.
Planning, 116  supervision and monitoring mechanisms for the entire education system have been very weak.
Management problems within the system have been cited often as a factor that impacts negatively on the success of projects that have been supported by international development agencies.
Data on the education system have not been collected in a timely manner or processed in a way that is adequate for planning.
The system has thus suffered from lack of adequate planning for the implementation of the policies that are vital to improved quality and expansion.
There was uncontrolled growth in the system, especially at the basic levels, and later in the higher education sub-sector.
An infrastructure for providing leadership was put in place, but without the necessary resources to undertake the required changes.
Government efforts to encourage higher entrance levels for teachers in the profession have been somewhat successful.
The problem, however, arises due to the poor quality of much of the training provided at the colleges of education responsible for training teachers.
The training methods and approaches are outdated and do not take into consideration the changes taking place in both the teaching environments in which teachers are likely to work and the requirements of a more technological global environment.
For example, the business studies curriculum and the vocational and technical studies curriculum require teaching that integrates a number of subjects.
Nonetheless teachers continued to be trained in single discipline subjects.
At the school level, teachers in service and administrative officials do not have opportunities for high quality staff development.
Teachers knowledge and skills are often outdated and the inspectors are not providing the necessary pedagogical support for further development.
There is need to rethink supervision and its role in promoting effective teaching and learning.
At the higher education level, post- graduate programs must be improved if Nigeria is to emerge from a long period of economic decline.
There is an urgent need to develop research capacity at Nigeria s best institutions.
High- level post- graduate skills are critical for a knowledge economy that requires constantly changing skill levels an area in which Nigerian higher education has fallen far behind the developed world.
3.1.2 Issue of Access and Equity in Higher Education 117  Access in education remains an issue at all levels of education.
The demand for access has not been fully met in Nigerian higher education where social mobility depends more on academic achievement than anything else.
The issue of access has been manipulated by various regimes as a source of political power and in seeking political support.
Such activity has opened up opportunities for malpractices that now run deep in the system.
Far too many students, who should have been denied access, presently gain access to higher education institutions, thus contributing to the decline in quality.
Disparities between Northern and Southern regions are evident in terms of teaching and learning resources, and the participation of males and females in education.
There are also disparities between urban and rural schools and between education institutions owned and controlled by the Federal Government and those owned and controlled by the States and private agencies.
The entire system reflects privilege and differentiation, with merit and quality usually the victims.
Gender disparities in enrollment numbers are quite evident in the system as a whole and particularly noticeable in completion and in retention rates.
Although government has made efforts to address some of these issues, a lot more work needs to be done to make the programs effective.
For example, there are programmes designed to increase female access to education, particularly amongst communities and regions where the denial of access is steeped in religious or cultural practices, which do not encourage females to participate in educational activities.
In response to strong social demand, the Federal Government has repeatedly taken steps to expand access.
Among its more notable actions have been: • increasing the numbers of Federal Universities; • expanding enrollments; • introducing an admissions quota system to address regional and class imbalances; • constructing new student residence halls • launching a scholarship programme for needy students; • approving the establishment of Private Universities; and • the establishment of our National Open University of Nigeria.
The latter two actions are particularly significant.
They signal steps towards the healthier diversification of a previously rather standardized system, and 118  create vehicles for the eventual delivery of continuing professional education 3.1.3 Issue of Literacy and Community Education Non-formal education is also a large sub-sector that different regimes have tried to reform.
This sub-sector has suffered from similar problems to those encountered in the formal sub-sector including poor quality of programs, shortages of space, under qualified trainers, high dropout rates, gender and zone disparities, etc.
In addition, there are other problems in need of attention that are unique to this sub-sector emanating from the nature of the targeted groups.
The targeted groups include nontraditional learners such as learners in the Koranic schools, nomads, migrant fishermen and their families, large numbers of street children, etc.
The infrastructure for providing literacy and community education appears to be in place.
But there is need for integration of development programmes in other areas such as health, civics and life enhancing skills.
Resources for the development, production and adaptation of programmes to the needs of local situations should be identified and provided.
3.1.4 Issue of Science and Technology Revolution in Higher Education It is generally realized that we now live in the age of science and technology, and logically emphasis in the new 6-3-3-4 system is on these disciplines.
Hitherto, science and technology education programmes in Nigerian higher education have been criticized as esoteric and generally unproductive due mainly to inadequacies in curricular provisions and implementation.
Therefore a scientific culture in which the type of education envisaged in the 6-3-3-4 system can thrive has so far not been ensured.
For example, superstitious beliefs are still flourishing and most scientific and technological products are imported and consumed with little or no attempt at understanding and maintaining them.
Graduates of science are mostly narrow specialists; who find it difficult to fit into the world of work (industry and the civil service); except into teaching which unfortunately takes all-comers.
Particularly technical and manual work is derided by the general society with the consequence that few students shows interest in science and technology career.
119  In order to encourage science and technology education, government has directed Universities to enforce the policy of 60:40 science to other disciplines admission ratio, while some Universities of Science and Technology and several Polytechnics have been established.
It is also proposed that some arts and humanities programmes in University are to be abolished in the controversial rationalization policy being debated, so that emphasis will shift to Science and technology education, the greatest areas of development needs.
A note of caution is however being sounded by many people that if the Science and technology education being emphasized neglects relevant aspects of humanities education, Nigeria may be producing only robots dehumanised scientists and technologists who would create more problems for society than contribute to its development.
3.1.5 Issue of Teacher Education The popular saying that no educational system can rise above the quality of teachers in the system is rather apt at this moment in Nigerian higher education.
If education is not achieving desired goals, it may be a reflecting of the teachers and the type of education they themselves received.
Teacher education in Nigerian higher education has been criticized for not fostering in teaches adequate knowledge and skills for effective practices are schools.
For one thing, the selection process into teachers education programmes need to be overhauled.
At present, teacher trainees are selected mostly through written examinations than through any other procedure of screening like interviews which would have helped to determine interests; attitudes; and aptitude of the applicant.
As a matter of fact, majority of intakes at all levels of teachers education are the dregs from the education system, who could otherwise not secure admission into any other course considered more reputable and rewarding by society.
Thus they are deficient both intellectually and attitudinally even before training.
It would be foolhardy to expect that even the best of training could do wonders with such trainees.
The training programmes especially for secondary school teacher education also emphasises acquisition of knowledge more than practical teaching skills.
Practical teaching exercises that are supposed to last at least twelve weeks during a three-year secondary teacher education programme in Colleges of Education and Universities hardly exceed 4 to 5 weeks in most of them.
Micro-teaching exercises that should also supplement practical exercises are at best glossed over in most institutions of teacher education.
120  A time has come for teacher educators to re-think their programmes right from selection through training to certification, if any success is expected from the new 6-3-3-4 system.
If we are not to entrust the training of future leaders to mediocre; applicants into teacher education courses must face more rigorous selection procedures in order to sift the corn from the chaff .
In order to encourage better qualified people to enroll in teachers education programmes, the government and society would need to accord teaching its due recognition and reward; after all without teachers; doctors; lawyers; accountants; and soldiers, who are highly regarded by society cannot be produced.
Relevant courses should also be developed and re- arranged to allow for more time on practical teaching exercises.
Perhaps a new system of teacher certification, in which competent teachers are only certified after a one-year on-the-job training and supervision (post- institutional training), would be a better alternative to the present system.
3.1.6 Issue of Brain-drain Brain-drain refers to widespread migration of academic staff from the institutions in the country to overseas institutions or equivalent institutions where their services are better rewarded.
Institutional deterioration and salary erosion during the past decade have prompted substantial brain- drain of academic staff and impeded new recruitment.
The causes of these brain-drains can be attributed to: • low level of academic salaries during the past decade; • the declining financial attractions of higher education employment in comparison to other job; • the rising workloads associated with deteriorating staff/student rations.
3.1.7 Issue of Cultism and Campus Brigandage in Higher Education The practice of cult activities is a problem that has its root in the society and has infiltrated the entire higher education system.
The conditions in higher education institutions, such as overcrowding; deteriorated facilities; admissions malpractice; and inadequately challenging academic programmess have been blamed for encouraging the emergence of secret cults in the system.
Cult activities have had an extremely negative impact on learning and discipline in the institutions.
Cult activities have been made illegal but the practices continue due to loopholes in the system which makes it difficult for higher education 121  authorities to prove allegations of membership in secret cults and the danger posed by returning cultists to campus after serving their punishment.
Safety on campuses and creation of a learning environment is essential for effective education and for the elimination or lessening of the anger and alienation that contribute to the attractiveness of cult activities.
The challenges in this area are staggering due to the fact that they are rooted in the society and the political system.
Cults operate underground with members not using their real names.
Government legislation seems to be ineffective in stamping the practice out of higher education.
This issue needs sustained attention by both government and individual institutions because it impacts negatively on the quality of the education offered.
3.1.8 Issue of Falling Standard of Education There is a general hue and cry that the standard of education at higher levels is falling.
Pundits point to the declining performance of graduates from the system relative to what obtained in the past, especially in terms of reading; writing and practical skills.
Some of the reasons adduced for this state of affairs include the apparent declining competence and commitment of teacher s; inadequate provision of facilities; outdated and largely irrelevant curricula; and lack of interest and seriousness on the part of students.
Some other people have however argued that even though educational standard may be falling present-day students are in fact broadly educated as they are exposed to many more subjects/courses within the same time period than those of past; and even warn that decreasing percentage passes in final school examinations may be deceptive as number of passes in absolute terms is in fact increasing.
There is no doubt that in quantitative terms higher education in Nigeria has prospered enrolment has increased in leaps and bounds as well as the number and type of education institutions.
However the issue of quality in education remains a problem for Nigeria.
There is need to qualitatively improve the curricula; to provide high quality educational faciliti8es; to increase the supply of qualified personnel; and most importantly to encourage; and motivate them.
The main thrust of the new 6-3-3-4 system is towards improving the quality of education but its successful implementation depends mostly on the quality and commitment of the teachers.
Such commitment would however not materialise if the society and government continue to despise and treat teachers as underdogs of the economy and the socio-political system.
122  3.1.9 Issue of Education and Self-Reliance Traditional education in Nigeria had emphasised acquisition of skills and attitude that made its products useful to themselves and the society.
However the formal Western Education that entrenched itself in Nigeria has often been criticized as elitist and non-functional as majority of its products have no marketable skills that would fit them into the world of employment.
The mis-match between educational and employment planning, in which higher education was expanding fast while complimentary employment opportunities were not being created; has led to the production of millions of ill-equipped graduates; majority of whom are roaming the streets in search for employment.
The new 6-3-3-4 system takes cognisance of this defect in that the proposed curricula emphasises functionalism and education for self-reliance.
It is envisaged that many of the products would be self-employed if they fail to find openings in the conventional employment market.
3.1.10 Issue of Ownership and Private Participation in Higher Education A million-naira-question still unanswered is that of who should own educational institutions.
It is a question that touches on many issues issues that are philosophical; economic; political; and indeed moral.
When, for example, the former East Central State of Nigeria took the lead in compulsorily taking over all primary and secondary schools in its area of jurisdiction, the action was greeted with such euphoria by all and sundry (excepting the missionaries) that one was tempted into believing that was the best thing that had happened in the lives of the people (teachers; parents; and pupils) over the years.
However, it was not very long before the euphoria died down and the same people began to speak and behave as if scales had just fallen off their eyes.
In the same manner that the take-over was greeted, so did the people soon after begin to shout crucify, the state take-over , as it were.
As at the time of this writing, some state governments have begun to consider handing the schools back to their former proprietors private entrepreneurs; voluntary agencies; and communities.
There is thus a big confusion as to who really should own schools and colleges in Nigeria.
In order to truly answer that question, some other related questions must be answered first, such as:- 1) Who has the right to decide where a child should be educated, the family (i.e.
parents) or the state?
123  2) Who is most likely to offer the type of education that would be in the interest of the child: his/her local community, and the society at large?
3) Are educational institutions the same thing as property, the freedom of which ownership is guaranteed in the constitution?
For example, although Nigeria s Supreme Court ruled in 1982 that individuals have a right to own educational institutions (universities) in the Nnanna Ukaegbu vs Attorney-General (Imo State), the respective government in that state have dragged their feet over effecting that decision four or five years after.
All said and done, it is our view that private educational institutions should exist side by side with state owned ones.
For one thing, it will ensure healthy competition of schools.
However, the state as the supreme authority in any land should have regulatory powers over such private establishments in order to ensure that they do not deviate from our national goals and aspirations.
The often-heard argument that state-take-over of schools ensures uniformity of standards is rather hackneyed.
Is there anything like uniformity in absolute terms?
Not event the so-called identical twins are that identical by every means.
Variety is the spice of life.
Let there be schools of various different proprietors, so that Nigerians can have a lot to choose from.
Government involvement in education has been overbearing and financially burdensome.
The multiplicity of organizational structure, bureaucratic regulations at the various governmental levels, coupled with the normal red tapism at the local school level, constitute serious problems and manifest barriers to efficient education.
Thus, there is wisdom in encouraging private sector participation in education and reducing the monopoly or overbearing control of government.
The over-regulation and overbearing influence of government in education has taken its toll on educational development in Nigeria.
The blanket prohibition of private sector involvement has been the anti-climax of literacy and educational by the Lagos State Government in 1980 was the causes of litigation in the case of Archbishop Anthony Olubunmi Okogie & Other v. Attorney General of Lagos State.
On the 26th March 1980, the Lagos State Government issued a circular letter abolishing private primary schools in Lagos State.
The plaintiff, a trustee of Roman Catholic School applied under Section 259 of the 1979 Constitution for reference to the Court of Appeal on the following substantial questions of law: 1) Whether or not the provision of educational service by a private citizen or organization comes under the classes of economic 124  activities outside the major sector of the economy in which every citizen of Nigeria is entitled 2) By section 18(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, government shall direct its policy towards ensuring that there are equal and adequate educational opportunities at all levels.
Is this not an obligation placed on the government of the state to provide equal and adequate educational facilities in all areas within its jurisdiction, rather than preventing or restricting other persons or organization from providing similar or different educational facilities at their own expense?
It was held that the establishment and running of primary and secondary schools by government is a social service but if undertaken by a private citizen could be an economic activity.
In our system, there is mutual and co-existing relationship and no legislation in implementing the educational objective in section 18 of the constitution can override the provisions of Fundamental Rights enshrined in Chapter IV of the 1979 Constitution.
Also in the case of Attorney General of Imo State v Dr.
Basil Ukaegbu, the plaintiff, a proprietor challenged the provisions of the Private Universities Abolition and Prohibition Decree (No.
19) of 1984 which abolished and closed down all existing private Universities in the country.
It was held that Decree was a contravention of constitutional provisions which encourage private participation in economic activities and protect private property interests.
Some other issues in higher education system are as follows: • Issue of examination malpractices • issue of moral and devaluation and sexual harassment • issue of graduate unemployment and National Development • issue of union activism and irregular academic calendar • issue of infrastructure provision and rehabilitation of existing buildings, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E List and discuss five (5) of the issues in Nigerian higher education 4.0 CONCLUSION 125  The need for higher education stems from the fact that the system is responsible for the development and production of high-level manpower within the context of the needs of the nation.
It has been seen that the higher education system, which is the bedrock of development in the country is bisected with myriads of issues.
Such are: issue of capacity building in higher education; issue of access and equity; issue of literacy and community education; issue of science and technology revolution in higher education; issue of brain-drain; issue of curriculum relevance; issue of falling standard in education; emphasis on science and technology etc.
However, for meaningful development to take place in higher education system, the government must address these issues as enunciated above.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss issues in Nigerian higher educational system.
For higher education system to achieve all the stated higher education goals, it becomes imperative at this point for the Nigerian government to look into the above enunciated issues.
This is because the society and the government realize that the nation s overall development is inextricably tied to its education system.
I hope you find this unit very interesting.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss and enumerate the issues in higher education in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.
A. and Ekundayo, H. T. (2006).
Management of University Education in Nigeria: Problems and Prospects.
Being a paper presented at the National Conference of Nation Association of Education Administration and Planning.
Enugu State University of Science and Technology.
Anumonye, A.
(1975).
Nigerian Students and Emotional Reactions in Our 126  Space Age Universities, (An Inaugural Lecture).
University of Lagos: Press.
Biodun, O.
(2000).
Crises of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Books Farm Publishers.
Ejiogu, A. M. and Adeyemi, D. (ed).
(1987).
Emergent Issues in Nigerian Education.
Vol.1.
pp.
1-10 Lagos: JOJA Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. Maja, T. (2000).
Nigeria Education Sector Analysis: An Analytical Synthesis of Performance and Main Issues.
New York: Document Produced for World Bank in 2000.
UNIT 2 ISSUE OF FUNDING OF HIGHER EDUCATION 127  CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Who has been Funding Higher Education?
3.2 Who should Fund Higher Education?
3.3 Pattern of Funding of Higher Education 3.4 Limitations of Higher Education Funding in Nigeria 3.5 Sources of Funding Higher Education in Nigeria 3.6 Problems of Funding Higher Education in Nigeria 3.7 Suggestions for Improved Funding of Higher Education in Nigeria Conclusion Summary Tutor-Marked Assignment References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The financial resource allocated to the education sector in Nigeria depends on a number of factors namely: the rate of growth of the national economy; the condition of the world market; the competition of others sectors of the economy; and the nature of the sources of revenue for education.
The financial resources allocated to the education sector represent a cost to the economy because they could be used for other purposes.
If economic growth are likely to decrease, for education, then the annual increment to the educational budget are likely to decrease, leaving little or no room for new targets or any expansion.
Educational expenditures are therefore often expressed in relation to economic growth, since in the final analysis it is the increase in the national income that determines what increases in educational revenue are feasible.
The financial resources allocated to the education sector also depend on the condition of the world market.
Nigeria depends mostly on oil revenue.
Quite often, there are fluctuations in the price of oil in the world market which makes it difficult to decide what proportion of the national resources should go to education.
The financial resources allocated to the education sector also depend on the competition of other sectors of the economy.
Education is only one economic sector our of several others which requires government money.
In Nigeria, for instance, education enjoys a high priority in the nation s development plan.
128  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss who fund education in Nigerian higher education • outline the pattern of funding higher education • list and explain the limitations of higher education funding in Nigeria • outline the sources of funding higher education in Nigeria • discuss problems of funding higher education • appreciate the suggestions for improved funding of higher education in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Who Fund Education in Nigeria The principal actors in the field of education in the first half of the 20th century in Nigeria were; i.
The government ii.
The private religious or secular bodies iii.
The communities iv.
A few individuals National Policy issues on education came precisely late after independence.
Before then, there was no harmonized policy on education with the result that regional and State governments operated varied educational policies.
For example, the Western Region began the free primary education while major schools in the Eastern Region were run by voluntary agencies.
Governments involvement was more through a grants-in-aid-system to schools, which was established by other bodies, after due authorization and inspection.
The department of education then was more concerned with laying down the minimum standards required in respect of staffing, and of facilities and carrying out a quality control process through inspection of schools by education officers.
The grants-in-aid system persisted until the 129  government takeover of schools in the mid-70s.
It was a most controversial and contentious step.
It appeared that government had the means and the where-withal to shoulder the enormous responsibility then, since the decision was taken in the era of the mighty oil boom of the 70s, the policy makers had no doubt that the funding could be sustained by government.
Some missionaries, especially the Roman Catholic Mission, protested to no avail.
Since the government s main source of revenue was the crude petroleum, any adverse impact of world trade on petroleum was bound to affect the fortunes of Nigeria.
This was exactly what happened in the early 80 s. The government revenue fell drastically, and the funding of education began to suffer.
Consequently, the federal government established the National Primary Education Commission.
The system appeared to be working.
The local governments were established and it was thought that they would be able to handle primary education with increase in their level of financial allocation from 10% of the distributable pool to 15%.
Regrettably, it did not work (Omolayole, 1998).
From the late 80 s, the federal government and the state governments realizing the limit of their resources to meet all educational demands, decided to allow individuals, communities and religious missionaries to get back into active participation in establishing and running schools although there would be no grants in-aid for such schools.
However, the old missionary schools were not to be returned to their original proprietors.
The resultant controversy is, of course, still raging, and the last had not been heard on the matter.
In the meantime, since the independence of Nigeria, International UN agencies and private NGOs have entered into the field of education, providing support services, counterpart funding and soft loans in one form or the other.
The influence and participation of UNESCO, World bank, UNDP and UNICED in the field of education is now too important to be 130  ignored.
In the late 50 s and early 60 s, such international NGO s as Ford Foundation, Rockefeller Foundation and Carriages Foundation played prominent parts.
Some local foundations such as Chris Ogunbanjo Foundation and Rochers Okorocha Foundation are springing up to fill the gap created when the International NGO s left at the time of our oil boom.
Finally in the 2nd half of the century, private companies started to participate in education through remedial classes at the company level and the establishment of craft schools where special skills were taught.
Lever Brothers was an example of such company (Omolayole, 1998).
3.2 Who Should Fund Higher Education?
Education is the most important instrument of change, as any fundamental change in the intellectual and social outlook of any society has to be preceded by an educational revolution.
The fulfillment of this role lies on funding and administering sound, functional education policies.
The federal government of Nigeria realizes this and this is why it provides funds for federal institutions throughout the country.
The federal government, through the National Universities Commission, provides funds for all federal universities to meet their capital and recurrent expenditures.
The federal government also funds its own polytechnics and colleges of education.
State Governments fund higher institutions in their areas of jurisdiction.
In spite of the efforts of the different governments of the federation to provide funds for higher education, and/or the huge amount of money expended, higher education still lacks funds to implement various programmes.
Inadequate financial resources in the higher institutions have the effect of limiting the educational development policy of both the state governments and it local governments.
The fact that the various governments of the federation cannot adequately fund higher education in the country implies that the institutions must look for other sources of revenue to finance their programmes.
Such sources of funding include: improvement of their internal sourcing of funds through consultancy services and mounting of sub degree courses to generate more revenue for necessary expansion.
Communities should set up school buildings, to be 131  handed over to the government to administer, that is, provide teaching staff and other employees, material and equipment necessary to run the institution.
The principal actors in the field of education should include: • The government • The private religious or secular bodies • The communities • Few individuals SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Who fund education in Nigerian higher education?
3.3 Pattern of Funding of Higher Education Recently, there has been emphasis in understanding the trend in educational expenditure, and identifying the factors that determine educational expenditures.
Most studies have focused on public and not private educational expenditures because of lack of data for the latter.
Eicher (1984) reviewed the pattern and explained that despite differences between countries and regions, the overall efforts in favour of education in the past two decades had been nothing less than phenomenal.
He states that: Total public educational expenditure increased by 25% in real terms.
Public educational expenditure as a ratio of national income increased by 75% in developing countries and by about 50% in developed countries.
Public educational expenditure increased by more than 30% in both developing and developed countries (pp.
45-47).
In developing countries like Nigeria, while the demand for education is increasing, the cost of education is also skyrocketing.
Education at all levels is virtually a public sector programme and this takes huge resources like men, money and materials.
The country cannot afford to ignore the social; political; and economic purposes which education serves.
The country cannot afford to ignore the social; political; and economic purposes should aspire to provide mass education not minding the cost of such venture, since education is regarded as an important investment by the society as a whole.
The mounting demand for education brought about the escalating costs of education.
132  Educational expenditure has been on the increase in Nigeria since the 1950s and government recurrent expenditure increased from about £566,300 in 1955 to about £2,150,600 in 1962 (Ojo, 1983).
This represented an annual increase of forty percent between 1955 and 1962.
There was a rapid increase in education budget from 1955.
This was as a result of the introduction of the Free Universal Primary Education (UPE) by some regional governments.
It was observed that allocations to education became the single largest item in the budget of the former regional governments between 1955 and 1966/67.
The Northern region spent between 20 and 26 percent of its annual recurrent budgets on education while the Eastern and Western regions spent between 35 and 49 percent respectively and Lagos spent 35 percent.
The development in education expenditure from the mid-fifties to the mid- sixties showed that the Nigerian governments aggregate expenditure on education increased at a faster rate than Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and overall government expenditure.
The annual compound growth rate of expenditure on education during 1960 for example, averaged about 25 percent, as compared with GDP annual growth rate of about 4 percent.
From 1955 to 1963, recurrent expenditure on education increased at annual compound in overall expenditure was 10.5 percent (Adesina, 1988) Education in the First Development Plan accounted for 10.3 percent of the total planned public sector investment and ranked fifth in sectional allocation.
In the Second Development Plan, education absorbed 13.5 percent of the N2.0 billion total planned public sector investment, thereby coming second only to the transport sector.
In the third plan, the position of the educational sector allocation dropped to the fifth position as the sector absorbed 7.5 percent or N2.464 billion out of the national public sector capital expenditure on education to 17.5 percent in the Fourth Development Plan, 1981 85 over the two plan periods, and this showed the emphasis placed on education.
When compared with the third plan, education ranked fifth but rose to the second position during the fourth plan.
The increase could be as a result of the introduction of the free secondary education policy in some states and the continuation of the Universal Free Primary Education.
Two sets of factors appear to be relevant in explaining the level of total public educational expenditure and its changes over time.
The first set relates to the supply of education and the amount of funds available to the government for funding education.
They include factors such as the rate of inflation; the range of competing demands of other public services; the rate 133  of growth of national economy; the sensitivity of educational revenue to changes in national income; etc.
(Tsang 1988, p. 18).
The second set of factors relates others; the growth in population; and its age distribution; the importance of education for social mobility and national development; the level of coverage of education to diverse segments of the population, etc.
Those two sets of factors are external to education in that they lay outside the locus of control of school administration and policy makers.
Tsang also showed that educational expenditure does not depend on the level of economic development (measured by GNP per capital; but was influenced by unit cost as a ratio of GNP per capita; and the enrolment ratio.
The slow down in total public educational expenditure in developing countries may be as a result of a combination of three factors: slower rate of economic growth; a relative decrease in the demand for education; and a change in government attitude toward education.
Having put into consideration the current fiscal constrains and demographic trends, the need for cost reducing measure and more generally, the policies turned toward cost-effectiveness is becoming urgent in many countries including Nigeria.
3.4 Limitations of Higher Education Funding in Nigeria The present state of education in Nigeria is regrettably one that does not cheer any body up nor inspire one with confidence.
From the primary education to the higher it is a tale of woe.
The whole system has collapsed.
For us to bring the picture nearer home, let us start with primary education.
The pre-primary level is only available to the super rich in the urban centers.
The declaration of Universal Free and Compulsory Basic Education with advocacy programmes for enrolment has naturally increased enrolment.
What do we expect?
Insufficient classrooms or no classroom for pupils, no desks, no instructional materials, no learning resources such as playgrounds, limited teachers, many of them are unqualified.
The school buildings are dilapidated where they exist at all.
Many children carry their desks and chairs from home to school everyday.
The school facilities have decayed to a point that standard has fallen.
The population of children in a class is 134  sometimes as high as 100.
Teachers are frequently owed several months of salaries and for that they are demoralized.
Do we expect teachers to perform effectively?
Secondary education is not much better in terms of problems and apathy.
Because of lack of finance, libraries in schools have scanty books, scientific equipment and reagents are lacking.
The teachers are demoralized and discipline in many of the schools is poor.
The examining bodies devised Alternatives to Practical.
There are so many examination malpractices that one cannot easily vouch for the authenticity of certificates.
The quality of education on the average has fallen.
Those who pass English and Mathematics at the West African School Certificate for SSS 3 are on the average much below 40% of those who entered for the subject.
Too many of the students offer purely academic subjects at WAEC, simply because there are no teachers and equipment to teach the technical streams.
As a result, the economy is not getting the right mix of manpower supply.
Cultism is beginning to rear its ugly head even in the secondary schools.
It is these students who transit into our higher institutions.
The inadequate preparation of primary and secondary education levels results is huge waters of funds and efforts expended on remedial programmes at higher education.
Omolayole (1998) asserted that higher education is comatose and seems to be in a state of perpetual crises.
The number of higher education places appears totally inadequate for those seeking admission.
The facilities have decayed so much that rehabilitation is almost an impossible task given the level of current funding.
The higher education teachers are most unhappy, dissatisfied and demoralized.
Their extra-militant trade union posture has not helped matters.
The practice of two extreme types of trade union activity has produced more disaster than succor.
Efforts must be made to fashion out a level of employer relations 135  activity at the higher level that must keep the employers on their toes while not wrecking the educational system itself.
A system of constant pressure could be maintained even without a strike.
The other higher institutions are just as badly placed as the universities.
Sometime they are much worse off in terms of funding.
The polytechnics are particularly capital intensive in the Engineering discipline.
Even with 96 public universities and 57 polytechnics, the emphasis on Science and Technology in tertiary institutions in Nigeria is far below what is required for a technological take-off.
To add to these woes, cultism is beginning to destroy the higher institutions.
The most serious problem facing the whole educational system is a very large under-funding syndrome.
Even the bit of money made available is often mismanaged; such is the grim state of affairs now that the future will need some drastic paradigm shift.
Higher institutions, where the highest manpower needs are expected to be bred, have become places of discontentment by both the lecturers and the students.
Employers describe our graduates as half-baked and when they go for higher education in foreign countries they are subjected to tests upon tests to determine the credibility of their certificates.
What a shame!
Can nothing be done?
Should we all watch and see our education system finally collapse?
We can together examine and proffer some solution that can at least improve the condition.
This is the bone of contention for this unit.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the limitations in funding higher education in Nigeria?
3.5 Sources of Funding Higher Education in Nigeria 136  Federal government sources of funds are federal taxes; duties on petroleum, profits; exports; and imports; which make up the revenue.
Another is the collected value Added Tax (VAT) on sales of commodities which was introduced in 1996.
This VAT is shared between the Federal and State Governments according to agreed formula.
Funds allocated by Federal Government to the education sector are normally distributed to the various arms and tiers of education-primary; secondary; higher (Universities, Polytechnics and Colleges).
State governments also fund education.
Their source is primarily their allocation from the Federal account, their share of VAT and state generated revenue through local taxes, school levies, etc.
States fund mainly secondary level of education and a significant part of higher education, which the states established themselves.
Earlier than April 2002, they were not involved in funding primary education when funds meant for primary education where not channeled to states.
But since April 2002, states have controlled and funded primary education with funds sent specifically for primary education through UBEC.
Local Governments are also involved in funding education at the primary school level.
Local Government revenues come from statutory allocations from Federal Account, proceeds from VAT and internally generated funds.
State Governments through the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) allocate funds for salaries and other items to Local Government Education Authorities.
Apart from Federal; State and local Governments funding education; there are other sources of funds such as education tax fund; multinational companies; community-based funding; institution-generated funds; and international development agencies.
Though these several sources through which the education sector is funded are mentioned, the emphasize is that the education sector s expenditure come largely from government s allocation.
To have a reliable and comprehensive statistics of the amount of funds coming from governments to the education sector has 137  not been so easy.
The fact is that both at the Federal and State levels, the keeping of records on expenditure has not been taken seriously and allocations sometimes come as extra-budgetary (Okeke 2005 quoting Hincliffe, 2002).
The allocation to education is said to be a seemingly large sum of money.
When the allocation is distributed to the various arms and levels of education to meet their various needs, the amount that finally reaches each institution becomes extremely negligible.
Reacting to the allocation to the education sector budget, stakeholders perceive the vote as too small and insignificant to solve the problems of the sector.
Stakeholders expressed dissatisfaction with the allocation, saying that the vote cannot adequately tackle the decay and rot of infrastructure in the system.
We all know that the face-off between the ASUU; NASU; SSANU; ASUP; COASSU; etc and Federal Government is rooted in under- funding of education especially when compared with what obtains in other developing countries who are even less naturally endowed.
Nigeria, an oil rich country, allocates 10.5, 11% to education, Ghana, Namibia and Botswana allocate 26%, 22% and 21% respectively.
UNESCO recommended an average of 26% of the annual public expenditure to be committed to education in developing countries for at least 10 consecutive years (Okeke 2005).
The summary of the situation is that the education sector in Nigeria is grossly under-funded.
To some extent, the Education Tax fund has come in as a significant intervening factor, helping to embark on some of the much- needed infrastructure.
Education is supposed to be given the highest budgetary vote of any nation, especially where it incorporates research and development.
Oluleye (1967) stated that in the early years after independence when the regional governments were administering educational policies in their areas, education used to get a bigger share of government expenditure, close to 50% of the budget.
138  The military regimes seem to have dealt the greatest blow to education in this country.
During the military regime, in its erratic proliferation of higher institutions, educational share of the national budget alternated between 20%, 25% and 30% of the national budget (Nwachukwu, 1999).
At this juncture, one begins to wonder how proliferated higher educational institutions would survive and perform creditably in a dwindled budgetary share.
On many occasions, some of the meager budgetary shares to the education sector are not met due partially to budget deficit as a result of down-turn of the economy or greater percentage of the share will go to individual pockets, leaving Suffocating as a result of fund either through insurance or educational reserve fund in case of budget deficit or economic mishap.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 3 List and discuss the sources of funding higher education in Nigeria 3.6 Problems of Funding Higher Education in Nigeria Financing of education has always been a controversial issue and there is no consensus amongst economists as to how best it can be done.
In Nigeria, education is financed in a number of ways.
First by all the three tiers of government; that is the Federal; States; Local Governments; and Secondly by private funding which has to do with payment of user charges in form of fees; private sector participation; etc.
Public support for education is dependent on a number of factors, most of which are economic in nature.
The performance of the economy to a larger extent determines the budgetary allocation to education.
In others words, the fiscal ability of a particular government on education and how much education to provide (Oguntoye and Alani, 1998).
Going by this line of analogy, the primary aim of funding education should therefore be geared towards economic development.
They argued that education especially in the developing countries of Africa and Asia, has contributed to aggregate economic growth by: 139  1) creating a more productive labour force and endowing it with increased knowledge and skills; 2) providing widespread employment and income earning opportunities for teachers.
However, the higher educational sector has been confronted with many problems.
The major crisis in education today revolves around adequate funding of the educational enterprise.
In any case, the prevailing financial plight of the government; at the Federal; State; and Local levels is not new.
A serious problem confronting Nigerian higher education today and perhaps all over the world is that of scarcity of fund.
It is necessary to mention that expenditures on education have been escalating in the recent times, as in most other countries.
While it is so, it must however be pointed out that expenditures in other sectors of the economy such as defence; health; and agriculture; which are as important as education have also been rising.
Invariably, to a large extent, this rise in cost is not peculiar to education.
The magnitude of the problem of meeting the financial needs of the higher educational system is alarming.
This is as a result of the fact that increase in government expenditure on education has been inadequate to cope with the financial requirements of higher education.
In most cases, expected educational expenditure is greater than the expected State revenue.
The education sector has grown so large that budgetary allocations are of major concern to both the Federal and State governments.
Government s financial policies on education have therefore been subjected to constant review with the intention of allocating more resources to higher education.
Even though there appears to be absolute increase in fund allocation to the education sector over the years, yet there is financial crisis in education (Uzoka, 2007).
Inflation has further aggravated the situation by reducing the purchasing power of money available and escalating the salary bill of teachers.
These problems have taken their toll on the funding of higher education in the country.
With the growing concern about the rapid expansion of educational facilities, the acute shortage of fund in the education sector is likely to continue.
Budgetary allocation to higher education has been found to be inadequate to cope with financial requirements of higher education.
At the same time, rapidly rising costs caused by inflation is creating serious financial problem for schools.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 4 140  Higher education in Nigeria is bedeviled with problems of funding.
Discuss.
3.7 Suggestions for Improved Funding of Higher Education in Nig Nigeria should decentralize the higher education programme to include the participation of the NGOs and the private sector.
The implication of government being the sole finance and administrator of education has its manifestation in under-funding of the institutions; moral decadence; poor quality education; brain drain; incessant strike actions; closure of schools; and ineffective control and management.
The Nigerian government should mobilize external resources through appropriate bilateral agreements to help contribute to the funding of higher education in Nigeria.
Development agencies such as the World Bank; UNICEF; Ford Foundation; John F. Kennedy Foundation; Rockefeller Foundation; WHO; USAID; and DFID should contribute to the higher educational development of Nigeria.
Their aids should be used for the provision of science and technical equipment or establishing model institutions.
Government should fund education by allocating higher percentage of her revenue to higher education for at least 10 years.
Many funds should be poured into higher education to bring education to a normal standard.
Many education practitioners and intellectual unions like the ASUU and even the N.U.T.
have severally called upon the government to involve the private sector in the management of education in this country.
In an ASUU deliberation with the government during the 1992 strike, ASUU initiated the company s payment of 2% profit as education tax.
Government should 141  set up a board to collect and manage the education tax for appropriate utilization for education programme.
Government should intensify population control through implementation of primary and secondary school curriculum in family life education and engage in mass education of planned Parenthood.
By controlling population growth government will be able to reduce the long-term pressure on resources available for education Institutions should vigorously adopt the mechanism for internally generated funds.
Institutions should establish and equip a unit in their campus solely for the purpose of generating funds internally e.g.
mixed agriculture; catering services; consultancy services; printing; and laundry services; transport; bookshops; publishing; sales; and machines production.
The private sector; voluntary and other agencies that made a positive move towards participation in university; and commercial education during the second republic but were stopped by the Buhari regime should be re- visited.
The NGOs; especially the Christian missions; are willing to resume their participation but government has not given them the opportunity.
The alienation of the private sector and all these agencies in the education progrmme of this country has resulted in the crises of management, finding, control and quality.
It is really doubtful if there is anything like partnership existing among the higher institutions; the industry and the government in Nigeria.
In many civilized nations, this partnership is the hallmark of national development and progress, especially in the field of science, technology; and military hardware.
The partnership provides a forum for cross-fertilization of ideas; a spectrum of merging theory with practice and in fact a melting point for intellectual endowment; policy enunciation; and implementation as well as encouragement of innovation; and creativity (Nwachukwu, 1999).
142  Prudent and calculated spending is a general rule of good financial management and utilization.
Here, the appeal is not only for the chief executives but all higher education personnel.
Over-invoicing by all should not be tolerated.
Each worker should join hands with administration to cut costs as much as possible.
Funds that appeared inadequate may become conservatively adequate.
Funds allocated should be disbursed on time in order to avoid the loss in real value arising from inflation.
A number of uncompleted project in higher institutions are as a result of depreciation in real value of the money.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E 5 What are the suggestions for improved funding of higher education in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION Attempt has been made to see the centrality of education towards national development.
Based on various policies on education, none of these policies has adequately addressed the issue of funding of higher education.
The principal actors in the field of education from the first half of the 20th century till date were discussed.
Federal; State; and Local; Government sources of funds were also enumerated.
We saw how funds were distributed to various education sectors.
The consequences of inadequate funding to higher education sectors were mentioned and the possible strategies in improving the funding of higher education in Nigeria were recommended.
SUMMARY In this unit, who funds higher education in Nigeria; who should fund higher education?
Patterns of funding of higher education; limitations of funding of higher education in Nigeria; and sources of funding higher education in Nigeria have been discussed.
Problems of funding higher education in 143  Nigeria and suggestions for improved funding of higher education in Nigeria were also highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and explain sources of funding higher education in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Adesina, S. (1988) Sharing the financial burden of higher education in Nigeria.
Graduation lecture delivered at Oyo State College of Education, Ilesa.
Eicher, J.C. (1984).
Educational costing and financing in developing countries: Focus on Sub-Saharan Africa.
Washington, DC World Bank Staff Working Paper No.
633.
Nwachukwu, K.O.
(1999).
The State of Funding in Higher Education in Nigeria: Problems and Prospects.
A Paper Presented at the International, Conference on Crisis and Challenges in Higher Education in Developing Countries held at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria 1999, Lecture.
Okeke, E.A.C.
(2005).
Funding of Education in Nigeria Realities and Strategies for Improvement, Reported in Herbert, K.S.
(2002).
Federal Government of Nigeria, Annual Budge t(Various years).
Oguntoye, A.O & Alani, R.A. (1998).
A sense of calling: Who teachers and why?
New York: Public Agenda.
Lagos State Approved Recurrent and Capital Estimates (1984).
# Ojo, R. (1983).
Nigerian universities and high-level manpower development.
Lagos: Lagos University Press.
144  Oluleye, O.
(1967).
Nigerian Education.
Lagos: Longman Nigeria.
Omolayole, M.O.
(1998).
Private and Community Participation in Education in Nigeria.
The Nigeria Academy of Education.
Lagos: Jas Publishers.
Tsang is Wohlstertter, P. & Odden, A.
(1992).
Rethinking school- based management and research.
Educational Administration Quarterly No.
28, Vol.
4, 529 549.
Uzoka, N.E.
(2007).
Funding of vocational programmes in Lagos State secondary schools.
A Journal of the Department of Educational Administration, Faculty of Education, University of Lagos.
No.
1, Vol.
3.
UNIT 3 PROBLEMS IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 145  2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria 3.1.1 Deteriorated Infrastructure 3.1.2 Graduate Unemployment 3.1.3 Political Interference 3.1.4 Disciplinary Problems 3.1.5 Market Forces 3.1.6 Education for World-Class Citizens 3.1.7 Faculty Exodus 3.1.8 Money and Management 3.1 9 Management Style and the Structure of Higher Education 3.1.10 Financial Crises 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Higher educational institutions in Nigeria are confronted with several challenges.
The challenges facing Nigerian higher education are complex.
It is a combination of dilapidated infrastructure; Graduate unemployment; political interference; disciplinary problems and market forces.
We all know that an educated citizenry is crucial to the social; political; economic; and cultural vitality of our communities and the country as a whole.
Struggling economies; outdated academic equipment and obsolete organizational structures are among the issues facing higher education in Nigeria today.
From the sociological point of view, it has become obvious that the broad aims of producing high-level manpower for national development for which the higher education is meant are not being achieved as a result of the multi-facet problem bedeviling the governance of the higher education system.
It therefore, becomes necessary to look at these problems in the higher education system in relation to contemporary Nigerian society.
2.
O OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the problems in higher education • analyze the effects of these problems • compare and contrast problems and issues in higher education 146  3.
O MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems in Higher Education The recent findings on the state of higher education in Nigeria as conducted by the World-Bank and UNESCO had confirmed the degradation of the Nigerian education system.
Nigeria was a country that produced world- class higher education graduates that compete with their counterparts around the world and hard work was their watchword.
Today, we only produce the worst set of uneducated higher institution graduates that cannot structure a simple sentence.
Nigerian higher education is based on a centuries old system of knowledge organization, largely influenced by 19th century academic traditions.
How are the higher educations to survive in the formulation and higher demand for higher education degree?
Today, College degree has become a necessity for most careers; and graduate education desirable for an increasing number.
A growing population will necessitate some growth in higher education to accommodate the increasing number of College age students seeking for College degrees.
Yet the potential of higher education systems in developing countries to fulfill this responsibility is frequently thwarted by long-standing problems of finance; efficiency; equity; quality; and governance.
[ 3.1.2 Deteriorated Infrastructure It is worrisome to note that higher educational institutions are fast decaying.
All the required resources for education production process are in short supply.
Lecture halls, laboratories, students hostels, library space, books and journals, official spaces are all seriously inadequate.
The equipment for teaching and learning are either lacking or very inadequate and in a bad shape to permit the higher educational systems the freedom to carryout the basic functions of academics.
3.1.3 Graduate Unemployment The problem of graduate unemployment is a reality in Nigeria, where graduates had to wait for years to get job in the labour market.
It is common in recent times for higher education graduates to be subjected to series of competitive examination for appointments.
It is becoming a Herculean task for fresh inexperienced graduates to pick a first employment in the formal sector.
147  3.1.4 Political Interference The higher education system these days are not totally free from the hands of politics.
Government of the day, most especially in the state-owned higher institution interfere a lot in terms of selection and choice of the chief executive, Deans, Department heads, Directors of Programmes and above all the selection of Vice- Chancellors and Provosts.
Another area of political interference is constitution of visitation panel by the visitor at wills, instead of the minimum five years intervals.
The aim which is to witch-hunt or crucify the chief executives and the management.
There is the erosion of the statutory functions of the Vice- Chancellors/Provost by the chancellors and Pro-chancellors.
Some of them now decide to stay permanent in their offices on campuses seeing to the day-to-day administration of some higher institutions.
Union officials see them on issues relating to the internal governance of the higher institutions rather than the Vice- Chancellor or designated officials.
3.1.5 Disciplinary problems Disciplinary problems have since the mid-1970 s become a common feature of our schools.
In a study of the use of Indian hemp and drugs among secondary students in Lagos in 1975 by Adesina (1975), 25 percent of the self-confessed drug users in the study sample said that they used drugs for action.
One would be interested to know what action ?
Obviously, the answer would be something like, action for violence .
That is to say that drug addiction is most likely to be highly associated with maladjusted or violent behaviours of youths.
However, student s dissent and disruption can be traced to other factors such as exposure to foreign culture through the movies.
Socially deprived students are more prone to disruptive behaviours as protests against their improvement or deprivation.
Also, heredity plays a significant role in determining the temperamental features of any child.
Depending again on their personality types, most children who come from broken homes or one- parent families, living in overcrowded homes have congenital impairment and if socially deprived are most likely to cause the greatest disciplinary problems in their schools.
We must not lose sight of the role of social and emotional problem of the space-age youth in any meaningful discussion of school disciplinary 148  problems.
According to late Professor Anumonye, such problems are traceable to: • the inflated social and commercial importance of the youth; • the tendency of the youth to feel that they owe a greater allegiance to each other than to their families; • the mass media having made youth considerably more sophisticated; • the fact that the space-age youth know what their contemporaries are thinking and doing in other countries; and parents and teachers are no longer the unchallenged arbiters of behaviour; and • the fact that parents are now less certain of their infallibility to tell their children what is right and what is wrong when they themselves are also increasingly questioning society s rules and regulation (Anumonye, 1975).
In short, today s students no longer wish to accept the curious status of being treated as children in disciplinary and organizational matters and as adults in what they are expected to do.
It for this reason that we urge school authorities to always engage in facilitative behaviours which would help to shorten if not remove the psychological distance between them and the pupils.
The present situation in which child rearing is increasingly being abandoned to nannies and house-helps most of who do not care one way or another how the child develops is not in the interest of a disciplined school system of the future.
We strongly recommend that school authorities, even at the higher education level, should encourage greater parental involvement in the affairs of home and the community in order to forestall untoward behaviour by the pupils.
The situation demands such joint efforts rather than one side pointing accruing fingers elsewhere for school disciplinary problems.
3.1.6 Market Forces Some of the market forces affecting Nigerian universities are Joint Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB), matching education to job demands; and infrastructure inadequacies.
The Joint Admission and Matriculation Board examinations have caused a concern for both parents and candidates in Nigeria.
Some candidates sit for the examinations for years without gaining admission to any University.
These have lead to cheating or taking an unpopular career course in order to gain admission.
Since it takes candidates a while to gain admission into the Nigerian higher education, a good number opt for any course.
By so doing the course will not be job matched with the education of the students.
149  The infrastructure inadequacies in the Nigerian universities are another area that poses hindrance to learning and research work.
A good number of Nigerian higher educations are offering technological education programmes.
The question is how many of these higher institutions have the basic infrastructure to run the programme.
For example, in higher institutions offering computer course, students graduate without touching a computer.
The death of infrastructure in the higher institutions is sickening and runs short of an idea academic environment.
Today students are learning in dilapidated buildings; environmentally depressing and learning disabling situations; and yet some of these students are ' still excelling .
For students, it is simply a means to acquire certificates, and not the development of their cognitive and social powers.
A revisit to our present day recruitment and retention exercise need a crucial attention.
3.1.7 Education for World-Class Citizens There is need to make research the centre of institutional activity, taking into account the social; cultural; and political problems that Nigeria now faces.
Financial and administrative limitations and lack of resources; intellectual stimulation; and incentives demand that we find new strategies to advance this ambition.
There is a diminishing scope of mentoring junior researchers by seasoned and senior researchers due to brain drain.
Despite the increasing value of research in the world economy based on the supremacy of knowledge; and constant technological change; budgetary constraint; and the belief that research is costly have resulted in the virtual disappearance of research centres in Nigerian higher education.
There is need to seek alternative source of financing research through private and public sectors.
In doing so, the higher education need to talk about the benefits to students of linking teaching and learning with scientific research.
Nigerian educational system should be tailored to match international standards, viz.
curriculum; computer proficiency; and student / staff ratio.
3.1.8 Faculty Exodus Over the past decades, as a result of a gradual exodus of many of our most talented faculty, Nigeria higher education have seized to be a place for exciting search for innovation.
Some faculty abandoned academia for other sectors of the economy, where professionals and scientists receive higher 150  salaries and greater social recognition.
Some emigrate for economic reasons, while some fled because of political reasons.
Odetunde (2004) stated, "There was mass exodus of many brilliant lecturers that could not compete on political campus arenas from the university campus.
Some left to join the rat race in the business world and others left Nigeria for better services" (p.3).
He further said, "That experienced and seasoned professors were sidelined.
The political professors often silenced the lone voices of active and academic professors" (p.4).
Ali (1999) also stated, "That many experienced and young lecturers are fleeing from the frustration of university life into more rewarding and more challenging sectors of the economy and even to overseas countries" (p-3).
The result of the faculty exodus is seen in the quality of graduates that our higher institutions produce.
3.1.9 Money and Management The growing and changing nature of higher education needs will trigger strong economic forces.
Already, the traditional source of funding -Federal support has simply not kept pace with the growing demand.
This imbalance between demand and available resources is aggravated by the ' increasing cost of higher education, driven as they are by the number of students seeking admissions into higher institutions.
The weakening influences of traditional source of funding are the | emergence of increased number of college age students seeking admission into the Nigerian higher education.
The societal needs; economic realities; and technology; are likely to drive a massive restructuring of higher education enterprise.
This will need a global knowledge and learning industry, and the need for traditional institutions to converge with other knowledge-intensive organizations such as information services; companies; and telecommunications.
Financial restrictions also create problems that obstruct academic work; causing friction between the higher education and the government, thus threatening the stability of institutions.
The problems are more visible in the areas of faculty salaries; libraries; equipment; research; and quality of students entering our higher institutions today.
The existing orthodox education in Nigeria seems to suffer from inadequate funding.
The schools today are ill-equipped and teachers are poorly trained.
Standard is falling in all departments.
Over 70 percent of the laboratory equipment and library books in today's Nigerian higher education, for example, were bought and placed between 19603 and 1980.
These are largely due to insufficient funding of the higher education system in Nigeria.
151  3.9 Management Style and the Structure of Higher Education Another area of close examination is the management style and the structure of our higher education.
There are allegations of politically motivated decision-making; mutual back scratching; patronage; and partisanship that have permeated our higher institutions.
One of the problems is the quality of products turned over to the higher institutions by primary and secondary schools.
Also the politicization; lack of resources; and frequent crisis of authority have further exacerbated this situation.
Added to this is the proliferation of academic programmes.
In the 1960 till late 7os, each Nigerian higher institution was known as an expert in certain programmes.
Today, it is a different scenario, as many Nigerian higher education want to run all programmes from University teaching hospital to having a nuclear department.
To this, is the massive influx of unprepared students whom the higher education admits without increase resources to address their special needs?
Despite the existing Federal; State; and Private; Universities in the country, the nation needed additional more Universities to take care of the growing number of students from secondary schools.
To promote reform in existing higher institutions, in order to bring research; training; and outreach activities to the service of the people, this will require deliberate collaborative efforts by governments; academia; business; and civil society to reinvent Nigerian higher education system and put it to the service of the people.
This will require a qualitative change in the goals; functions; and structure of Nigerian higher education.
There is the need for Nigerian higher education to move towards more business like forms of management and governance.
It is important to understand that the most critical challenge facing most higher education will be to develop the capacity for change.
Nigerian higher education must seek to remove the constraints that prevent them from responding to the needs of a rapidly changing society.
This can only be achieved by introducing democratic higher education structures and management styles.
For the Nigerian higher education to meet the standard of higher education in the changing world today will require a global reform.
Finally perhaps this is the greatest challenge for our higher education, and the most important role of our leadership, in the years ahead as we attempt to build higher institutions.
152  3.1.10 Financial Crisis There is growing shortage of funds and learning resources in higher educational institutions.
The major challenge facing the management of higher education system is inadequate funding.
There was an increase in the proportion of total expenditure devoted to education but this has been considered to be rather grossly inadequate considering the phenomena increase in student enrolment and increasing cost, which has been aggravated by inflation.
Besides, the Nigerian government over the years has not been meeting the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) recommendation of 26% of the total budget allocation to education sector.
The apparent shortage of fund has been responsible for the declining library; laboratory facilities; in higher educational system and in no small way makes the governance of the system a Herculean task.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E List and discuss the possible solutions to issues in Nigeria education system.
4.0 CONCLUSION For meaningful development to take place in the university system, the government must address the issue of funding the system adequately.
There is the need to make plans projections on the nation s manpower needs in a bid to integrate this into university programmes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the need for university education stems from the fact that the system is responsible for the development and production of high-level man-power within the context of the needs of the nation.
Therefore, for its actualization, the government should re -address the issue of funding of university, review upward pay-package of academics, grant autonomy to the universities, make plans and projections on the nations manpower needs and amongst others.
153  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe any five solutions to the problems in Nigerian universities.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adesina, S. (1975).
Some Aspects of School Management.
Ibadan: Education Industries Ltd. Adesina, S. (1985) Sharing the financial burden of higher Education in Nigeria.
Graduation lecture delivered at Oyo State College of Education, Ilesa.
Ajayi, I.
A. and Ayodele, J.
B (2004).
Fundamentals of Educational Management: Ado-Ekiti, Green Line Publishers.
Ali, A (1999).
Academic standard of extension and satellite programs of Nigeria Universities: Management and Control.
University of Nigeria Nsukka.
Amunonye, A.
(1975).
Nigerian Students and Emotional Reaction in Our Space Age Universities, (An Inaugural Lecture).Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Babalola, J.
B. Jaiyeoba, A. O., Okediran, A.
(2007).
University Autonomy and Financial Reforms in Nigeria: Historical Background, Issues and Recommendations from Experience.
In J.
B. Babalola and B. O. Emenemu (eds).
Issues in Higher Education: Research Evidence from Sub-Sahara Africa.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Ekundayo, H. T. and Ajayi, I.
A.
(2009).
Towards Effective Management of University Education in Nigeria: www.google.com accessed 12th September, 2009.
Nigeriadeltacongress.com/sarticle/slate-of higher education.
Mgbekem, S. J.
A.
(2004).
Management of University Education in Nigeria.
Calabar: UNICAL Press.
Odetunde, C (^004).
The state of higher education in Nigeria.
Retrieved- (4/2/2004) http://www.
Nigeriadeltacongress.com/sarticle/slate-of higher Education.
154  World Bank (1994).
Higher Education: The Lesson of Experience.
Washington, D. C: The World Bank.
155  UNIT 4 SUGGESTED SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEMS IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Suggested Solutions to the Problems of Higher Education 3.1.2 Funding Mechanisms 3.1.3 Infrastructural Provision and Rehabilitation of Existing buildings Upward Review of pay-package for academics 3.1.5 Granting of Autonomy to Universities 3.1.6 Re-appraisal of the role of University Education and the World of work 3.1.7 Reducing Volatile and Militant Students Unionism 3.1.8 Depolitisation of the system 3.1.9 Combating Secret-Cults 3.1 10 Market Forces 3.1.11 Education for World-Class Citizens 3.1.12 Management Style and Structure of Nigerian Higher Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education embodies the development of desirable habits, skills and attitudes, which make an individual resourceful for the society.
It enables people to acquire knowledge and skills by decoding the prevailing traits for an effective use.
From the sociological point of view, it has become obvious that the broad aims of producing high-level manpower for national development for which the higher education is meant are not being achieved as a result of the multi-facet problems bedeviling the management of the higher education.
It therefore, becomes necessary to suggest ways of making the system more effective and efficient in relation to contemporary Nigerian society.
2.
O OBJECTIVES 156  At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list some of the enunciated solutions • discuss the solutions to the problems in higher education • appreciate the importance of these solutions 3.
O MAIN CONTENT 3.2 Solutions to the Problems in Higher Education 3.1.2 Funding Mechanisms Government funding of education has been inadequate.
The funding of education is shared among different levels of government and supplemented by funds from other sources such as business, community organizations and levies charged.
The revenue collected through fees constitutes an insignificant proportion of the revenue of the institution.
Fund allocation has not been much during the last decade.
The gross under-funding of the educational system in the country has rendered the higher education system incapacitated.
The higher education system has not had the financial resources necessary to maintain educational quality in the midst of significant enrolment explosion.
UNESCO recommended 26% of the total Government should allocate more funds to higher education so that they can be more effective in their day-to-day operations.
The higher institutions should seek alternative sources of revenue generation to augment what the government allocates to them.
There should be an effective monitoring of the management of fund being allocated to the sector.
Reliable accounting system should be established in each Nigerian university to guarantee accountability, honest, and transparency.
3.1.3 Infrastructural Provision and Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings If quality is to be enhanced in our nation s universities, the infrastructural base of the system needs to be improved upon.
The government should 157  make available enough funds for the rehabilitation of existing facilities.
Government should intensify efforts in providing more physical facilities.
Corporate bodies, philanthropists and alumni associations should assist in the provision of these facilities to aid effective teaching learning activities.
There is need for a serious expansion of physical facilities and equipment to meet the increasing student population.
There is need to take serious look at the maintenance culture, which is lacking in Nigeria, as this will go a long way to reduce the rate of decay of the existing facilities.
3.
1.4 Upward Review of Pay-Package for Academics Personnel emolument has to be revisited.
If education is well funded, pay package of academics reviewed upward and the conditions of service improved, academic would not have to go abroad looking for better job.
3.
1.5 Granting of Autonomy to Universities The issue of autonomy to universities is a matter of necessity if quality output is expected, for uninterrupted academic calendar to be guaranteed.
An enabling teaching learning environment is to be assured and the incessant face- off between the ASUU and the government to be put to rest.
The struggle for university autonomy has been a long-standing issue in the university system in Nigeria.
For a university to be truly autonomous, the state control must be minimum.
3.1.6 Re-Appraised of the Role of University Education and the World of Work University education in Nigeria today needs a total overhauling and restructuring, this reform is required to improve the performance of the system.
A reform in university programme is highly necessary and long- overdue.
Better training for university students to be vigorously pursued.
The curriculum needs to be reformed in content and in methodology to give room for the spirit of inquiry, discovery and experimentation.
It is necessary to redesign the university education to become purely practical oriented for skill acquisition.
There is need to plan the nation s 158  manpower needs in a bid to integrate this into the university programmes.
The NUC and the Nigerian Manpower Board are in the position to alert universities on the future manpower requirements of the country.
3.1.7 Reducing Volatile and Militant Students Unionism It is advisable that the students are involved in decision making particularly on issues that borders on their welfare.
University administrator should avoid being high-handed with students.
Vice Chancellors should make themselves accessible to students.
University administrator should establish frequent forums for negotiation, dialogue and exchange ideas with student s administrators.
3.
1.8 Depoliticisation of the University System The autonomy to universities would help reduce the extent of political interference in the affairs of these universities, most especially in the appointment/selection of principal officers in the university.
The academic should be free to choose who should be their head without the influence of the visitor.
The issue of tribalism, political interference, etc should be disregarded in the appointment of heads.
The idea of using visitation panels to witch-hunt the vice-chancellors and university authorities should be discouraged.
The visitation panels should be made to follow the due process.
3.1.9 Combating Secret Cults Eradicating cultism in Nigerian universities is a joint effort of all the stakeholders (government, university authority, religious leaders, students and parents).
They should come together and decide on how cases of cultism should be dealt with as research evidence have shown that most cult members are children of the highly placed in the society.
3.1.10 Market Forces The mission of Nigerian higher education should not be limited to these goals alone.
They have to take into consideration the larger society s needs and the construction of knowledge.
Higher education must therefore shape its curricular offerings to fit the demands of the market in a particular context and period, without losing sight of encouraging full human development.
They cannot be confined to provide the human resource 159  demands by the market.
To do so would be to limit the social relevance of higher education.
The challenge to Nigerian higher education is to conduct the higher education affairs in a way that is relevant to a historical moment gripped by rapid change.
3.1.11 Education for the World-Class Citizens Students need to become familiar with the freedom of choice and expression; the free flow of ideas; and access to systems of information and means of communication based on new technologies.
"The National University Commission survey discovered that only about 30 percent , of Nigerian student population has adequate access to classrooms; lecture theatres; laboratories; workshops; and libraries" (Okebukola 2002, pp.
9).
Students need to have all the basic infrastructure and conducive environment for active learning to take place.
Students need to be prepared not only as professionals but also as citizens who are able to act intelligently and live in a democratic society.
The students need to be acquainted with the complexity of the information that they will manage.
There is need to develop the capacity for compiling; producing; applying; and critically evaluating information extracted from international debates; laboratories; and libraries; and directly from the working world.
Doing so will make Nigerian higher education a rich and stimulating environment for learning and producing knowledge.
3.1.12 Management Style and Structure of Nigerian Higher Education There is need for Nigerian higher education to change from being conventional sources of graduates to becoming engines of community development.
Nigeria needs a new generation of higher education that can serve as engines of both community development and social renewal.
Fundamental reforms will be needed in the curriculum design; teaching; and management of Nigerian higher education.
The higher education need to help solve the economic; social; and environmental challenges that the authorities in their location face.
They should play a role in promoting infrastructure development.
The Nigerian higher education system needs a reformation for it to meet the societal needs.
Academic reform cannot work unless relations among higher education authorities; faculty; students; and government are redefined on the basis of mutual respect and collaboration.
Educational changes essentially reflect changes in the society or polity".
For the most part, our higher institutions still have not grappled with the extraordinary 160  implications of an age of knowledge; a society of learning that will likely be our future.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCIS E List and discuss the possible solutions to problems in Nigeria education system.
4.0 CONCLUSION For meaningful development to take place in higher education system, the government must address the problem of funding the system adequately.
There is the need to make plan for the nation s manpower needs in a bid to integrate this into the higher education programmes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the need for university education stems from the fact that the system is responsible for the development and production of high-level manpower within the context of the needs of the nation.
Therefore, for its actualization, the government should re -address the issue of funding of university, review upward pay-package of academics, grant autonomy to the universities, and make plan for the nations manpower needs.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe any five solutions to the problems facing Nigerian higher education.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.
A. and Ayodele, J.
B (2004).
Fundamentals of Educational Management: Ado-Ekiti, Green Line Publishers.
Babalola, J.
B., Jaiyeoba, A. O., Okediran, A.
(2007).
University Autonomy and Financial Reforms in Nigeria: Historical Background, Issues and Recommendations from Experience.
In J.
B. Babalola and B. O. Emenemu (eds).
Issues in Higher Education: Research Evidence from Sub-Sahara Africa.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
161  Ekundayo, H. T. and Ajayi, I.
A.
(2009).
Towards Effective Management of University Education in Nigeria: www.google.com accessed 12th September, 2009.
Mgbekem, S. J.
A.
(2004).
Management of University Education in Nigeria.
Calabar: UNICAL Press.
Okebukola, P (2002).
The state of university education in Nigeria.
National University Commission, Abuja Nigeria.
World Bank (1994).
Higher Education: The Lesson of Experience.
Washington, D. C: The World Bank.
162
