 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA801 COURSE TITLE: ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION EDA801 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Course Team T. L. Adepoju Ph.D (Developer/Writer) - OAU Professor Remi Longe (Editor) - UI Dr. Ogundiran S. O.
(Programme Leader/Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii EDA801 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Amina kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja.
E-mail: centrainfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-105-7 All Rights Reserved iii EDA801 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………….……………… 1 Course Aims…………………………………………….…………... 2 Course Objectives…………………………………….…………….. 2 Working through the Course…………………………….………...... 3 The Course Materials…………………………………….…............. 3 Study Units………………………………………………………..... 4 Textbooks and References ……………………………………...….. 5 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA)……………………………......... 5 Final Examination and Grading………………………………….….. 5 Summary……………………………………..…………………..…... 5 iv  Introduction This course is aimed at explaining how an organisation operates and functions for the purpose of achieving its predetermined goals and objectives.
Human organisations such as educational system have some characteristics that differentiate them from other non-organic ones.
Among such characteristics are the behaviours and interactions of the people which to a very large extent can predict the success or otherwise of the administrator.
The course is essentially designed to increase your knowledge about organisational theory as a concept and field of study, as well as equipping you with the necessary skills for understanding how human organisations operate.
The course is compulsory, and a three-credit course that addresses basic concepts and principles that will enable you develop core competencies in the key areas of organisation.
Special focus has been laid on the administration of educational system as an educational organisation.
Also, relevant examples, tables and illustrations have been included to assist you in becoming familiar with the subject of the discourse.
Structured in four modules and twenty-one units, each component of the course provides you with comprehensive information that would enable you appreciate the nature and application of organisational theory, basic concepts and principles of organisation.
On the whole, the course promises to be exciting, informative and learner-oriented, and you are bound to be well equipped to be a successful administrator of an organisation, if you follow-through the processes discussed in this course.
In this Course Guide, you will be provided with the relevant information that you need to know about the course.
These include: i.
Course aims ii.
Course objectives iii.
Course materials iv.
Study modules and units v. Recommended materials for further reading vi.
Course assignment vii.
Course assessment viii.
Final examination ix.
Overview of the course content EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Course Aims The overall aims of this course are to enable you: i. learn the basic concepts of organisational theory ii.
discuss the principles and essentials of organisational performance iii.
learn why theory is very important in educational administration iv.
discuss the development of organisational theory v. learn about the backgrounds and contributions of organisational theorists Course Objectives In order to achieve the above aims, there are specific objectives that have to be accomplished under each unit.
These are statements of what you are expected to have learnt by the end of each study unit.
It is expected that by the end of this course, you should be able to: 1. identify the concepts associated with organisational theory 2. explain the concept ‘organisation’ 3. explain the relevance of organisation 4. discuss the meaning of structure and organisational structure 5. differentiate a formal organisation from an informal organisation 6. identify the criteria for a good organisational structure.
7. identify the major approaches to organisational theory, in particular, the classical school 8. examine the major contributions made by the theorists to the development of organisation practice.
9. define and distinguish between human behaviour and organisational behaviour 10. explain the causes and effects of conflict in the organisation 11. enumerate the strategies that can be adopted to manage conflict in the organisation 12. define what motivation is and discuss the importance of motivation in educational organisation 13. define the concepts of ‘administration’ and ‘educational administration’ 14. identify the basic task areas in educational administration 15. enumerate the uses of the theories in educational administration 16. trace the development of educational administration in Nigeria 17. identify and explain the roles which education agencies and parastatals play in Nigeria.
ii EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Working through the Course This course requires that you match study with practical observations.
The contents have been painstakingly selected to offer you a sequential and easy to comprehend study package.
You are also advised to avail yourself the opportunity of attending tutorial sessions.
The course is organised into four modules of twenty-one units in all.
Module 1 introduces you to the study of organisational theory and development.
It explains the meaning of some basic concepts, the structural view of organisation, and some major approaches to the development of organisational theory.
The backgrounds and contributions of selected organisation theorists to organisation practice were also visited in this module.
Module 2 examines the study of human behaviour in the organisation; it presents the concept of motivation and its applications in human organisations such as the school system.
Also in this module, the social dimension of educational organisation was discussed.
Module 3 focuses on the study of educational administration in Nigeria where such issues as meaning, scope and significance of educational administration, task areas and principles of educational administration as well as development of theories and stages of development of educational administration in Nigeria are examined.
The last module, Module 4 highlighted institutional machinery for administration and control of educational organisations in Nigeria.
The roles of the major ministries of education and educational parastatals are covered in this module.
To reinforce your learning, some assignments and a list of recommended reading materials are provided at the end of each study unit.
If you diligently follow through these exercises, you would have increased your knowledge of the new concepts and ideas discussed.
You would also have been well equipped for taking the final examination, which comes up at the end of the course.
The Course Materials The resource materials available for this course include: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
List of Reading Materials 4.
Assignments 5.
Other Support Materials iii EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Study Units The course is a-three credit compulsory course of 21 units in all.
The layout of the Modules and Units are presented below: Module 1 Introduction to the Study of Organisational Theory and Development Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Organisational Theory and Development Unit 2 An Overview of the Relevance and Elements of Good Organisation Unit 3 The Structural View of Organisation Unit 4 Major Approaches to the Development of Organisational Theory I (The Classical School) Unit 5 Major Approaches to the Development of Organisational Theory II (The Neoclassical and Modern Schools) Unit 6 Backgrounds and Contributions of Selected Organisation Theorists to Organisation Practice Module 2 The Study of Human Behaviour in the Organisation Unit 1 Understanding Human Behaviour in the Organisation Unit 2 Motivation and Individuals in the Organisation Unit 3 An Overview of Motivational Theories Unit 4 Social Dimension of Educational Organisation Module 3 The Study of Educational Administration in Nigeria Unit 1 Meaning, Scope and Significance of Educational Administration Unit 2 Task Areas in Educational Administration Unit 3 Principles of Educational Administration Unit 4 Development of Theories in Educational Administration Unit 5 Stages of Development of Educational Administration in Nigeria Module 4 Institutional Machinery for Administration and Control of Educational Organisations in Nigeria Unit 1 The Major Education Ministries Unit 2 Basic Education Regulatory Machinery Unit 3 Higher Education Agencies Unit 4 Research, Training and Development Councils Unit 5 Measurement and Evaluation/ Examination Machinery Unit 6 Education Decision Making Councils and Other Regulatory Councils/Parastatals iv EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Textbooks and References To support further learning, a list of recommended resource materials has been provided at the end of each unit.
These materials contain additional information that would add value to what you have learnt.
For instance, they may include additional illustrations, pictures and relevant information that would help you not only to comprehend what you have read but also to remember and apply what you have learnt.
Self Assessment Exercise To assess your level of absorption and comprehension of the information contained in each of the units, you are required to conduct some tests at the end of each of the units.
Therefore, each unit contains some questions with accompanying answers for self-assessment.
You are also encouraged to look at the answers only after attempting the questions yourself.
Your sincerity comes to play here so that you would not deceive yourself.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) The Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) is the continuous assessment component of your course.
The assignments at the end of each unit make up your continuous assessment.
You would be given four of these assignments (i.e.
4 TMAs), which you must attempt.
These forms a total of 40% of the total score for the course.
These assignments would be given to you by your facilitator and returned to you after reviewing the assignment.
You are expected to submit at least three assignments before being allowed to take the final examination.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination constitutes 60% of the scores for the course.
This would be the final assessment of the course.
You would be given an examination notice to enable you prepare for your examinations.
Summary This course is expected to build your competency around organisational theory and the operations of human organisation such as educational system.
It entails comprehensive information about basic key concepts in organisational theory, organisation, motivation, human behaviour and organisation conflict.
The modules and units have been carefully organised to enable you achieve the course objectives and it is hoped that the various assessment strategies and resources adopted will provide the necessary support you need for a successful completion of this course.
It is expected that you will find this course exciting and I wish you success as you begin this interesting course.
v EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Course Code EDA801 Course Title Organisational Theory in Education Course Team T. L. Adepoju Ph.D (Developer/Writer) - OAU Professor Remi Longe (Editor) - UI Dr. Ogundiran S. O.
(Programme Leader/Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA vi EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Amina kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja.
E-mail: centrainfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-105-7 All Rights Reserved vii EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Introduction to the Study of Organizsational Theory and Development………………………....….
1 Unit 1 Basic concepts of Organisational Theory and Development……………………………..………..….. 1 Unit 2 An Overview of the Relevance and Elements of Good Organisation…………………………………………….10 Unit 3 The Structural View of Organisation………………….
18 Unit 4 Major Approaches to the Development of Organisational Theory I (The Classical School)……… 28 Unit 5 Major Approaches to the Development of Organisational theory II (The Neoclassical and Modern Schools)……………………………………… 35 Unit 6 Backgrounds and Contributions of Selected Organisation Theorists to Organisation Practice…… 43 Module 2 The Study of Human Behaviour in the Organisation………………………………………..... 63 Unit 1 Understanding human behaviour in the Organisation.. 63 Unit 2 Motivation and Individuals in the Organization …….
73 Unit 3 An Overview of Motivational Theories……………… 81 Unit 4 Social Dimension of Educational Organisation……… 90 Module 3 The Study of Educational Administration in Nigeria……………………………………………….
95 Unit 1 Meaning, scope and significance of Educational Administration……………………….…………....... 95 Unit 2 Task areas in educational administration…..…....... 107 Unit 3 Principles of Educational Administration...……...... 113 Unit 4 Development of theories in Educational Administration…………………………………..........125 Unit 5 Stages of Development of Educational Administration in Nigeria…………………….....….
144 Module 4 Institutional Machinery for Administration and Control of Educational Organisations in Nigeria.
152 Unit 1 The Major Education Ministries…………….…….
152 Unit 2 Basic Education Regulatory Machinery………....... 155 Unit 3 Higher Education Agencies……………….…….… 164 Unit 4 Research, Training and Development Councils 169 Unit 5 Measurement and Evaluation/ Examination Machinery………………..……………….…....….
173 Unit 6 Education Decision Making Councils and Other Regulatory Councils/Parastatals………………… 177 viii EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF ORGANISATIONAL THEORY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Organisational Theory and Development Unit 2 An Overview of the Relevance and Elements of Good Organisation Unit 3 The Structural view of Organisation Unit 4 Major Approaches to the Development of Organisational Theory I (The Classical School) Unit 5 Major Approaches to the Development of Organisational Theory II (The Neoclassical and Modern Schools) Unit 6 Backgrounds and Contributions of selected Organisation Theorists to Organisation Practice UNIT 1 BASIC CONCEPTS OF ORGANISATIONAL THEORY AND DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Theory 3.2 Definition and Conceptual Model of Organisation 3.2.1 A System View of Organisation 3.3 Definition of Organisational Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Have you heard the following basic terms before - ‘Theory’, ‘Organisation’ and ‘Organisational theory’?
Certainly you must have come across the term at your undergraduate level and perhaps at your graduate level.
In this unit, the first of the 6 units in Module 1 of this course, we shall discuss together in details, the meaning of the three basic concepts mentioned above and of course, trace the development of organisational theories from the classical period to date.
Over the years, some theories have emerged and these theories laid a very firm foundation for the structure of organisation and management.
No doubt, the prescriptions that these theories put forward, pave the way for the 1 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION operations of efficient and effective organisations.
Of course, the models presented by these theories seem to be different but, certain commonalities can be drawn from them.
Modern organisations, because of their complexities and of the need to stand the test of time, do apply these theories in line with their situational development, goal orientation and culture.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the concepts associated with organisational theory • define the concept ‘theory.
• explain the concept ‘organisation and • define the concept ‘organisational theory.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Theory Theory as a concept is derived from a Greek word, ‘theoria’, which means “a look at”.
However, the concept of theory in modern usage has been argued to be more than just a mere “looking at” or mere “observations”.
For this reason, several meanings have been given to the concept.
Some of the meanings will be given here.
According to the Advanced Learners Dictionary, a theory is “a set of properly argued ideas intended to explain facts or events”.
It is also ‘‘the principles on which a particular subject is based”.
Let us examine other definitions ascribed to theory by some experts.
1.
A theory is “a set of assumptions from which a larger set of empirical laws can be derived by purely logico-mathematical procedures.
The theory thereby furnishes an explanation of these empirical laws and unifies the originally relatively heterogeneous areas of subject matter characterised by those empirical laws” (Feigl, 1981).
2.
A theory is “regarded as a hypothesis which has undergone verification and which has potential, (a) for explaining and predicting events, and (b) for the production of new knowledge’’ (Walker, 1970).
3.
Theory is “a set of logically interrelated constructs, definitions and propositions that presents a systematic view of phenomena 2 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION by specifying relations among variables, with the purpose of explaining and predicting phenomena’’ (Kerlinger, 1973).
4.
A theory is “a set of interconnected propositions that have the same referent - the subject of the theory….’’(Argyris and Schon, 1974).
5.
‘‘A set of logically interrelated proposition is called theory.
A theory then is an integration of constructs representing clusters of concepts pertinent to the world of human experiences’’ (Silver, 1983).
6.
‘‘A theory is a set of statements intended to logically and convincingly capture or express some aspects of reality’’ (Harrison, 1976).
7.
A theory “consists of a set of related assumptions concerning the relevant empirical phenomena, and empirical definitions to permit the user to move from the abstract theory to empirical observation” (Hall and Lindzey, 1978).
8.
A theory can be viewed as “a set of relevant internally consistent postulates about a particular observable phenomenon along with definitions to enable the user to move from the abstract to the real in order to describe, explain, predict, and/or advance knowledge” (Kimbrough and Nunnery, 1983).
Some common characteristics of these definitions include: (a) The procedures for developing a theory.
(b) The logic involved in the abstract thought process in developing the theory.
(c) The elements of a theory must appear interconnected or interrelated when viewed collectively, and add to a consistent whole.
(d) A theory must consist of substantive or empirical elements.
Theory has two broad sets of meanings; one used in the empirical sciences (both natural and social) and the other used in philosophy, mathematics, logic and across other fields in the humanities.
There is considerable difference and even dispute across academic disciplines as to the proper usages of them.
What follows is an attempt to describe how the term is used, not to try to say how it ought to be used.
A theory in the scientific sense of the word is an analytic structure designed to explain a set of empirical observations.
A scientific theory does two things: 1.
It identifies this set of distinct observations as a class of phenomena, and 2.
Makes assertions about the underlying reality that brings about or affects this class.
3 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION In other words, theories are analytical tools for understanding and explaining a given subject matter.
It can also be described as a constructed set of sentences which consists entirely of true statements about the subject matter under consideration.
However, the truth of any of these statements is always relative to a theory.
Therefore the same statement may be true with respect to one theory, and not true with respect to another.
A theory can now be summarised to be: 1.
A set of statements or principles devised to explain a group of facts or phenomena, especially one that has been repeatedly tested or is widely accepted and can be used to make predictions about natural phenomena.
2.
The branch of a science or art consisting of its explanatory statements, accepted principles, and methods of analysis as opposed to practice.
3.
A set of theorems that constitute a systematic view of a branch of materials.
4.
Abstract reasoning, speculation: a decision based on experience rather than theory 5.
A belief or principle that guides action or assists comprehension or judgment.
6.
An assumption based on limited information or knowledge; a conjecture.
From all the arguments raised above, we can now provide an encompassing and fundamental definition for theory.
This encompassing and fundamental definition refers to a theory as a set of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions and propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables and describing, explaining, and predicting the attributes of the phenomena.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Provide simple definition for a theory.
2.
What are the common features or characteristics of theory?
3.2 Definition and Conceptual Model of Organisation In this section, we are going to examine the concept of organisation in relation to its openness and closeness.
Before the discussion, can you imagine the place where you are working presently, how can you describe the place?
Does it look like what can be called organisation?
4 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION What name can you give to the place?
In order to help you answer these questions correctly, let us now discuss what an organisation is.
There are so many definitions and ideas that have been advanced by experts and organisational theorists as to what organisation is.
For instance, Edem (1982) defines it as a number of units with well defined functions and activities while Adepoju (1998; 2004) believes that an organisation arises when any group of people come together to strive towards a common purpose.
An organisation has also been viewed as a system or a framework of activities of an establishment.
It is a collective effort and the pulling of resources together to achieve a common goal.
An organisation can also be described as an enterprise or group of arrangements according to which work is divided up in order to achieve a single or group of objectives.
An organisation is a combination of people working together in pursuit of certain common purposes or specified goals called organisational goals.
The goals may be to make profit (business organisation), to spread knowledge (educational organisation), to provide defense (Army) or to provide social satisfaction (social clubs or societies).
It is the pattern for combining the resources (human, materials and finance) of an establishment to provide the most successful means for achieving the objectives of such organisation.
The type of structure to be adopted, however, depends to a very large extent on the nature of production being carried out in such organisation.
According to Nwankwo (1981), organisation implies three things namely: (a) Group of persons working together for a common purpose.
E.g.
companies, school, institutions; (b) A network of relationships among individuals and activities.
This implies the structural and/or strategic arrangement of person’s positions and roles; and (c) A process of executive function aimed at ensuring that resources, activities and authority relationships are so co-ordinated to achieve specified goals.
From the foregoing, it would not be out of context therefore, to describe an organisation as a system of co-operative efforts of two or more individuals working together for the purpose of achieving a common goal.
Now that we have discussed what an organisation is, can you now link our discussion with what operates in your place of work?
5 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Provide a simple definition for the concept “organisation”.
3.2.1 A System View of an Organisation Having learnt what an organisation implies, let us now discuss why an organisation is regarded as a system.
Think of two or three variables that are interrelated and that can only achieve a desired goal only when they act together.
If you are able to attempt this question, then, you are moving toward identifying what a system is.
A system could be considered as an assemblage of different but interrelated components or entities.
The components on their own form an entity within a supra system.
In other words, a system is a series of interrelated and interdependent parts, such that the interaction or interplay of any of the subsystems (parts) affects the whole (Adepoju, 2004).
Johnson, et al (1975) as cited by Adepoju (1998, 2003) described a system as follows: A system approach suggests a view of the school organisation as a network of interrelated subsystems, each charged with accomplishing part of the overall task of converting inputs into desired outputs.
The idea of likening an organisation to a system is to take a macro view of an organisation in which various ideas and components (parts) act on one another to bring about the realisation of predetermined objectives.
Such components or subsystems include individuals, groups or departments each of which is a subsystem within the total (supra) system.
School organisation is therefore, a system having components or subsystems that interplay to bring about results.
A system may be ‘closed’ or ‘open’.
A closed system is one which for all practical reasons is completely self - operating, self-supporting and self-directing without any interaction with its external environment.
Conversely, an open system is one which interacts with its external environment in so many ways and in all directions because, it obtains its inputs from the environment, processes them and sends the products (outputs) back to the environment for its use.
6 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Let me explain this to you with this simple model in figure 1 below.
Fig.
1: A Simple Model of an Open System Source: Adepoju, T.L.
(2004) Characteristics of Open Systems The following are the basic characteristics of open systems using the above example: 1.
They receive inputs or energy from their external environment; 2.
They convert the inputs into outputs; and 3.
They send their outputs into the external environment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
What is meant by system?
2.
Mention and explain the types of system that exist?
3.
What are their characteristics?
3.3 Definition of Organisational Theory In the previous sections, we have attempted to provide definitions for the two key words; organisation and theory.
In this section, we are going to base our discussion on what an organisational theory implies.
Organisational theory can be explained in terms of a rational edifice or prescriptions built by people to explain human behaviour in the organisation.
In other words, it implies the body of knowledge and principles which provides the touchstone for effective administrative action in organisations.
Put more succinctly, organisational theory enables people to describe, explain, and predict a wide range of human behaviour within organisations.
7 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Ajayi (1986) described organisational theory as a major element of science which provides the grounds for management activities in a number of significant areas of business endeavour.
It also attempts to provide a framework for understanding the influences which bear upon organisations.
Several theories on organisation have emerged, all in an attempt to explain that no organisation operates in a vacuum.
According to Scott and Mitchell (1972), the origins of organisational theory are traceable to Europe.
Fredrick Winslow Taylor, Henri Fayol, Max Weber, Henry Gantt, Frank and Lillian Gilbreth were major contributors to organisation theory.
The developments of the various organisational theories proposed by these individuals were based on their experiences in the organisations where they worked.
According to Hills (1980, 21), the main features of Greenfield’s organisational theory are as follows: • The function of organisational theory is to describe and not to prescribe.
• The aim of organisational theory is to explain and enlighten.
• The data for the theory can only be obtained from within the specific organisation.
• Scientists who study the human being cannot make statements about the structure of human behaviour in every context.
• Organisational theory does not only concern what is explained but also to whom it is explained and by what means.
• Organisational theory provides insight into human behaviour.
• Organisational theories are as diverse as the individuals within an organisation.
• No universal theory about organisation exists.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Do you subscribe to the thesis that organisational theory provides the grounds for management activities in a number of significant areas of endeavour?
4.0 CONCLUSION To properly understand the operation of modern organisations, there is the need to study the formalised principles that guide their activities such that the organisation can stand the test of time.
It is also important that you understand the basic meaning of theory and organisation as presented in this unit.
These two concepts underlie the understanding of this course, they form the nucleus of the course upon which other 8 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION contents are based.
Therefore, what you have learnt in this unit will be elaborated upon in the subsequent units of this course.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about what theory, organisation and organisational theory are, and their major characteristics.
You have also learnt about the system view of organisation and the two types of system.
The links between theory and organisation were also explained.
In the next unit, you will be introduced to an overview of the relevance and elements of organisation,and organisational concepts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Provide definitions for the following terms: i. Organisation ii.
Theory iii.
Organisational Theory 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998) Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2004) Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Ajayi, A.O.
(1986) Organisation Theory: Its Ramifications, Overview and Critical Appraisal.
AJEM, 1, 1, 102-112 Edem, D. A.
(1982) Introduction to Educational Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. Scott, W.G.
and Mitchell, T.R.
(1972) Organisation Theory: A Structural and Behavioural Analysis.
Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc & the Dorsey Press.
9 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 2 AN OVERVIEW OF THE RELEVANCE AND ELEMENTS OF ORGANISATION AND ORGANISATIONAL CONCEPTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Relevance of Organisation 3.2 Elements of Good Organisation 3.3 Rationale for Studying Organisation 3.4 Organisational Concepts 3.4.1 Organisational Climate 3.4.2 Organisational Goals 3.4.3 Organisational Culture 3.4.4 Organisation and Methods (OM) 3.4.5 Group Cohesiveness 3.4.6 Organisational Behaviour 3.4.7 Organisation and Development (OD) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having introduced you to the basic concepts in unit 1 of this module, it becomes very imperative to examine the relevance and elements of good organisation as well as the rationale for studying organisation in this unit.
This will help you to appreciate and be acquainted with the reasons why an organisation exists.
Some basic organisation concepts will also be examined to give you more idea of how organisation operates.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the relevance of organisation • explain the elements of a good organisation • list and explain the rationale for organisation • explain the following organisational concepts: - organisational climate - organisational goals - organisational culture 10 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION - organisation and Methods (OM) - group cohesiveness - organisational behavior - organisation and development (OD).
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Relevance of Organisation Organisation is a predominant concept and every aspect of human race is closely associated with organisation.
The production of goods and services are all important aspects of organisations.
For this reason, human race cannot be separated from organisations (Akinwale, 1999).
Organisation can be said to be the wealth of nations and which has the following features; goal, attainment, coordination, planning and procedures.
Organisation, since it is the embodiment of common purpose and unity which offers workers to work together and achieve plans agreed upon by all the stakeholders towards the realisation of the corporate goals, makes organisation as a concept very importance to administration.
In the organisation, are two important elements, these are human resource and material resource.
The former includes the skilled, the semi-skilled and the unskilled.
The combination of these elements and personalities makes up the strength of organisations (Akinwale, 1999).
However, the latter comprises the physical as well as the financial aspects.
The two elements (human and material) can be made to produce effective administration and management of an organisation.
Organisation also provides the basis which attracts people to work together in the process of realising their individual and corporate goals.
Without organisation being put in place, the services of the individuals within it would not be needed.
It is therefore a structure put in place to ensure that objectives and / or goals of individuals and organisations are accomplished in a systematic way.
This makes it very important.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why in your own view do you think organisation is significant?
11 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.2 Elements of Good Organisation The following are the elements of good organisation.
In good organisation: a. definite and clear cut responsibilities should be assigned to each executive to prevent frictions.
b. responsibility should always be accompanied with corresponding authority.
c. no change should be made in the scope or responsibilities of a position without a definite understanding to that effect on the part of all concerned.
d. no executive or employee, occupying a single position in the organisation should be subject to definite order from more than one source.
e. order should never be given to a subordinate without the prior knowledge of his immediate executive head.
Rather than do this, the officer in question should be supported.
f. criticisms of subordinates should whenever possible, be made privately and in no case should subordinates be criticised in the presence of executives or employees of equal or lower rank.
g. no dispute or difference between executive or employees as to authority or responsibility for prompt and careful adjudication.
h. promotions, wage changes and disciplinary actions should always be approved by the executive immediately superior to the one directly responsible.
i. no executive or employee should be the accuser and the judge of another at the same time (Roger and Hin, 1990, 49).
3.3 Rationale for Studying Organisations Organisations are studied because of the following reasons: 1.
To achieve social transformation 2.
To make major investment decisions 3.
To make organisational analysis 4.
To examine outcomes 5.
To achieve consolidation and growth Let us briefly explain the reasons given above for better illustrations.
1.
Social Transformation No doubt, the great social transformations in history have been essentially organisational based (Hall, undated).
For instance, the current reforms being embarked upon by the Federal government of 12 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Nigeria either in education, economy, health, etc, are to bring about social transformations which are compelled by global challenges.
All these reforms or transformations cannot be understood without a consideration and an understanding of their organisational contexts.
2.
Major Investment Decisions Major and rational investment decisions cannot be made without studying the organisation in question.
For instance, investors constantly assess how business firms are doing and buy and sell stocks accordingly.
The knowledge about this will help them to make rational decisions on whether to invest in a given project or not.
3.
Organisational Analysis Organisation analysis does occur at all levels of management.
The job of organisational management is to assess the state of the organisation.
Labour unions and also analyse the operations of the companies with which they have contracts.
Customers assess the quality of product.
In other words, organisations are studied to analyse their structures and products before having dealing with them.
Every level of the organisation should be analysed to determine the level(s) that default(s) in the realisation of the corporate goals.
4.
Examination of Outcomes Organisations are studied because they have outcomes which may be good or evil, because they can spread hatred or save lives, because they can wage war or bring peace.
We therefore study organisations to assess their outcomes.
5.
Consolidation and Growth There is the need for the study of organisations towards consolidation and achievement of growth.
For instance, when organisations are recording successes, there are strong tendencies for them to become larger and larger through growth or merger.
3.4 Organisational Concepts There are some concepts or terms commonly used in relation to organisation.
A clear understanding of these concepts will help those working in the organisation system to be well equipped with the principles, procedures and theories of organisation.
These concepts/terms are; organisational climate, organisational goals, organisation culture, organisation and methods (O&M), group 13 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION cohesiveness, organisational behaviour, organisation development, power and authority etc.
Some of these concepts would be discussed in this section.
3.4.1 Organisational Climate Organisational climate according to Hodgetts and Altman (1979) implies “a set of properties of the work environment perceived by individuals who work there and which serve as a major force in influencing their job behaviour”.
Organisational climate is also referred to as the internal working environment or situation of the organisation as perceived by the workers or members of such organisation.
Essentially, varying characteristics make organisations differ in several respects; for instance, organisation structure, leadership style, rules and regulations, the size, communication network, goals, objectives, nature, interpersonal or intergroup.
What make organisations differ are the elements mentioned here.
3.4.2 Organisational Goals Organisational goals are said to be the mission and predetermined objectives of the organisation.
They refer to future target of the organisation.
Every organisation must set its goals before it commences operation.
In other words, goal setting is an essential aspect of the organisational life and existence which gives its direction for a specific time.
According to Akinwale (1999), the idea of organisational goal is a scheme which stipulates not only the purpose and mission of the organisation but also the general expectations required of workers by management.
If the general expectations and purpose, objectives or mission are to be accomplished however, there must be the wherewithal such as the human, material and financial resources.
The goals of an organisation may be to make profit (business organisation), to provide defence (Army) or to provide social satisfaction (social clubs or societies).
3.4.3 Organisation Culture Organisation culture is the dominant pattern of shared beliefs and values (Cole, 1996).
Morgan (1986) as cited by Cole (ibid.)
sees organisation culture from a sociologist’s perspective, and describes it as; “shared meaning shared understanding and shared sense-making’’.
The structure of an organisation is essentially influenced by the cultural disposition of such organisation.
As Cole (1996) would say, ‘the dominant culture that develops in an organisation is primarily the product of the aims and methods of its founders, or their successors in senior management, 14 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION combined with their interaction with a variety of internal and external forces’’.
3.4.4 Organisation and Methods (O&M) The concept relates to administrative and office work.
Organisation and methods seek to have the most effective management structure, to improve efficiency and effectiveness of working.
Generally speaking, O & M aim at achieving improvements through: i. improvement in management ii.
improvement in working organisation Thus, O & M can be described as any systematic attempt at improving procedures, methods and systems, communication and controls in the organisation (Adepoju, 2004).
3.4.5 Group Cohesiveness Group cohesiveness, otherwise refers to the attractiveness or drawing power for the members of the group.
Groups vary widely from one to another in the extent of their cohesiveness.
The cohesiveness of a group is the determination of group members to be the best means available for meeting the individual’s needs.
The cohesion of any group is always subject to the attractiveness of other groups which promise to satisfy needs more effectively.
Cohesiveness is important because it affects the power of a group.
Group develop norms or standards of behaviour, and it has been found that “the more cohesive the group, the more effectively it can influence its members” (see Festinger, 1 et al.
1950; Adepoju, 2004).
Behling and others (1936) and Mayo and others (1939, 1970) studies revealed the extent to which group cohesiveness can influence organisational productivity.
While Behling and others (1936) emphasised that “cohesiveness in work groups has a clear positive effect on absenteeism, turnover and tardiness…” Mayo and others (ibid.)
found that group cohesiveness brings about high productivity.
By implication, a more cohesive work group is not only more powerful in influencing its members; it can also withstand outside pressures and be productive in clarifying and working toward its own goals (Adepoju, 2001).
According to Newell (1978), the cohesiveness of work groups is thus significant to the productivity of any organisation.
This is in agreement with Mayo and others’ position.
15 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.4.6 Organisational Behaviour Organisational behaviour according to Amold and Feldman (1986) is concerned with the way organisations influence the thoughts, feelings, and actions of their members in order to create healthier and more productive environment.
Organisational behaviour is also concerned with understanding the ways in which behaviour and performance of individual organisation members influence the performance and effectiveness of the organisation as a whole.
In other words, it is an attempt to have basic knowledge of how individual performance, actions and effectiveness influence the corporate goals of the organisation.
3.4.7 Organisation Development (OD) This term implies a systematic process aimed at improving organisational effectiveness on the basis of behavioural science knowledge; typical stages in an organisation development programme include analysis, diagnosis, action plans and review.
An external third party assists in the process (Cole, 1996).
Organisation development is also a strategy or approach to organisational change that can be employed or used to analyse and diagnose the sources of organisational problems and to develop and implement action plans for their solution.
According to Amold and Feldman (1986), organisational development is a collaborative process in that members of the organisation who will be affected by change are actively involved in diagnosing the problems and in designing new ways of operation in their organisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Briefly examine the organisation concepts and highlight their basic characteristics.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt in this unit that organisation exists for some reasons, and that the concept ‘organisation’ is more than what people think it is.
Thus, it has a wider scope and context.
The emergence of human organisation therefore indicates that certain behaviour must prevail in order to achieve the stated objectives of such organisation.
You have equally learnt various organisational concepts which no doubt must have equipped you adequately for the subsequent units.
16 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the relevance and purpose of organisation, which gives you more idea of how organisation operates.
Also, you have learnt the rationale for studying organisation and some basic organisation concepts.
What you have learnt in this unit is very necessary for you and will equip you for the next unit on the structural view of organisation.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What have you learnt in this unit about organisation?
2.
Briefly explain why organisation should be studied.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Ajayi, A.O.
(1986).
Organisation Theory: Its Ramifications, Overview and Critical Appraisal.
AJEM, 1,1, 102-112 Akinwale, E, J.
A.
(1999).
Human Resources Management: An Overview.
Lagos: Concepts Publications.
Scott, W.G.
and Mitchell, T.R.
(1972).
Organisation Theory: A Structuraland Behavioural Analysis.
Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc & the Dorsey Press.
17 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 3 THE STRUCTURAL VIEW OF ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Structure and Organisational Structure 3.1.1 Meaning of Structure 3.1.2 Definition of Organisational Structure 3.2 Steps involved in the Establishment of Organisational Structure 3.3 Types or forms of Organisational Structure 3.3.1 Formal Organizational Structure 3.3.2 Informal Organisational Structure 3.3.3 Line and Staff Organisation 3.3.4 Flat and Tall Structures 3.4 Functions of Organisational Structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, attempt is made to acquaint you with the structural view of organisation.
You will also be introduced to the criteria for a good organisation framework.
Organisational structure prescribes the types of relationship that exist between and among the workers and the management of an organisation.
No doubt, production activities in any human organisation should be closely monitored, supervised and coordinated by superior officer for effective realisation of the predetermined objectives of the organisation.
The functions of organisational structure and types or forms of organisation will also be discussed in this unit.
Organisation must have a structure, to enable it design role expectations for its members and determine the expected rule of behaviour in the organisation.
18 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • provide a simple definition for the concepts ‘Structure’ and ‘Organisational Structure’ • differentiate between a formal organisation and an informal organisation • identify the criteria for a good organisational structure • explain the functions of organisational structure • explain what is meant by line and staff organisation • define flat and tall structures.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Structure and Organisation Can you bring to your view, the type of house you are living in presently, what does the pattern or structure look like?
We can start our discussion by attempting the above question.
Having done that, let us now provide meaning to the concepts of ‘structure’ and ‘organisation structure’ 3.1.1 Meaning of Structure The structure of any organisation is like the architectural plan of a building (Newman, 1972).
Structure can be described as a designed framework or arrangement of things, it connotes the framework within which people act.
Thompson (1977) refers to structure as “the internal and patterning of relationship within the organisation”.
Edgar and James (1977:329) noted that; Oganisational design and structure is a powerful way to change and influence people’s behaviours….organisational structure is the result of human thought.
It is a product of human hands.
The structure of an organisation involves five main variables: centralisation or the hierarchy of authority, division of labour, or specialisation; formalisation or rules and regulations, unified direction and chains of commands.
In view of the above definition, organisation structure is described as having similar characteristics with the term, “bureaucracy’ (Edgar and James, 1977).
19 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Newman (1998) defines structure as “The process of logically grouping activities, delineating authority and responsibility and establishing work relationships that will enable both the organisation and the individuals to realise their mutual objectives”.
In other words, structure is the pattern of relationships among members of the organisation.
The purpose of the structure is the division of work among members of the organisation and the co-ordination of their activities so that they are directed towards achieving the goals and objectives of the organisation.
Child (1984) argues that the structure of an organisation does not only affect productivity and economic efficiency but also the morale and job satisfaction of the work force.
Therefore, structure should be redesigned to encourage performance.
Miller (1986) stated that the objectives of structure are to provide economic and efficient performance and the level of utilisation, monitoring the activities of the organisation and different areas of work and the social satisfaction of members.
Mullins (1993) stated that structure defines the tasks and responsibilities, works, roles, relationships and channels of communication.
Structure makes possible the application of the process of administrator and creates a framework of order and command through which the activities of the organization can be planned, organized, directed and controlled.
Douglas and Mussazi (1989) stated that structure is a device for integrating the tasks, types of authority and situational factors in accordance with matrix approach such as routine task, that requires repetitive solutions by personnel with technical backgrounds, the engineering situation with professionals analysing and advising the line managers, the craft situation that deals with inquiring but repetitively processed output requiring flexible and person oriented structure and the uncertain situation that calls for a flexible and participative design.
The approach encourages adaptation of organisation structure to the existing situation in different parts of the enterprise depending on the environment, tasks and personnel involved to which authority and responsibility are distributed.
Cole (1995) stated that structure can be classified into the following: a.
High or low degree of specialisation b.
Narrow or wide structure c. Flat or tall structure d. Centralised or decentralised structure e. Tight control and lose control structure 20 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.1.2 Definition of Organisational Structure According to Mussazi (1987), organisational structure is the systematic arrangement of facilities and tasks so that an institution can work with maximum efficiency.
Organisation is seen here as comprising of materials and people whose differentiated use of activities are deliberately coordinated for the purpose of achieving organisational goals.
The activities are consciously planned and deliberately structured so that every member has a role to play towards the success of the organisation.
Harvey (1990) referred to organisation structure as the logical relationship of functions and authority arranged to accomplish objectives in an efficient manner.
He argues that good organisational structure does not by itself produce performance just as a good constitution does not guarantee great presidents or good laws or morally sound society.
But a poor organisation structure makes good performance impossible, no matter how good individual managers may be.
Lawrence and Lorseh (1987), in their study found that a useful way to look at organisational structure is in terms of two fundamental processes which are differentiation and integration.
Differentiation is viewed as the process of breaking down the task into substances while integration is the pulling of all pieces together to accomplish overall goals.
The duo discovered that major barriers to organisational effectiveness stem from consequences of differentiation which are different in backgrounds and interest of people in various departments or professions, minimal communication, tendencies of unit giving priority to their own roles than those of others or the total system.
The process of integration therefore attempts to overcome the above listed barriers by liaising or integrating roles; interacting across groupings, committees with joint membership direct meetings to foster familiarity with other areas.
Cole (1998) noted that, the criterion of the appropriateness of an organisational structure must be the extent to which it furthers the objectives and the degree to which it conforms to a prescribed pattern.
Organisational structure can also be described as a designed framework, chart or an organogramme that shows the chains of command and the type of relationship that exists between two individuals or among many individuals (super - ordinate-subordinate officers).
Organisation structure involves the identification and grouping of work to be performed and delegation of responsibility and authority and the establishment of relationships for the purpose of enabling people to work most effectively in accomplishing organisational objectives (Allen, 1997).
Organisational structure is therefore an orderly arrangement of authority to ensure effective decision making and control.
No organisation can survive without effective structure as this involves sharing of 21 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION responsibilities among managerial and non-managerial staff to ensure effective running of an organisation.
Structure could be tall or flat, which is associated with narrow span of controls.
Flat structure has few levels of relationship in its hierarchy authority while tall structure has many hierarchical levels and few workers reporting to each boss (Johns 1983).
Simply, organisational structure involves dividing activities into departments, divisions, units and sub-units, defining relationship between the heads and members that make up the units.
A good structure; (i) Identifies the operating departments (sales department, production department, and finance department) (ii) Isolates the service department (personnel research) (iii) Places emphasis on balancing the structure, and (iv) Shows the role of committees in the organisation.
3.2 Steps Involved in the Establishment of Organisational Structure The following three steps should be followed in the process of establishing organisational structure.
1.
Determination of the responsibilities to be allocated to the particular positions concerned.
2.
Allocation of responsibilities to the individual person who is to hold the managerial position concerned.
3.
Establishment of certain formal relationships between managers and the emergence of informal relations among them.
Four variables or forces are said to be of particular importance in the design of an organisational structure according to the contingency approach to organisational theory.
These are, (i) forces in the manager; (ii) forces in the environment; (iii) forces in the task; and (iv) forces in the subordinates.
All these variables should be taken into consideration while designing an organisational structure if such organisation is to achieve its objectives or goals; the more clearly set-out, balanced and utilitarian the plan, the stronger and more serviceable the structure.
For the structure to be appropriate and good, the following variables should be considered: 22 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • Effectiveness • Efficiency • Division of work and specialisation • Functional definition of authority and responsibility • Chain of command • Channel of contract or type of relationship • Agreed procedure • Effective and efficient administrator.
(Adepoju, 2004) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Briefly describe a structure of an organisation you know.
2.
Draw an organisational framework for such organization.
3.3 Types and Forms of Organisational Structure Let us examine the following types of organisational structure in this section.
3.3.1 Formal Organisation These are the forms of organisations in which there is a structured programmed, formalised or routine-based rules of behaviour, the behaviour and activities of the members are guided by an established or laid down rules and regulations which consequently determine the extent to which members can participate in the organisation’s activities and decision making processes.
A formal organisational structure is usually described in terms of the task, position, and authority relationships.
It is also characterised by control through the formulation of rules and regulations in order to promote discipline and common standards.
The administrative process perceived as a formal organisation has the limitation of being too impersonal with the human considerations completely absent.
An ideal type of formal organisation according to the classical belief (Max Weber, 1946) is the one where the following components or variables are embedded.
These are; (i) Rules and regulations (ii) Hierarchy or authority (iii) Impersonal-orientation (iv) Career-orientation (v) Official record keeping (vi) Division of labour and speculation.
Formal organisations tend to be official in all respect and relations and membership is absolutely compulsory.
Good examples of formal 23 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION organisations are educational institutions and companies (private and public).
A group formed through and by the formal organisational structure is called a Formal Group.
Informal Organisational Structure These are social groups or cliques which develop and operate within a formal organisation.
The basic objective of an informal organisation is to achieve or fulfill individual’s social needs of its members.
It is characterised by unstructured or un-programmed rules and regulations.
Informal groups and activities form a network of personal and social relationship which are not established or prescribed by the formal organisations.
Davies (1981) says that the informal organisation arises from the social interaction of people, which means that it develops spontaneously as people associate with each other.
Informal organisations or groups arise from people’s needs for relationships, affiliation, friendship and security.
Argyris (1964) also contends that the informal organisation helps to decrease the basic cause of conflict, frustration and failure.
Group solidarity is the bond of group membership strengthened by the co- operative and collective action of its members.
Informal organisations tend to be concerned with membership goals at the expense of organisational goals.
There are many well documented cases of restriction in output and other dysfunctional approaches used by the informal organisational at the expense of the corporate goals of the organisation.
Membership of an informal organisation is voluntary and not prescribed by strict rules and regulations (Adepoju, 1998; 2004).
It may interest you to note that no formal organisation can operate effectively without informal organisation.
This is to say in essence that group dynamics is essential for successful operation of a formal organisation.
Within a formal organisational structure, there may exist two or more informal or social groups.
Consequently, informal groups may terminate when the present membership leaves or does not exist again, in other words, while formal organisation continues to exist as long as the organisation is operating, informal organisations have shorter life span.
Informal group or association helps to increase communication flow among workers.
This is also known as the grapevine.
Apart from spreading rumours, the grapevine can be used to pass information from one person to another orally in the organisation (Adepoju, 1998; 2004).
In educational organisation for instance, informal intimacy among teachers can emerge as a result of their daily contacts in the staff room during free periods.
Unofficial consultations among teachers and the proximity of their classrooms can also lead to intimate relationships.
24 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Other examples of informal organisations are students’ union, trade unions, clubs association/union based on ethnicity and religion, etc.
Informal organisational structure is of three basic types namely: 1.
Horizontal type 2.
Vertical type 3.
Mixed type 1.
Horizontal type: When membership is drawn from workers who are in the same or similar rank in the organisation.
This is known as horizontal type of organisational structure.
2.
Vertical type: This comprises membership drawn from higher level employees, managers, and supervisors etc., who work in the same department.
3.
Mixed type: This is otherwise known as random clique.
This type comprises employees of different ranks, different departments and even different locations (Peretomode, 1991).
3.3.3 Line and Staff Organisational Structure Line organisation refers to the officials who have full responsibility for success or failure in achieving organisation’s aims.
They are officials who are usually responsible for the operation of the major units of an organisation, such as a school system.
Line authority is often referred to as direct authority because it encompasses the right to give orders and to have decisions implemented.
These are the decision-makers or those found at the top management level of an organisation.
They see to the formulation of policies concerning the achievement of organisation objectives or goals.
In the school system, the line officers at the state level comprise of the commissioner for education, the permanent secretary, chief inspector of education, principals, head-teachers, vice- principals and assistant head-teachers.
Staff organisation comprises officials whose functions are principally advisory in nature.
Staff organisation is the source of ideas, it advises the line officers of such matters relating to the survival of the organisation.
The line and staff organisation can be used to identify and describe the kind of person required to fulfill these roles.
However, while line and staff organisation places too much emphasis on the delegation of authority and responsibility by superiors to subordinates, it gives little or no room for staff participation in policy decisions and does not encourage a free flow of communication.
It also places excessive emphasis on the strict chain of command which increases the social distance between superiors and subordinates.
25 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.3.4 Flat and Tall Organisational Structures These types of structure relate to the span of control or management or span of supervision adopted.
A wide span of control means that the executive or the administrator supervises a large number of people reporting to him or her and a relatively flat organisational structure results (Obilade, 1989:63).
A narrow span of control requires that the organisations have more levels in the hierarchy and the structure therefore, looks very much like a pyramid.
The organisational chart of the school system with the narrow span of management/supervision/control is called the tall structure.
This type of structure levels between the lowest and the highest positions in the hierarchy.
3.4 Functions of an Organisational Structure The structure of an organisation is very important for the following reasons: 1.
It shows the pattern of communication flow between the administrator and the subordinates.
2.
Organisational structure presents at a glance the flow of authority and responsibility among workers.
3.
Through the structure, the act of responsibility and accountability is made simple.
The individual is conscious of who is accountable to whom.
4.
Delegation of responsibility and authority are possible.
5.
The performances of individuals and their contributions can easily be assessed and evaluated.
6.
As a reference point, administrative structure presents the true picture of the institution to the outsider.
It reflects a genuine formal organisation.
7.
Organisational structure classifies functions of each unit or level thereby averting the situation of conflict or clash.
8.
It shows the order of promotion of staff thereby making every staff significant in the organisation.
SELF ASSIGNMENT EXERCISE 2 State and explain the functions which organisational structure performs.
26 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION The structure of an organisation is the framework for carrying out the responsibilities of management.
Organisational structure prescribes the types of relationship that exist between and among the workers and the management of an organisation.
No doubt, production activities in any human organisation should be closely monitored, supervised and coordinated by superior officers for effective realisation of the predetermined objectives of the organisation.
This is to say that certain variables must come into play or be considered while designing organisation structure.
Such variables include job satisfaction, nature of job, channel of communication, span of control among others.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been introduced to what structure and organisation structure are.
You have also learnt the steps involved in the establishment of organisational structure.
Also, some criteria that should be considered before an organisation can be said to be good were highlighted.
We also discussed the four basic forms or types of organisation structure;formal, informal, line and staff, and tall and flat.
Finally, you were given the functions of organisational structure.
In the next two units, you will learn about the major approaches to the development of organisational theory.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is meant by structure and organisational structure?
2.
Briefly draw a simple organogram of an organisation you are familiar with.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998) Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2004) Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Prospects Publications.
Obilade, S. (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Odusote Bookstores Ltd. Peretomode, V.F.
(2003) Educational Administration, Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Nigeria: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. 27 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 4 MAJOR APPROACHES TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF ORGANISATIONAL THEORY I (THE CLASSICAL SCHOOL) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Brief Overview of the Classical School 3.2 The Scientific Management Theory 3.3 The Administrative Theory 3.4 The Bureaucratic Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 3 of this module, we have discussed extensively, what structure and organisational structure are.
We have also enumerated key organisational concepts.
It is therefore expedient to examine in this unit, the major approaches to the development of organisational theory, more specifically the classical school.
This will help you to become acquainted with the earliest approach to a systematic study of what workers in industrial organisations were doing with a view to finding out the best and cheapest way of doing it.
Our discussions so far must have equipped you and prepared you for our next discussion.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the major approaches to organisational theory, in particular, the classical school • identify and describe the emphasis of the three streams of thoughts under the classical school, and • enumerate the strengths, weaknesses and criticisms of the three streams of thought under the classical school.
28 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Brief Overview of the Classical School According to Adepoju (1998, 2004) the idea of coming together by people to achieve a common purpose forms the beginning of administrative thought and practice.
However, at the end of the 19th Century, Western European and American business men were putting in more efforts to increase profits from industries (Industrial Revolution Era).
Then, it was generally believed that industries could make more profits by lowering the unit cost of produced goods by employing more experienced and technically oriented scientists and engineers.
All these therefore led to the emergence of the management practice, which started with the classical school that dominated organisation stage in the period, 1900-1930s.
Adepoju (2006) pointed out that the classical school is concerned with the structure of organisations and the determination of the tasks necessary to attain organisational objectives.
The School also emphasised efficiency of work structure.
The Classical School of thought comprised three streams namely; 1.
The Scientific Management developed by Fredrick W. Taylor 2.
The Administrative Theory developed by Henri Fayol, 3.
The Bureaucratic Theory developed by Max Weber.
These three streams or schools of thought came together to produce what is today known as the classical or structural management approach.
The classical approach is a point of departure from other contributions made by organisational theorists to organisation development.
Notable among the names associated with the classical approach were Frederick Winslow Taylor, who developed the Scientific Management and referred to as the father of Scientific Management.
Taylor’s associates were Henry Gantt, Frank and Lillian Gilbreth (husband and wife).
Other notable names were Henri Fayol, regarded as the father of Administrative theory and Max Weber, who came up with the idea of Bureaucracy (Adepoju, 2004, 2006).
Let us now examine each of these streams, their features, strengths and weaknesses.
3.2 The Scientific Theory/View One of management and perhaps, the earliest systematic view was that management intended to maximise the output of workers in an 29 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION organisation by applying the principles of scientific management.
The most notable representative of this view was Frederick Winslow Taylor.
Taylor gave as his goal, the rational analysis of administrative procedures for exploiting human and material resources in order to attain the objectives of an organisation most expeditiously.
Excellence in management, he thought resided in “knowing exactly what you want men to do and then seeing that they do it the best and cheapest way”.
It is a philosophy dedicated to improving efficiency through the elimination of wasted effort.
It’s ideal is a constant growth in wealth achieved through productivity.
This mechanistic approach of Fredrick Taylor was later referred to as Taylorism.
Among the disciples of Frederick Taylor were Henry Gantt, Frank and Lillian Gilbreth (Husband and wife), Warrington, Emerson, e.t.c.
All these names were also associated with scientific management.
Taylor’s scientific management advocated efficiency, which could be achieved when workers are made to work to achieve the objective, set by the organisation.
The type of management advocated is described in his Principles of Scientific Management and may be summarised thus; 1.
Time-Study Principles: All productive efforts should be measured by accurate time study and a standard time established for all work done.
2.
Piece-rate Principle: Wages should be proportional to output and their rates based on the standards determined by time study.
As a corollary, a worker should be given the highest grade of work of which he is capable.
3.
Separation-of-planning from performance principle: Management should take over from the workers, the responsibility for planning the work and making the performance physically possible.
Planning should be based on time studies and other data related to production, which are scientifically classified.
It should be facilitated by standardisation of tools, implements and methods.
4.
Scientific-Methods of work Principle: Management should take over from the workers, the responsibility for their methods of work, determine scientifically, the best method and train workers accordingly.
5.
Management-Control Principle: Managers should be trained and taught to apply scientific principles of management and control (such as management by exception and comparison with valid standard) so that they can train the workers accordingly.
6.
Functional-Management Principle: The strict application of military principle should be considered as the industrial 30 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION organisation should be so designed that it best serves the purpose of improving the coordination of activities among the various specialists.
Taylor and his followers were enormously influential in establishing these principles in such powerful organisations as Midland Steel, Bethlehem Steel, Santa Fe Railway, and ACMC Wire Company among others.
Taylorism was criticised as being too mechanistic, forceful, exploitative, inhuman, and for not having any consideration for human factors but rather in favour of organisation and emphasised productivity at the expense of human elements.
Some of the major critics of Taylorism are Campbell and his associates (Adepoju, 2004).
3.3 The Administrative Theory/ View Henri Fayol was a French industrialist; he was another major contributor to the systematic study of administration.
In 1916, Fayol came up with a book Administration Industriale and Generale where all his ideas on administrative theory were embedded.
Fayol created the famous five elements/functions of management, which include; Planning, Organising, Coordinating, Commanding, and Controlling.
Planning: To plan is to foresee and provide means to examine the future and draw up the plan of action.
Organising: To organise means, building up the dual structure, material and human of the undertaking.
Coordinating: This means binding together, unifying and harmonising all activities and efforts.
Commanding: This implies giving directives to the subordinate, by the superior for them to carry out.
Controlling: This implies seeing that everything occurs in conformity with established rules and expressed command.
These five elements/functions of management identified by Henri Fayol have been variously modified by modern writers and organisation theorists such as Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick.
For instance, Gulick used the acronym POSDCORB to represent the functions of the Chief Executive in a typical organisation.
Each letter represents an activity essential to the proper functioning of the office.
POSDCORB stands for Planning, Organising, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Reporting and Budgeting.
31 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Among Fayol’s achievement was his attempt to raise the level of administrative practice by providing a framework of principles and functions, which are referred to as Fayol’s 14 principles.
They include the following: i.
Division of work ii.
Authority and Responsibility iii.
Discipline iv.
Unity of Command v. Unity of Direction vi.
Subordination of Individual interest vii.
Remuneration of Personnel according to efforts viii.
Centralisation ix.
Chain of Command x.
Order xi.
Equity xii.
Stability of Job and Tenure xiii.
Initiative and xiv.
Espirit de Corps (Team spirit) You will read more on these principles in Module 3, Unit 3 as they apply to educational administration.
3.4 The Bureaucratic Theory View The bureaucratic model developed by Max Weber forms the third stream of thought under the classical approach.
According to Max Weber, the bureaucratic concept of organisation and administration is; a pyramidal, hierarchical organisational structure in which all power for making decisions flows from super-ordinates to subordinates.
Weber emphasised that bureaucratic apparatus would be very impersonal, immunising, irrational, personal and emotional factors.
Weber therefore proposed the following principles for the modern organisation in order to bring forth efficiency and productivity.
i.
Division of work and specialisation ii.
Hierarchy of Authority iii.
Rules and Regulations iv.
Impersonal Orientation v. Career Orientation vi.
Official documentation/record keeping.
i.
Division of work and specialisation: According to Weber, the principle of the bureaucracy demands competence therefore, assignments should be allotted to individual workers based on 32 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION their technical knowledge and capacity.
This, he says, would bring about efficiency and high productivity in the organisation.
ii.
Hierarchy of Authority: In Weber’s view, it is the job of the higher officer to supervise and control the junior officers.
He emphasised that in an ideal type organisation, where things worked well, each lower officer is under the control and supervision of a higher one.
iii.
Rules and Regulations: This principle according to Weber is “a continuous organisation of official functions bound by rules”.
Bureaucracy believes in creating rules and regulations, which cover the rights, duties and operations of all members.
iv.
Impersonal Orientation: Impersonality in official matters means that the administrator or manager should be impersonal in his official dealings and should not personalise the means of production or owning any property in the organisation.
He should therefore neither reflect his personal interest nor protect the interests of anybody in his dealings with official matters.
v. Career Orientation:Weber emphasised that employment and promotion of staff should be based on qualifications, technical knowledge or competence and experience/skills acquired over time.
vi.
Official Documentation/Record Keeping: Weber advocated that all official transactions and matters in the organisation should be done officially and be properly documented.
The ideas preached and advocated by the classical school of thought is efficiency and high productivity in organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION The idea behind the classical approach to management or administrative thought and practice is to bring about efficiency and high productivity in the organisation.
In other words, the process of realising organisation objectives is viewed from the standpoint of individual workers.
This however led to the idea that workers should be used as machines or what others will call Taylorism.
The classical approach is said to be a point of departure from other schools such as the neoclassical and modern schools which are going to be discussed in the next unit.
33 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the major approaches to the development of management/administrative practice in this unit with specific emphasis on the classical school.
I have discussed with you the three major components of the classical school; the scientific management, the administrative theory and the bureaucratic principles.
You have equally been briefed in the unit, that the classical school preached and advocated for efficiency and high productivity.
In the next unit we are going to discuss, the neoclassical and modern schools.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly comment on the features of the three streams of thought that produced what is today known as the classical or structural management school.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2006).
School Management: An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Henri, F. (1949).
General and Industrial Management.
London: Pitman Peretomode, V.F.
(2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. 34 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 5 MAJOR APPROACHES TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF ORGANISATIONAL THEORY II (THE NEOCLASSICAL AND MODERN SCHOOLS) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Brief Overview of the Neoclassical and Modern Schools 3.2 The Human Relations School 3.2.1 The Hawthorne Studies 3.3 The Behavioural/Social Sciences 3.4 The Modern School (System Analysis) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION I am sure that your knowledge about the development of organisational theory is improving with the discussion made in unit 4 above.
Of course, I also believe that your mind will be agitating to be acquainted with the other organisational theories such as the neo-classical and modern school (system analysis).
Certainly, those are the theories we are going to consider in this unit.
If you are a student in this field of study, it is expedient for you to be able to explain what each of the theories stands for.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the features of the neoclassical and modern schools • appraise the two schools of management thought • describe succinctly, each of these approaches with emphasis on the strengths, weaknesses and implications of their applications in educational system.
35 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Brief Overview of the Neo-Classical and Modern Schools Following the criticisms raised against the earliest approach, which centred on mechanistic and human nature of the approaches adopted by Fredrick Winslow Taylor, Henri Fayol, Max Weber and their colleagues who have their names associated with the classical school, another movement called the neoclassical school came on board.
Remember, we stated that the classical school views the process of production from the standpoint of organisation structure.
However, the neo-classical school, which comprises, the human relations and behavioural sciences or social sciences movements considered the process of production from the standpoint of individual or group efforts.
The major concern of the classical organisational or functional school or movement was with how to make the worker and the organisation more productive.
They were not concerned with the worker as an individual and his special needs and interests; they looked at the whole organisation as if it had a fixed structure (Bamisaye, Ejieh, Adelabu & Alege, 1998).
The neoclassical movement believes that workers either individually or collectively be allowed to determine what they need themselves in order to bring about high productivity.
In other words, job satisfaction became noticeable early by the neo-classical schools.
The neoclassical theory of organisation embarked on the task of compensating for some of the deficiencies in classical doctrine.
One of the main contributions of the neoclassical school is the introduction of behavioural sciences in an integrated fashion into the theory of organisation.
The inspirations of this school were the Hawthorne Studies.
Despite all the contributions made by the neoclassical theorists to the study of organisation, neoclassical school of organisation theory has been called bankrupt.
Criticisms range from, “human relations is a tool for cynical puppeteering of people” to “human relations is nothing more than a trifling body of empirical and descriptive information”.
Of course, there is a good deal of truth in both criticisms since the school like the classical movement lack integration among the facets of human behaviour studied by it.
However, modern organisation theory has made effort to cover the shortcomings of the current body of theoretical knowledge (Ajayi, 1986).
The distinctive qualities of modern organisation theory are the following; its conceptual analytical base, its reliance on empirical research data and above all, its integrating nature.
These qualities are 36 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION framed in a philosophy, which accepts the premise that the only meaningful way to study organisation is to study it as a system of mutually dependent variables.
Five parts of the system, which are interdependent, have been identified in modern organisation theory.
These include: i. individual; ii.
formal arrangement of functions; iii.
the informal structure; iv.
research findings; and v. the physical setting in which the job is performed.
At this point, it is very expedient to affirm that, modern organisational theory and general system theory are similar in that, they look at organisation as an integrated whole.
They however differ in terms of their generality.
General system theory is concerned with every level of system, whereas, modern organisational theory focuses primarily on human organisation.
The modern school otherwise known as newer perspective or integrated school or system analysis views an organisation as a set of interrelated and interdependent elements that make up an organised whole.
3.2 The Human Relations Movement (1930s-1950s) This movement has as its point of departure, the classical or structural approach of Frederick Taylor, Henri Fayol and Max Weber.
It started through a series of long experiments at the Harvard University in the early 1940s.
This movement took another view of managing organisation with much emphasis on the human angle (factor) which the classicists failed to consider.
Among the major contributors and proponents of the human relations movement was Mary Parker Follet, regarded as the leader of the school, Elton Mayo, Roethlisberger, Dickson, etc.
In the studies conducted by Elton Mayo and his associate, Roethlisberger in the early 1930s (1932) at the Hawthorne Plant of the Western Electric Company near Chicago, it was finally concluded that the involvement of workers (social clique) in the production processes had great impact on their productivity.
Even though, the human relations approach ushered in such things as group dynamics, policy making by consultation, justice and fair play, democracy and communication, it was criticised for being too soft toward the workers to the detriment of the organisational objectives.
While the classical organisation approach ignores the impact of social relations, the human relations approach ignores the impact of the formal structure of organisation.
In summary, 37 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION human relations’ approach stresses people rather than structures, their motives and behaviour rather than the activities that need to be harnessed for achieving organisational goals.
3.2.1 The Hawthorne Studies (1924-1936) Elton Mayo and Fritz J. Roethlisberger conducted the Hawthorne Studies or experiments at the Hawthorne Plant of the Western Electric Company near Chicago between the period, 1924 and 1936.
The studies /experiments divided into five stages, had distinct characteristics.
First Stage This stage took place between the period, 1924 and 1927, under the direction of Pennock and Dickson.
The stage was known as the lighting stage.
The company’s staff to know the effect of lighting on output of the workers conducted it.
Two groups were involved in this stage, the experimental group and the control group.
While the former had lighting varied, the latter had a constant supply of lighting.
The finding of the study revealed that outputs of the experimental group and the control group increased.
It observed that when the lighting of the experimental group reduced, the group produced more.
Second Stage This stage took place between the periods 1927 -1929.
The stage known as the relay assembly test room was mainly conducted to know the effects of differing physical conditions on productivity.
It revealed that the output of the six women-workers involved in this study increased even when the physical conditions change.
The reaction of the workers to the conditions became known as the Hawthorne Effect.
Third Stage This stage took place between 1928 through 1930 and known as the interview stage; where attention focused on finding out the attitudes of the workers towards workers’ conditions, supervision and jobs.
This study, conducted before the completion of the relay assembly test showed the importance of working condition and supervision in increasing workers’ performance.
It was revealed that the relationships with people were important determinants of employees’ attitudes.
Fourth Stage In 1932, this study known as the bank wiring observation room took place.
It was the fourth stage of the experiment and involved fourteen 38 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION workers removed from among other staff on bank wiring to a separate observation room though, under the same working conditions.
The aim of this stage was to observe the group working under differing conditions over a period of nine months.
Fifth Stage This fifth stage was conducted in 1936 and known as the final stage.
This stage focused on lessons learned from the earlier studies and aimed at discovering employees’ relations.
The finding of this study led to the improvements in personal adjustment, employee - supervisor relations and labour management relations that eventually produced positive influence on workers and organisation productivity (see Peretomode, 2003; Ogunu, 2000; Adepoju, 2006).
Major Findings of the Hawthorne Studies 1.
Workers in any organisation cannot be treated in absolute isolation hence should be seen as members of a dynamic group.
2.
Informal groups (social clique) exercise much influence on members’ behaviour and organisation productivity.
This is also known as Group Dynamics.
3.
Membership of an informal organisation or social group was found to be more important than monetary incentives or physical working conditions.
4.
Administrators or managers need to be aware of the social needs of the workers and cater for them in order to encourage workers to work toward achieving the corporate goals of the organisation rather than working against the survival of the organisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Briefly highlight the position of the Human Relations School.
2.
In your view, do you think educational administrators should have knowledge of the Hawthorne Studies?
3.3 The Behavioural Sciences/Social Sciences Movement (1950s-1975) This movement came up as a significantly different school or approach from the earlier ones (Classical and Human Relations).
One of the major pioneers of this movement was Chester Barnard.
The theoretical framework of this new movement derived from the social sciences/behavioural science disciplines like psychology, sociology, political science, economics, etc.
According to the proponents of the approach, every administrator or manager should be equipped with the 39 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION knowledge of these social science disciplines above.
The belief was that, through the knowledge of these fields of study, administrators or managers would have better insight into the situation, job content, job context and the nature of the workers.
Another fact to know about this movement was the emphasis on some prior knowledge of basic principles or procedures of administration by administrators, which can assist them to accomplish the goals of the organisation.
Such principles or procedures are effective communication, behavioural disposition of the workers, rewards, inducements, etc.
In other words, the impact of this movement was the apparent loss of identity of the science of management rather; attention shifted to the social sciences.
Among the adherents of the behavioural science movement were Gouldner, Argyris, Bakke, March, Simon and Parsons.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the position of the Behavioural Sciences School on the study of organisation and its member?
3.4 The Modern View (System Analysis) This school was lately developed.
It therefore integrates the earlier schools discussed above.
Among the notable figures of the integrated school were Simon and March.
This school views the organisation as a system of interrelated sets of activities, which enable inputs to be converted into outputs.
This approach enables theorists to study key elements of organisation in terms of their interactions with one another and with their external environment.
Whereas, in the past, the explanations were in terms of structures or people, now, it is possible to identify theories, which seek to explain or predict organisational behaviour in a multi dimensional way by studying people, structure, technology and environment at once and at the same time.
There are several socio-technical systems under this approach; the highly embraced one is the contingency approach which states that “there is no best way to organise and manage rather, the best form depends on some contingencies or situation that pervades the organisation at one time or the other” such as: • The goals of the organisation • The characteristics of its members • Kinds of the tasks or job • The content of the job 40 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • The context of the job and • The structure of the organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Our discussion in this unit has shown that organisations and people within such organisations are viewed from different perspectives.
While some organisation theorists such as the neo-classical movement emphasised that individual or group of individuals should be motivated and made more satisfied with their tasks in order to bring about high productivity, the advocates of modern school emphasised that organisation should be viewed in terms of a system or interrelated sets of activities which enable inputs to be converted into outputs.
In addition, the contingency approach under the modern school indeed emphasised that, there is no best way to organise and manage an organisation.
Hence, the situation should be allowed to predict what approach to use.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that the neoclassical school is the movement that came after the classical school while the neoclassical school is a point of departure from the modern school.
Also in this unit, I have taken you through the major features of the neo-classical and modern schools.
What you have learnt in this unit is very necessary for your comprehension of Unit 6 which deals with backgrounds and contributions of selected organisational theorists to organisation practice.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly comment on the positions of the neoclassical and modern schools.
2.
What exactly, do you find interesting about the theories so discussed?
41 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2006).
School Management: An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Bamisaiye, E.A.
; Ejieh, M.U.C.
; Adelabu M.A.
& Alege, B.O.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Management.
Ibadan: Adeose Publications.
Henri, F. (1949).
General and Industrial Management.
London: Pitman Peretomode, V.F.
(2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. Weihrich, H. and Kootz, H. (2001).
Management: A Global Perspective (Tenth Edition).
New Delhi: McGraw-Hill.
42 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 6 BACKGROUNDS AND CONTRIBUTIONS OF SELECTED ORGANISATIONAL THEORISTS TO ORGANISATION PRACTICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Fredrick Winslow Taylor 3.2 Henry L. Gant 3.3 Henri Fayol 3.4 Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick 3.5 Max Weber 3.6 Fredrick Herzberg 3.7 Douglas M. McGregor 3.8 Elton Mayo 3.9 Mary Parker Follet 3.10 Abraham Maslow 3.11 Fritsz J. Roethlisberger 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units, (1 – 5), you have come across some names who have themselves associated with some theories.
In this unit, you will read and study more on their backgrounds and the major contributions they made to the development of organisational theory and practice.
These organisational theorists have over the years, and in no small way contributed and set a pace for the study and development of organisational theory.
Their contributions have also influenced the practice all over the world.
It is important to point out that the works and views of many of these scholars overlap and are very much interrelated or in simple terms, many of their works and views are complementary and universal.
Thus, an amalgam of approaches constitutes an effective tool-kit to educational administration and management.
However, this is not to say that the works, views and theories postulated by these pioneering administration / management scholars are all completely correct or perfect.
In fact, their works/views/ theories had been subjected to a wide range of criticisms and challenges as well as going through several amendments before subsequent adoption to suit the tastes, and peculiarities of diverse sectors of human endeavour including the field of education.
Such contributions and background are discussed in this unit.
43 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the organisational theorists and their backgrounds • examine the major contributions made by the theorists to the development of organisation practice • identify the areas in which such contributions were made.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Frederick Winslow Taylor (1856-1917) Frederick Winslow Taylor was an American who rose through the ranks as an apprentice, labourer, clerk, machinist, foreman, and chief industrial engineer.
He popularised the theory of management and was regarded as the father of the Scientific Management School.
In addition, Taylor posited the concept of Management by Exception (MBE).
Taylor’s major concern throughout most of his life was to increase efficiency in production, not only to lower costs and to raise profits but to make possible increased pay for workers through their higher productivity.
His contributions to the school are summarised as follows.
• He pioneered the development of science in management, which replaced the rule of the thumb methods.
He did away with guesswork.
• He developed scientific selection of workers and the progressive teaching and development of work.
• He advocated scientific education and development for selected workers.
• He raised the idea that workers should be paid on incentive basis i.e.
tie salary to how much a worker can produce.
• He advocated that every worker should be developed to his/her highest level or fullest capability.
• He instituted friendly cooperation between management and staff.
Taylor further opined that: - In each daily task, each man should have clearly defined task to accomplish.
- A worker should be given standard condition and adequate tools to work with.
- There is high pay for a job well done, for example, incentives.
- There is loss of pay for work failure.
44 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Most of Taylor’s contributions to management are contained in his famous work, The Principles of Scientific Management published in 1911.
In his view, excellent management resides in knowing exactly what you want men to do, then, seeing that they do it in the best cheapest way.
He propounded the following management principles.
• Time - Study Principle • Piece - Rate Principle • Separation of Planning from Performance Principle • Scientific Method of Work Principle • Management Control Principle • Functional Management Principle • Differential Work-Plan Principle In addition, Taylor listed ‘new duties’ for management.
These include; • The development of true science.
• The scientific selection, education and development of workers.
• Friendly close cooperation between management and workers.
Taylor and his contemporaries Gantt, Emerson, Frank and Lillian Gilbreth stressed the engineering approach to management.
3.2.
Henry L. Gantt (1861-1919) Henry L Gantt was a contemporary and colleague of Frederick Winslow Taylor at Bethlehem Steel Works.
He was the first to see human relations in industry as an important element.
Gantt believed that scientific management should entail the study of problem according to scientific methods.
He also believed that training of workers should be the sole responsibility of the management.
He was the forerunner of modern techniques such as programme evaluation and review technique (PERT).
In addition, Gantt developed building task and bonus system, that is, sequencing production activities and invented the Gantt chart, which shows the relationship between ‘events’ in a production programme.
He was the person that developed the philosophy of consideration for and fair dealings with workers.
Unlike Taylor and Gilbreth, Gantt believed that, the worker was a human and insisted on the basic day- wage as a minimum.
He was also of the view that the chance to earn more money was all that was needed to motivate workers to accept improved methods.
45 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.3 Henri Fayol (1941-1925) Henri Fayol was a Frenchman and an industrialist.
He was regarded as the father of modern operational management theory.
Fayol in his book published in 1916 identified five basic elements of administration or management, which include planning, organising, coordinating, commanding and controlling.
He developed fourteen principles of management and was of the opinion that, all business organisations are the same all over the world i.e., they are universal.
His contributions amongst others are the codification of administrative principles such as: i.
Division of Labour/Work - He believed that specialisation leads to efficiency and higher productivity and as such, a manager should give an employee specialised job or activities.
ii.
Authority and Responsibility - The responsibility of an employee should be commensurate with the authority given to him.
iii.
Unity of Command - An employee can only report to only ONE super officer i.e., no one should serve two masters.
iv Scalar Chain/Chain of Authority and Communication - The formal line of authority should be cleared and unbroken from top to bottom through the organisation in which information, directives, responsibility and obedience should flow.
v. Discipline - There must be respect for rules and regulations and authority of command.
vi.
Unity of Direction - Work or activities that are related to a group or department and with the same objectives must have a leader and a plan.
vii.
Subordination of individual initiative/ interest to general interest - The corporate goals of the organisation most take precedence over individual goals.
viii.
Remuneration of Personnel:- There should be adequate payment of wages and salaries.
ix.
Centralisation: - Authority should reside at the centre.
x.
Order: - People and materials should be found in the right place at the right time.
In other words, ‘a place for everything and everything in its place’, the right man should be placed in the right place.
xi.
Equity and Justice:- There should be fairness in the treatment of all xii.
Stability: - The tenure of personnel must be stable; a high rate of worker turnover should be discouraged.
xiii.
Initiative:- Employees should be allowed to think and execute plan of action independently.
xiv.
Espirit de corps: - There should be unity of effort through harmony of interest or teamwork.
46 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Henri Fayol was regarded as the leader of the administrative approach to organisation.
3.4 Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick Professor Luther Halsey Gulick, a management expert and author along with Lt. Col. Lyndall Urwick in 1937 expanded Fayol’s five elements of administrative functions and came up with the popular acronym, POSDCORB which implies Planning, Organising, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Reporting and Budgeting.
1.
Planning - Developing outlines of activities and execution of methods so as to accomplish organisational goals.
2.
Organising- Establishment of a formal organisational structure, functions and subdivisions that are required for carrying out the duties for the achievement of defined objectives.
3.
Staffing - The recruitment and training of personnel, and maintenance of favourable work climate for the personnel.
4.
Directing - Organisational leadership, decision making and embodying them in specific and general orders and instructions for each member.
5.
Coordinating - The vital function of uniting and interrelating the various parts of the work.
6.
Reporting - Keeping subordinates and super-ordinates informed about the status of the work through record reports, research and inspection.
7.
Budgeting - This embraces fiscal planning, accounting and control.
It must be stressed here that both Gulick and Urwick belonged to the same school of thought.
In addition, Lyndall Fowness Urwick, a British management thinker and writer of all times was one of the greatest British Army Officers of the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
He also had an engineering background and held management positions both in the British military and public service.
He belonged to the administrative wing of the classical school of management theory and founded the Institute of Industrial Administration.
He was a management consultant who authored the ten-principles/articles on organisation building as indicated below: 1.
Objective – All organisations should have clearly defined objectives for which they are set up.
2.
Specialisation - The activities of members of an organisation should be defined and codified into simple functions.
3.
Coordination - The effort of individuals should be harmonised and coordinated towards a goal(s).
47 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 4.
Authority - There should be clearly defined lines of authority from the top to everyone in the organisation.
5.
Responsibility -The super-ordinate should assume absolute responsibility for the actions and inactions of his subordinates.
6.
Principles of definition – Duties, authority and responsibilities should be written and communicated to all concerned.
7.
Principles of correspondence - In every position, the responsibility and authority should correspond.
8.
Span of Control - Urwick was of the opinion that for effective control, a manager or an administrator should not supervise more than five or at most, six, direct subordinates whose work “inter- lock”; although where no interlocking exists, the control could be more.
9.
Principles of Balance - This implies that various units should be kept in balance.
10.
Principle of Continuity - The process of re-organisation and re- engineering should be a continuous exercise.
3.5 Max Weber (1864-1920) Max Weber was born on 21st of April 1864 in the German town of Erfurt.
His father was a lawyer and member of a family of prosperous textile manufacturers.
The Weber family moved to Berlin in 1869 where his father became a member of the German Reichstag as a National Liberal.
Max received a classical education and went on to study law at the university.
He did his military training and practiced as a lawyer in Berlin until 1893.
He lived in a period that led to catastrophe of the First World War when the European powers struggled for world mastery, and their societies transformed by the emergence of the class of industrial workers.
It was also a period of value crisis - the Christian world view was challenged by natural science on one hand and the glorification of power and freedom for self-expression on the other hand.
It was also the early period of establishing institutionalised social and economic research for policy purpose.
Although, Max obtained his academic qualification by studying the history of law and the ancient world, his social awareness drew him to the Association for Social policy.
While working as lawyer, he completed a major research project on the social and economic conditions of the Prussian peasantry in 1892.
In 1893, Max married Marianne, a second- generation cousin and a formidable intellectual that became a prominent leader of German feminism, surviving him until 1896.
His academic reputation grew and in 1894, he was called to a Chair of Economics in Freiburg from where he moved to a similar position in Heidelberg in 1896.
48 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Max gave up his teaching position in 1903.
Thus, the period between 1903 and 1920 were marked by a stream of writing, which continues to be a treasury of ideas for later scholars.
He wrote on topics as various as the Russian Revolution and the sociology of music, the religion of China and the development of the city industrial psychology and bureaucratic structure.
He also worked on the religion basis of human rationality and on the development of western capitalism as well as the philosophical implications of empirical social science, and consequently, he became a well-known political commentator.
In fact, it was the product of his works that eventually culminated in his conceptual framework for sociology, which was linked to his enormous study of the relationship between the economy and society.
In addition, as a journal editor, Max turned the ‘Achieve for Social Science and Social Policy’ into the major forum for applied social research.
He also worked strenuously to help found the German Sociological Society in 1910.
Furthermore, Max developed the concept of Typology of Bureaucracy and wrote a book titled The Theory of Social and Economic Organisation.
His study of the development of organisational theory and capitalism is still the first and provides the take-off point for sociological studies.
Max argued that a bureaucratic organisation has five basic attributes namely: 1.
Division of Labour - Work should be broken down into components and there should be specialisation of tasks.
2.
Hierarchy of Authority - Organisations and offices should have an arrangement of authority from top to the lowest of the organisational pyramid.
3.
Rules and Regulations - The rights and responsibilities of each position and individual should be stated and well defined.
4.
Impersonal Orientation - Official decisions should be taken without sentiments or prejudice.
5.
Career Orientation - Technical competencies is the key to career advancement and achievement and / or seniority should form the basis for promotion i.e.
super-ordinate’s assessment or evaluation of employees should be based on employees’ rare talents and must be defended against denial of promotions and arbitrariness to ensure continued loyalty to the organisation.
6.
Official Record Keeping – Official matters should be treated officially and appropriately documented for easy reference (see Adepoju, 1998; 2003; 2004; 2006).
Finally, in 1919, Max took another permanent chair in Munich and lectured in overflowing lecture theatres on basic concepts in sociology, 49 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION on economic history and on political science.
He laboured for years on his great work: the three-volume Sociology of Religion and the two volumes Economy and Society, although, he never saw them in print.
His other works include The Methodology of Social Science, The Protestant Ethic and The Spirit of Capitalism.
He died of pneumonia on 14thJune 1920.
3.6 Frederick Herzberg Fredrick Herzberg is one of the behavioural scientists who developed the ‘Job Enrichment and Two-Factor Theory on Motivation’ namely; Motivator/Hygiene/ Satisfiers and Maintenance/Dissatisfiers otherwise known as the concept of duality.
Motivator/ Satisfiers are intrinsic to the job and provide job satisfaction and self-actualisation.
They include achievement, recognition, advancement or growth and responsibilities.
On the other hand, Maintenance/Dissatisfiers/Hygiene variables are those variables that do not provide motivation but merely prevent dissatisfaction in an organisation.
They include the following: i.
Company policy and administration ii.
Supervision iii.
Interpersonal relations with peers, superiors and subordinates iv.
Working conditions v. Salary vi Status vii Job Security (see Adepoju, 1998; 2003; Pollard, 1978).
These variables are extrinsic in nature, and if employees perceive them to be deficient, they are likely to be unhappy, dissatisfied and less productive.
Although, this theory had been criticised by House and Wigdor (1967-369-390) and King (1970-18-31), it is no doubt a systematic approach with an easily understandable language.
Thus, the theory can be used to develop better conceptualisations rather than wholesome acceptance or rejection (Ajayi and Oni, 1992).
3.7 Douglas M. McGregor Douglas M. McGregor belonged to the behavioural / human relations school.
He discovered the human side of enterprise and formulated Theory X, a reallocation of pessimistic view of workers and Theory Y, which takes optimistic view of workers.
These are two opposing views or assumptions that represent more of the philosophy of the human relations schools (Adepoju, 2004).
50 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Theory X This theory states the following assumptions.
That; 1.
The average being has an inherent dislike for job and will avoid it, if possible.
2.
The average person lacks ambition, dislikes work and responsibility but prefers to be directed, coerced, controlled and threatened with punishment to get his/her adequate effort towards meeting organisation’s objectives.
However, he wants job security and economic rewards.
3.
The average person is resistant to change.
4.
The average person is self-centered and indifferent to corporate objectives and goals.
Theory Y This theory has the following assumptions.
That; 1.
The average person is not by nature passive/resistant to the organisation’s need.
That expression of physical and mental effort in the work place is as natural as play or rest.
2.
The average person does not lack ambition, dislike work and responsibilities and does not desire undue punishment, coerce, being controlled and threatened, rather, he learns under rewarding conditions to seek and accept responsibilities.
This is in contrast to item number (2) in Theory X.
3.
The average person learns under ideal situation.
He wants to exercise autonomy and creativity.
This is relevant to self- actualisation of Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of needs theory.
In other words, avoidance of responsibility, lack of ambitions and emphasis on security are generally consequences of experience, not inherent human characteristics (see Adepoju, 1998; 2003; 2004; 2006).
Essentially, Theory X simply implies that administrators must use both the ‘carrot and stick’ to motivate workers and as such, suited for organisations that are characterised by non-conformity, antagonism and mistrust.
On the other hand, Theory Y is based on trust, openness, concern for others and respect for individuality; thus Theory X and Theory Y are on the two extremes.
McGregor’s theory is generally regarded as an over-simplification of reality, where the work and worker are viewed either as X or as Y.
In reality, situations fall within the continuum that range from the X extreme to the Y extreme.
Furthermore, McGregor’s Theory X and 51 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Theory Y are useful to educational administrators and managers in the formulation of meaningful personnel policies.
These include selecting the competent, training the inexperienced, eliminating the incitement and providing incentive for staff to maintain group work and ensure maximum productivity.
In addition, while Theory X may prevent educational administrators from discovering and utilising the best potentials of the average teacher, Theory Y is considered ideal for efficiency and improved productivity in educational organisation.
3.8 Elton Mayo (1880-1949) Elton Mayo was an Australian by birth, a psychologist by training, and, according to some, Mayo was a natural public relations man by inclination.
At the time of the Hawthorne studies, he was a Professor of Industrial Research at the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration.
He was involved in the study of labour turnover and was approached by the executives of the Western Electric Company for advice on issues relating to fatigue and accidents.
The name of Professor Elton Mayo was mostly associated with what has come to be considered as the best - known and most widely quoted piece on social research in the 20th Century, namely, the Hawthorne Studies carried out at the Hawthorne Plant of the Western Electric Company in Chicago, U.S.A between 1927 and 1932.
The emphasis in the studies was on the workers rather than on the work itself.
Unlike Taylor and the scientific managers, the researchers at Hawthorne Plant were primarily concerned with studying people, especially in terms of their social relationship at work.
The conclusions of the Hawthorne studies are as follows: • Informal group leaders are often as important as formal leaders and they should be consulted by the organisation’s management to resolve issues and execute decisions in the organisations.
• Changing and modifying physical work conditions like varying rest period and increasing pay packages all tend not to sufficiently explain productivity.
Group social beliefs and attitudes to work were found to explain organisational productivity.
Attention should therefore be directed at the working of groups as a basis for effective administration and management of the organisation.
• Subjects taking part in an experiment often want to impress researchers in their behaviour in response to their awareness that an experiment is going on.
This confounding manifestation has been labelled the ‘Hawthorne effect’.
52 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.9 Mary Parker Follet Follet was an American philosopher and human relations consultant.
She first adopted social science to industry and developed new concept of management and relations with industrial groups.
Her works focused on group efforts in the organisation while paying less attention to individual efforts in industry.
She was noted for developing and advancing the human relations approach to the study of organisation.
3.10 Abraham H. Maslow Professor Abraham H. Maslow developed man’s basic needs, which he called hierarchy of needs theory on motivation.
He was a behavioural Psychologist who developed and contributed in no small measures towards motivation with the concept of basic needs of man, which he categorised into five levels namely: 1.
Physiological needs - food, clothing, shelter and rest 2.
Safety needs - projection against damper, job security 3.
Social/ love needs - love, affection, association with others 4.
Esteem/Ego needs - status, reputation and natural respect 5.
Self-Actualisation - self fulfillment.
3.11 Fritsz J. Roethlisberger Fritz Roethlisberger was a sociologist.
He worked along with Professor Elton Mayo, an industrial psychologist under the famous Hawthorne Studies between 1927 and 1932.
The result of the Hawthorne studies pointed out the importance of ‘human relations’ in an organisation.
Roethlisberger’s study emphasised ‘human relations’ from the point of view of top administrators who had interest in having the cooperation of their employees with a view to getting more out of them by social and psychological manipulations.
The results of the Hawthorne Studies also pointed to the fact that, what goes on inside the worker has greater effects on his productivity than what goes on outside i.e.
the physical conditions of the plant were not the only factors that affect workers productivity.
Secondly, economic incentives were not the only motivators of workers, and that, social sanctions, cliques and subgroups, were found to be important in organisations.
The conclusions of Fritz Roethlisberger and Elton Mayo’s Hawthorne Studies are highlighted in 3.8 above.
53 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.12 Frank B. Gilbreth and Lillian Gilbreth Frank and Lillian Gilbreth were husband, wife and work as team to develop the ideas of Taylor.
Frank Gilbreth gave up going to the university to become a bricklayer at the age of 17 in 1885.
He rose to become chief superintendent of a building contracting firm 10 years later and established his own building construction company shortly thereafter.
During this period, and quite independently of Taylor’s work, he became interested in wasted motions in work; by reducing the number of bricklaying motions from 18 to 5, he made possible the doubling of a bricklayer’s productivity with no greater expenditure of effort.
His contracting firm work soon gave way largely to consulting on the improvement of human productivity.
After meeting Taylor in 1907, he combined his ideas with Taylor’s to put scientific management into effect.
In undertaking his work, Frank Gilbreth was greatly aided and supported by his wife, Lillian.
She was one of the earliest industrial psychologists and received her doctorate degree in this field in 1915, nine years after her marriage and during the period when she was involved in having and raising her celebrated dozen children.
After her husband’s premature death in 1924, she carried on with his consulting business.
She was widely acclaimed as the “first lady of management” throughout her life, which ended in 1972 when she was 93.
Lillian Gilbreth’s interest in the human aspects of work and her husband’s interest in efficiency – the search for one best way of doing a given task – led to a rare combination of talents.
It is therefore not surprising that Frank Gilbreth long emphasised that in applying scientific-management principles; we must look at workers first and understand their personalities and needs.
It is also interesting, too, that the Gilbreths came to the conclusion that it is not the monotony of work that causes so much workers’ dissatisfaction but, management’s lack of interest in workers.
4.0 CONCLUSION While some of the postulations of the organisational theorists discussed in this unit overlap or are interrelated or complementary, others have been subjected to a wide range of criticisms.
It is important to emphasise here that the contributions of these pioneer scholars form the basis of management practice all over the world.
In other words, a clear appreciation and knowledge of their works and viewpoints would no doubt assist in the study of organisational theory either as a discipline or as a course of study.
Even though, the works of Taylor, Fayol, Gantt, Gulick, Urwick, Frank and Lillian Gilbreth were mainly in the field of industrial organisations or in the broad field of administration, the influences have left imprints on educational administrations.
Educational scholars such as Franklin Robbins (1913) and Elwood 54 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Cubberly (1916) adopted the scientific management theory for schoolteachers, supervisors and administrators/managers.
Similarly, Douglas McGregor’s (1960) theory x and theory y, Max Weber’s (1947) theory of social and economic organisations, Frederick Herzberg’s two- factor theory on motivation have all been adopted and used in educational administration and management.
This is in consonance with the trend in other fields of human endeavour such as public and business administration where the pioneering works of these scholars have been used as foundations and springboards for later scholars.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt how some renowned and pioneer organisational theorists such as Fredrick Winslow Taylor, Henry Gantt, Henri Fayol, Luther Gulick, Lyndall Urwick, Max Weber, Fredrick Herzberg, Douglas McGregor, Elton Mayo, Mary Parker Follet, Abraham Maslow and Fritzs Roethlisberger have contributed to the development of organisation and administrative practice.
Their brief backgrounds have been discussed in the unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly highlight the contributions of Fredrick Taylor, Henri Fayol and Elton Mayo to the development of organisational practice.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Despoja, T. L. (1998) Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003) Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications Adepoju, T. L. (2004) Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2006) School Management: An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig.)
Ltd. Robbins, S. P. (2000) Organisational Behaviour (Ninth Edition).
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H. (2001) Management: A Global Perspective (10th Edition).
New Delhi: McGraw-Hill.
Scott, W. G. and Mitchell, T. R. (1972) Organisation Theory: A Structural and Behavioural Analysis (Revised Edition).
Illinois: Richard D. Irwin Inc. 55 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION APPENDIX Appendix 1: Significant Administrative/Management Theorists by Contribution and Period Years of Theory or Model Publication or S/N Contributor Developed Significant Research 1 F.W.
Taylor Scientific Management 1911 2 Mayo Hawthorne Studies 1933 3 Barnard Executive Function 1938 4 Coch-French Michigan Studies 1948 5 Stogdill Ohio State Studies 1948 6 Homans Human Group 1950 7 Maslow Hierarchy of Needs 1954 Theory 8 McGregor Theory X and Theory Y 1957 9 Tannenbaum- Continuum of Leader 1957 Schmidt Behaviour 10 Blake-Mouton Managerial Grid 1964 11 Argyris Maturity-immaturity 1964 12 McClelland Achievement theory 1965 13 Odiorne Management by 1965 Objectives 14 Herzberg Motivation-Hygiene 1966 Factor Theory 15 Likert Systems 1-4 1967 16 Fiedler Contingency Model 1967 17 Reddin 3-D Management Style 1967 18 Olsson Management by 1968 Objective 19 Hersey- Situational Leadership 1969 Blanchard 20 Vroom-Yetten Contingency Model 1973 21 House-Mitchell Path-Goal Theory 1974 22 Vroom Expectancy Theory 1976 23 House Charismatic Leadership 1977 24 Burns Transformational 1978 Leadership 25 Kerr-Jermier Substitutes for 1978 Leadership 26 McCall- Fatal Leadership Flaws 1983 Lombardo 27 Greenleaf Servant Leadership 1983 56 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 28 Bennis-Nanus Leadership 1985 Competencies 29 Tichy-Devanna Transformational 1989 Leadership I 30 Manz Super Leadership 1989 31 Yukl Integrating Leadership 1989 Model 32 Covey Principle-centered 1991 Leadership 33 Fisher Leading Self-Directed 1993 Work Teams 34 Johnson SOAR Model 1994 35 Pansegrouw - 1995 36 Gyllenpalm - 1995 37 Whetter- - 1995 Cameron 38 Tichy Leadership Engine 1997 39 Ball DNA Leadership 1997 40 Byham-Cox Empowerment 1998 41 Fairholm Values-Based Leadership 1998 42 Cohen 8 Universal Laws of 1998 Leadership 43 Ulrich, Zenger, Result-Based Leadership 1999 Smallwood 44 Wheatley Leadership and the New 1999 Science Sources: i. Hersey, P., Blanchard K.H., Johnson, D.E.
(2002): Management of Organisational Behaviour; Leading Human Resources.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited.
Page 87 ii.
Babalola, J.B. and Atanda, A.I.
(2006) pp.
43-44 57 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Appendix 2: Other Significant Administrative/Management Theorists by Nationality and Contribution Theory or Model S/N Contributor Nationality Developed 1 Frederick W. Taylor United States Scientific Management 2 Frank and Lillian United States Time and Motion Gilbreth Studies 3 Mary Parker Follett United States Industrial Humanist 4 W. Edwards Deming United States Global Quality Pioneer 5 Charles Handy Ireland Organisation Theory 6 Tom Buras Great Britain Organisation Theory 7 G.M.
Stalker Great Britain Organisation Theory 8 Joan Woodward Great Britain Organisation Theory 9 Henri Fayol France, Europe Classical Management 10 Geert Hofstede Netherlands Cross-culture 11 Max Weber Germany Bureaucracy theory 12 Peter Drucker Austria Management by objectives 13 Fred Hedler Austria Leadership 14 Joseph M. Juran Romania Quality Improvement 15 Ichak Adizes Yugoslavia/Israel Managing Change 16 Elton Mayo Australia Directed Hawthorne Studies 17 Kaori Ishkawa Japan Quality Improvement Sources: i. Kreitner, R. (2002).
Management.
Delhi: A.I.T.B.
S. Publisher & Distributors.
Page 37 ii.
Babalola, J.B. and Atanda, A.I.
(2006) p. 44 58 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Appendix 3: Summary of the History of Administrative/Management Thought School of Contributor Year of Contribution Thought Publication Acknowledged as the father of scientific management.
His primary concern was to increase productivity through greater efficiency in production and increased pay for workers through the SCIENTIFIC 1.
F.W.
Taylor 1903-1912 application of scientific method.
His principles emphasised using science, creating group harmony and cooperation, achieving maximum output and developing workers.
Gantt called for scientific selection of workers and harmonious cooperation between labour “ 2.
H.L.
Gantt 1901 and management.
Developed the Gantt’s chart and stressed the need for training.
“ 3.
F. & L. 1900 Frank is known 59 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Gilbrethfor primarily for his time and motion studies.
Lillian, an industrial psychologist, focused on the human aspects of work and the understanding of workers’ personalities and needs Referred to as “the father of modern management theory”.
Divided industrial activities into six groups: technical, commercial, financial, security, accounting and MODERN managerial.
OPERATIONAL Henri Fayol 1916 Recognised the MANAGEMENT need for teaching management.
Formulated fourteen principles of management such as authority and responsibility, unity of command, scalar chain, and esprit de corps.
BEHAVIOURAL 1.
Hugo 1912 Application of MANAGEMENT Munsterberg psychology to industry and 60 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION management 2.
Walter Dill 1911 Application of “ Scott psychology to advertising, marketing, and personnel.
“ 3.
Max Weber 1946,1947 Theory of Bureaucracy 4.
Vilfredo 1896-1917 Referred to as “ Paretothe “the father of social systems approach” to organisation and management 5.
Elton Mayo Famous studies and F.J. 1933 at the “ Roethlisberger Hawthorne plant of Western Electric Company.
Influence of social attitudes and relationships of work groups on performance The task of managers is to SYSTEMS 1.
Chester 1938 maintain a THEORY Barnard system of cooperative effort in a formal organisation.
He suggested a comprehensive social systems approach to managing.
MODERN 1.
Peter F. 1974 Prolific writer MANAGEMENT Drucker on many general management topics.
2.
W. Edwards After Introduced 61 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION “ Demingin World War quality control I in Japan.
3.
Lawrence 1969 Observed that “ eventually people get promoted to level where they are incompetent.
4.
William Quchi 1981 Discussed “ selected Japanese managerial practices adapted in the U.S. environment.
5.Thomas Peter 1982 Identified ‘ and Robert characteristics Waterman of companies they considered excellent Sources: i. Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H. (2003).
Management: A Global Perspective New Delhi: Tata McGraw- Hill, pages 32/33 ii.
Babalola, J.B. and Atanda, A.I.
(2006).
Management Thoughts and Educational Management.
pp 45-47.
62 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION MODULE 2 THE STUDY OF HUMAN BEHAVIOUR IN THE ORGANISATION Unit 1 Understanding Human Behaviour and Conflicting Issues in the Organisation Unit 2 Motivation and Individuals in the Organisation Unit 3 An Overview of Motivational Theories Unit 4 Social Dimension of Educational Organisation UNIT 1 UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOUR AND CONFLICTING ISSUES IN THE ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Human Behaviour and Organisational Behaviour 3.1.1 Developmental Trends in Human Behaviour 3.2 Meaning, Nature and Types of Conflict in the Organisation 3.2.1 The Concept of Conflict 3.2.2 Nature of Conflict 3.2.3 Types of Conflict 3.3 Causes and Effects of Conflict in Educational Organisation 3.3.1 Causes of Conflict 3.3.2 Effects of Conflict 3.3.2.1 Arguments in favour of Conflict 3.3.2.2 Arguments against Conflict 3.4 Management Conflict in Educational Organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is obvious that while organisations’ objectives differ somewhat in various organisations; the individuals involved also have needs and objectives that are especially important to them hence human or employee behaviour also tends to differ in human organisation.
This is probably due to the different backgrounds of the employees.
They only 63 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION meet in the organisation and are working towards achieving the organisational goals and objectives.
The goals of the workers are not usually the same with the corporate goals.
Essentially, the organisation prescribes the rule of behaviour expected of the workforce.
Organisation, through the administrator, also helps its workers to see that they can satisfy their own needs and utilise their potentials and simultaneously, contribute to the aims of the enterprise.
When there is incongruence between the individual goals and organisational goals, then, conflict ensues, which may be positive or negative.
Administrators have roles to play in managing whatever conflict occurs through adoption of several strategies at their disposal.
Every administrator should thus have an understanding of the roles, individuality and personalities assumed of the workers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define human behaviour and organisational behaviour • highlight the developmental trends in human behaviour • define the concept conflict • identify the types of conflict • explain the causes and effects of conflict in the organisation • enumerate the strategies that can be adopted to manage conflict.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Human Behaviour and Organisational Behaviour Individual workers or employees should display certain behaviour that should be in consonance with their role expectations in the organisation.
Individual workers also have certain characteristics that differentiate them and make them distinct from their fellow workers.
The need to understand individual characteristics therefore informed the study of human and organisational behaviour.
The study of individuals and their characteristics is called human behaviour.
It is one of the essential components of organisational behaviour.
Organisational behaviour on the other hand is a field of study that investigates the impact that individuals, groups, and structures have on behaviour within organisations and the application of such knowledge towards improving an organisation’s effectiveness (Robbins, 2000).
64 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION From the above, three distinct areas are said to be indicators of behaviour in organisations.
These are (i) Individuals, (ii) Groups, and (iii) Structure.
The knowledge of these three components is very essential to ensure the realisation of organisation’s goals and objectives and of course, ensure that organisations work more efficiently and effectively.
It will be interesting to explain to you again that organisational behaviour is concerned with the study of what people do in an organisation and how that behaviour affects the performance of the organisation.
Since it is specifically concerned with employment-related situation, you should not be surprised to find that it emphasises behaviour as related jobs, work, absenteeism, employment, turnover, productivity, human performance, and management (Robbins, 2000).
Thus, human or employee’s behaviour is just one of the components that constitute organisational behaviour.
Equally, you have learnt that three distinct areas are emphasised in organisational behaviour.
These are the individuals, the groups and the structure.
The knowledge of these three components will help in making the organisation work more efficiently and effectively.
In the next section, we are going to discuss the developmental trends of human beings in the organisation.
3.1.1 Developmental Trends in Human Behaviour Over time, individuals working in the organisation tend to develop along specific developmental trends or dimensions.
According to Argyris (1972), these trends or dimensions are operationally definable and empirically observable.
These developmental trends in respect of human behaviour in the organisation are as follows: • Individual tends to develop from a state of being passive to a state of increasing activity as adult.
• He tends to develop from a state of dependence on others as infant to a state of relative independence as adult.
• He tends to develop from being capable of behaving in only a few ways as infant to being capable of behaving in many different ways as adult.
• He tends to develop from having a short time perspective ( i.e., the present largely determines behaviour) to a much longer time perspective ( i. e., behaviour is more affected by the past and the future).
65 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • He tends to develop from being in a subordinate position to aspiring to occupy a more equal and/or super-ordinate position.
• He tends to develop from a lack of awareness of the self to an awareness of and control over self.
These dimensions, according to Argyris (1972) are descriptive of a basic multi-dimensional developmental process along which the growth of individuals in our culture may be measured.
Presumably, every individual, at any given moment in time, could have his degree of development plotted along these dimensions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate between human behaviour and organisational behaviour.
3.2 Meaning, Nature and Type of Conflict in the Organisation In every organisation, conflict is inevitable no matter the size of the organisation.
The reason being that every individual is dependent on others in the organisation and once there is interaction, there is bound to be conflict.
In the same vein, since individual interests may clash with the organisational goals, conflict is likely to ensue (Adepoju, 2004).
3.2.1 The Concept of Conflict Conflict has been conceptualised as the behaviour by a person or group of people that is purposely designed to inhibit the attainment of goals by another person or group.
This purposeful inhibition can be either active or passive.
McFarland (1979) defined conflict as “a situation in which persons or group disagree over means or ends, and try to establish their views in preference to others”.
Human behaviour is so complex; different objectives of individuals are brought into an organisation hence the moment these various goals / objectives interfere with another or with the goals of the organisation, conflict exists.
Conflict connotes the act of conscious opposition between two identifiable human elements over incompatible goals.
It is possible for opposition to exist and where this is resolved or stopped by mere explanation between the parties involved, peace would only hold when the goals are compatible.
Furthermore, for a clear understanding of the concept of conflict, it is necessary to distinguish conflict from competition and tension.
Conflict, unlike competition involves one person thwarting the efforts of other.
In conflict, it is impossible for the parties involved to laugh with each 66 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION other, as we normally have in competition.
During conflict between two parties, there would be a perceived divergence of interest, which may result into hostility or mutual suspicion or even court action.
However, conflict may result into tension.
3.2.2 Nature of Conflict Conflict from a popular opinion is necessary for the development of strong interpersonal relationships and hence for strong group loyalties (McNleil, 1965).
Through conflict, interpersonal tension and differences which otherwise would be continually expressed in indirect ways can be resolved.
Such resolution increases mutual feeling of confidence and trust among the contending parties and provides greater confidence that future differences can be resolved.
Succinctly put, conflict is inevitable in a period of changing values and occurs on many fronts (Adepoju, 2004).
Conflict establishes conditions, which may enable a group to modify its goals, values, norms, structures, and programmes.
Conflict is tolerated more readily when the contenders sense that they are committed to common objectives and that, only their means of achieving the objectives differ.
Conflict is most intense when it arises out of close relationships.
Thus, conflict between two persons within a unit in an organisation tends to be stronger than a similar conflict in an organisation as a whole.
One must admit that conflict is sometimes dysfunctional and destructive but it sometimes helps the organisation to grow.
A relationship strengthened through resolution of prior conflict, is more vulnerable to disruption.
3.2.3 Types of Conflict Normally, conflicts fall under four major headings in organisations (the school system inclusive).
i.
Individual Conflict: This is where individuals believe that others have infringed on their rights through their actions and inactions.
Here, the objective of the individual is at variance with that of the organisation or other individuals in the organisation.
ii.
Group Conflict: This is also known as collective conflict and it arises from unresolved individual conflict.
It may involve a group of workers (e.g teachers or students in the school system).
It may be school management versus a group of teachers, students versus school authority e.t.c.
iii.
Inter – personal conflict: This occurs between members of an organisation, e.g.
teachers versus teacher, teacher versus students, students versus student.
67 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION iv.
The Inter – Union conflict: This occurs between two unions or more in an organisation, e.g.
graduate versus non – graduate teachers, teaching staff versus non – teaching staff, and professional teachers versus non – professional teachers.
3.3 Causes and Effects of Conflict in Organisation 3.3.1 Causes of Conflict Causes of conflict are discussed under two major headings; internal and external conflicts.
Internal conflict refers to disagreements within the organisation while external conflict occurs outside the organisation but have remote effect on the organisation in question.
The variables that contribute to them are discussed below.
Causes of Internal Conflict i.
Poor Communication: This is when communication is distorted and creates a gap between the members of the school organisation.
When this communication gap exists, there is no official channel of information thus; there will be gossip.
A good administration needs to ensure that there is free flow of information to avoid communication gap or misinformation.
ii.
Size of the Organisation: When the size and scope of the organisation grow bigger there is bound to be conflict.
In the school system, the bigger the school, the higher the propensity for conflict.
iii.
Wages/Salary: This is the most potent factor that can cause conflict within the organisation.
Workers are always seeking for better pay and good conditions of service.
iv.
Changes: This has to do with the re-organisation of the structure of the organisation.
Human beings, naturally, do not like changes; hence, they will always resist reorganisation in the system’s structure.
v. Policy: Some policies can cause conflict in the organisation particularly, when staff -members are not adequately informed and carried along.
External Conflict i.
Government Policy: Some government policies affect the members of the organisation and by extension cause conflict in such organisation.
For instance, if there is increase in fuel price to which the labour union is reacting through strikes, this will affect workers and hence cause conflict in the organisation.
ii.
Fear of Technology: When there is the fear among workers that modern technology will threaten their jobs, they will resist the administrator’s attempt to introduce one.
68 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION iii.
Political and Economic Factors: Political and economic instability can cause crises in the organisation such as school system, e.g.
the June 12 crises (1993 to 1998).
iv.
International Influence: The International Labour Organisation has been having great influence on labour laws in Nigeria.
The human rights activities and series of reports on labour activities in the country can also inform disruptions in the organisation.
3.3.2 Effects of Conflict in Educational Organisation Professor Edwin Flippo observed, “A total absence of conflict will be unbelievable, boring and strong indication that such conflicts are being suppressed”.
From the above expression, it becomes pertinent that conflict should be allowed, resolved and finally managed.
3.3.2.1 Arguments in favour of Conflict in the School Organisation a.
Like other organisations, conflicts strengthen the educational administrators or managers.
It will show whether they are experts or not because the way they handle conflict can make or mar the organisation.
b.
In addition, constructive conflict, which leads to criticisms, will put the school administrator on his toes as to the formulation of policies in the organisation.
c. Conflict will also enable the educational administrator devise strategies for dealing with staff members accordingly.
d. Conflict and conflict resolution will make the students and teachers to be aware of their duties, obligations and responsibilities.
3.3.2.2 Arguments against Conflict in the School Organisation a.
Conflicts, if not properly resolved, can lead to the disruption of school activities.
In addition, poor interpersonal relationship in the school system can lead to mutual distrust and suspicion, which may hamper the attainment of organisational goal.
b.
Conflicts, if not properly and promptly resolved, can lead to riots in the school system, which may in turn lead to physical destruction of lives and properties.
c. Conflicts, if not resolved will generally lead to the abortion of educational organisation’s goal attainment.
69 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.4 Managing Conflict in Educational Organisation Fredrick, A.S. et al (1980) as cited by Adepoju (2004), identified two broad techniques of managing conflict in the organisation.
These are the interpersonal conflict management and structural conflict management; that can be applied in school system for conflict resolution.
1.
Interpersonal Conflict Management This is the technique of dealing with personal conflicts within the school system.
They are numerous and range from the use of force by a superior over a subordinate to the problem solving approach.
• Use of force – This is where the principal employs official authority in compelling his teachers and students to accept a policy.
Here, the expression “he may not be right but he’s still the boss” applies.
The party for which the decision / policy was directed may not agree with the results, but if he or she wants to stay within the organisation, the directive must be respected and accepted.
• Withdrawal- This is where both parties to a conflict withdraw or avoid themselves.
Here, conflict is reduced, but the reason that originates the conflict remains.
• Smoothing - Smoothing is the principal’s attempt to provide a semblance of peaceful co-operation by presenting an image that all members of the school community are one big family.
With this approach, problems are rarely permitted to come to the surface; but the potential for conflict remains.
• Compromise - Neither party gets all it wants when compromise is used.
For instance, school management may offer one hundred naira per hour for afternoon lessons while teachers may seek for one hundred and fifty naira.
A compromise figure of one hundred and twenty naira may result in a settlement of conflict, but neither side may be happy with it.
• Mediation and Arbitration - Some principals and head teachers may engage community leaders or PTA executive members to assist in resolving the conflict.
Where the vice principal for example, is in conflict with the senior teachers in the school and if this is getting out of hand for the principal, he may engage the above-mentioned group as arbitrators or mediators.
The arbitrator assumes the authority to act as a judge in making a decision.
The decision rendered is binding on parties involved, while a mediator can only suggest, recommend and attempt to keep the two parties talking in the hope of reaching a solution.
• Corporate Goals- This is where a goal that supersedes the personal goals of two opposing factions is encountered.
If the 70 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION school is in danger of being closed down by the supervising ministry after the result of an inspection, staff and school management, may put aside their conflict and work towards a common goal for the survival of the school system.
• Problem solving – This is an open and trusting exchange of views and facts among the members of the school community.
With this approach, individuals can disagree with each other’s view and remain friends.
It is a healthy approach, which rarely produces a person who is completely right or person who is completely wrong.
With problem solving, a person is encouraged to bring difficulties into the open without fear of reprisal.
When this occurs, a situation that appears to be a major problem may evolve into only a minor instance, which is easily resolved ( Adepoju, 2003; 2004).
2.
Structural Conflict Management • Procedural Changes: If the organisational procedure is changed, many difficulties will be resolved.
• Organisational Changes: The organisation can be changed to promote or reduce conflict.
To reduce undeserved conflict within an organisation, transfers of incompatible workers in the same unit of the organisation can be made.
• Problem – Solving Stimulation – Physical works have been used effectively to reduce or eliminate conflict.
If a manager desires to stimulate a problem-solving atmosphere, open office arrangement is permitted.
• Expand Resources – A source of conflict caused by incompatibility of goals can be reduced if resources can be expanded (see Adepoju, 2003; 2004).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In your own view, do you think conflict is good and can help the organisation to grow?
Explain.
4.0 CONCLUSION The need to study human and organisational behaviour is very expedient in any organisation if such organisation is to become effective and efficient.
Organisational behaviour on the other hand, is a field of study that investigates the impact that individuals, groups, and structures have on behaviour within organisations for the purpose of applying such knowledge toward improving an organisation’s effectiveness.
The knowledge of human and organisational behaviour will help inform administrators about dimensions of development of their employees.
It 71 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION is established in the context of this unit that conflict is inevitable in any human organisation no matter the size.
The individual employee tends to have his interest at variance with the goals of the organisation and when this occurs, the result is conflict.
Administrators should therefore be pragmatic by adopting effective strategies toward resolving conflict in the organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit, the meaning of human behaviour and organisational behaviour as well as the developmental trends in human being.
Equally, the meaning, nature and types of conflict that exist in the organisation, and the causes and effects of these conflicts were discussed.
Finally, we examined the strategies that should be adopted to manage conflicts.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give a concise definition of Organisational Behaviour.
2.
As an administrator in the organisation, explain the strategies that you will adopt to manage conflict if it occurs.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T. L. (2003).
Trade Unionism and Culture of Violence and Resistance: A Social System Perspective.
Enugu: Hope Publications Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications Argyris, C. (1972).
Human Behaviour in Organisations, in Nord, W.
(Ed.).
Concepts and Controversy in Organisational Behaviour.
California: Goodyear Publishing Co. Inc. Robbins, S. P. (2000) Organisational Behaviour (9th Edition).
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall.
72 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 2 MOTIVATION AND INDIVIDUALS IN THE ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Motivation 3.1.1 Intrinsic Motivation 3.1.2 Extrinsic Motivation 3.2 Types of Motivation 3.3 Importance of Motivation in School Organisation 3.4 Human Factors and Workers’ Productivity 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is no doubt that the concept ‘motivation’ occupies the centre position in any human organisation.
In an organisation where the workers are not motivated, the overall production would be affected while labour turnover may be experienced.
Management of any human organisation should note that, individual workers should first be studied before motivating them.
In other words, what can motivate an individual worker may not be the source of motivation for another worker.
For this reason, the needs of individuals need to be ascertained before applying motivation mechanism (see Adepoju, 2008).
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define motivation • discuss the types of motivation in the organisation • explain how an individual can be motivated in the organisation • discuss the importance of motivation in educational organization.
73 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Motivation Motivation according to Adepoju (1999) refers to that internal or intrinsic drive that compels an individual to act or behave (positively) in a certain manner.
It is an incentive that encourages and drives a person to act.
Motivation as Adepoju (1999) explained is also the willful desire to direct one’s behaviour towards goal attainment.
It refers to the complex forces, drives, needs, tension, states or other mechanisms that starts and maintain or that spur voluntary activity directed towards the achievement of personal goals.
In the school system, motivation can be referred to as those forces, inducements, internal or external drives and reinforcements which urge pupils to learn better and which encourage or stimulate teachers to increase their productivity or performance.
It involves all that can engender, direct and sustain pupils or teachers’ action and behaviour towards effective teaching-learning outcomes (Adepoju 1998; 1999).
Robbins (2001) defines motivation as the processes that account for an individual’s intensity, direction, and persistence of effort toward attaining a goal.
Weihrich and Kootz (2003) opined that, motivation is a general term applying to the entire class of drives, desires, needs, wishes, and similar forces.
To say that managers motivate their subordinates is to say that they do those things, which they hope will satisfy these drives and desires and induce the subordinates to act in a desired manner.
Staw (1983) refers to motivation as ‘a proponent state that energizes and guides behaviour’ whereas, Mondy, Holmes and Flippo (1930) defined motivation as the process of influencing or stimulating a person to take action that will accomplish desired goal.
Motivation has been a very crucial factor in the progress of any individual or organisation (such as school system).
It could be likened to grease used on a machine to make it more effective if it is becoming stiff and unproductive.
It needs to be stressed that during the process of motivating the workers in the organisation, it is essential for the management of such organisation to know that, the factors that motivate one set of workers to work positively (or that brought satisfaction to them) may be sources of dissatisfaction to others.
This is because; the needs of the individuals are different.
An active, agile and happy teacher for instance, may be demoralised and discouraged by unfavourable conditions around the working environment.
His conditions or attitude has a positive correlation to his work.
Thus, a demoralised teacher will perform lower than expected and 74 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION if this occurs, then a serious crisis is looming in the school system.
Conversely, a teacher with high morale, enthusiasm and sense of belongingness will definitely reflect these in his performances.
The result will be an increase in productivity, which will lead to the achievement of the purpose for setting up the school system.
These motivational factors also lead to less friction in the working environment, initiative, better efficiency, increased output and zero wastage of the resources committed to education (Adepoju, 2004).
Teacher’s morale could be dampened by stiffening, unfair, frustrating or alienating school rules or policies.
In addition, the economic condition of his environment may have an adverse effect on him.
For example, periods of rising cost of living without commensurate pay or lack of comparison of the teacher’s condition with similar school may demoralise a teacher.
The teacher’s psychology towards work and productivity may be affected by the management-subordinate relationship, that is, lack of recognition of the good job done by the school administrator or government.
Poor human relations, lack of delegation of responsibility and authority could also contribute to a downturn in teacher’s behaviour and thus, seriously hamper his productivity (Herzberg two-factor theory on motivation captures the idea expressed here).
In motivation, there are some factors to be considered; these are the management and climate that tend to vary from time to time.
As indicated above, one thing may motivate an employee and at the time turn off another.
Human beings tend to have a variety of motives and needs; hence, it is almost impossible to satisfy them.
These needs therefore, underlie the motivation of every individual.
In other words, the more you are able to satisfy the needs, the greater the motivation and the less you are able to satisfy the needs, the less the motivation.
Once a need is satisfied, that need is no longer a source of motivation and performance rather, another need automatically replaces the need that has been satisfied.
The essence of motivation is to encourage the worker to increase their (i) Productivity and (ii) Satisfaction.
A considerable amount of studies have been undertaken to identify those motivational factors, which relate to job performance.
Although, the research results are controversial, they have practical implications that need attention.
75 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION From the above explanations, the following could be deduced: i.
Motivation relates to both human behaviour and job performance ii.
Motivation involves what can engender, direct and sustain human action or behaviour iii.
Motivation involves certain ‘forces’ acting on or within a person (to initiate and direct behaviour) (Peretomode, 1999, p. 112) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Provide at least three definitions on motivation.
3.2 Types of Motivation There are two types of motivation; the intrinsic motivation and the extrinsic motivation.
3.2.1 Intrinsic Motivation This occurs when a pupil decides to learn or achieve educational goal for his own sake.
That is, the desire to learn comes from within the pupil himself.
He does not attach or expect to get any external reward.
He engages in classroom activities as a matter of interest not influence.
When a pupil or student is reading for pleasure and not necessarily for examination, intrinsic motivation is being displayed.
Largely, intrinsic motivation reduces the task of the teacher in the classroom as extra effort may not be expended before the pupils with great interest or desire could be trained or taught.
This type of motivation according to Adepoju (1999) is endogenously inclined; it operates within a person or system without any need for external assistance or influence.
3.2.2 Extrinsic Motivation This type of motivation according to Adepoju (1999) occurs when an external reward is attached to performance or certain activities in the school and classroom.
This reward is attached in order to induce learners to learn and achieve certain educational objective or goals.
In addition, when a worker is promised a reward if he completes a task within a specified period and he agrees to do so, this is an extrinsic motivation.
When extrinsic motivation is displayed, the pupil does not learn for his own sake or for pleasure, but as a means of obtaining some desired goals, which are externally related to such activity.
Unlike intrinsic motivation, the pupil reads or performs certain classroom assignments or activities purposely for external reward such as getting prizes, praise or to do better in examination.
This type of motivation according to 76 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Adepoju (1999) is exogenously inclined.
It only occurs because of external or foreign influence.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Briefly distinguish intrinsic motivation from extrinsic motivation.
3.3 Importance of Motivation in School Organisation Motivation is very important in school organisation for the teachers and pupils alike as it will ensure the realisation of school goals.
Let us examine the points highlighted below: 1.
Motivation encourages pupils to learn and achieve the purpose of going to school 2.
Motivation helps teachers to arouse pupils’ interest and thereby stimulate them to learn 3.
It leads to higher achievement on the part of the pupils 4.
It helps teachers to appreciate and understand the differences in behaviours and performance of pupils in the classroom 5.
It reduces the incidence of truancy and other forms of indisciplined behaviours among the pupils in the school 6.
It brings about cordiality between the teacher and the pupils 7.
It leads to effective classroom management and control 8.
When teachers are motivated by the head of the school or the government, they work better and possibly have their productivity increased 9.
Motivation increases the morale, enthusiasm and sense of belonging of the teachers 10.
Motivation increases the satisfaction of the teachers and if there is job satisfaction, the tendency is there for job performance to be increased (Adepoju, 1999).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Why is motivation important in the school organisation?
77 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.4 Human Factor and Worker’s Productivity All sorts of encouragement and recognition of work performance have been confirmed to be good sources of motivation that can bring about high school productivity.
Taylor (1911) in his Principles of Scientific Management came up with some ideas and the fastest methods for performing a given task without due consideration to the human factor.
The principles were applied in some organisations but, resisted in the school setting.
The critics of “Taylorism” in educational organisations argued that teachers deal with the minds of human beings.
This, to them means that, the obsession with the physical aspects of human activities implied in Taylor’s doctrine is practically not in consonance with the goals of education.
Apart from this, experts have continued to criticise Taylor’s doctrine in educational setting because it tends to allow teachers and head teachers to lose sight of the individual difference in ability, interest and goals that predominate within the entire school setting and which, cannot be absolutely eliminated.
Campbell, et al (1971), concluded that Taylor took a narrow view of management.
He tended to ignore the psychological or personal aspect of mobilising human effort.
This is in essence to say that, Taylor and his followers such as Gant, Gibreth among others failed, to recognise the human factor to increase workers productivity.
Mayo’s (1933) Hawthorne studies have indeed shown how important the human factor is in increasing productivity.
The studies, which started in 1924 and ended in 1932 involved several stages.
Most interesting of the experiments was the ambition to find out other factors that could motivate productivity of workers.
Focus was then given to the environment hence; the result was an increased productivity that was not consistent.
The studies however, discovered that workers love freedom.
They want to interact socially, to belong to group (informal group) and indeed participate in the management.
The recognition given to the informal group is called group dynamics.
The studies have also shown that the recognition given to the human factor can bring about increased productivity.
(see discussion of Hawthorne studies in Module 1, Unit 5 under Human Relations School).
According to Synder and Anderson (1986), since Mayo’s Hawthorne studies, the field of motivation has included a “drive state” which activates behaviours towards something desirable.
Several studies (Knezevich, 1973; McGregor, 1960; Ivancerich, 1976) have identified goals, both personal and work, as perhaps the single most important 78 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION stimulants for worker’s productivity.
House (1973) developed the path- goal theory for workers’ motivation.
The assumption is that; Workers productivity is likely to increase if management actually assists the worker in achieving his or her work goals.
(P.5) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Briefly explain what you know about human factor and workers’ productivity.
4.0 CONCLUSION As discussed in this unit, motivation is a very crucial factor in the progress of any individual or organisation.
It is the process through which individuals are driven to increase their actions or performance either by internal (intrinsic) or external (extrinsic) forces.
Motivation relates to both human behaviour and job performance, it also involves what can engender, direct and sustain human action or behaviour.
Organisations’ management should always take the concept as a prime factor through which organisational objectives could be realised.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit, the meaning and types of motivation.
In addition, our discussed has also addressed the importance of motivation in school organisation.
Equally, the human factor and workers’ productivity vis-à-vis Taylor’s’ human relations’ ideas have been examined.
What you learnt here will be very useful for you since the next unit will address motivational theories.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Justify the reasons why individual workers should be motivated in human organisation.
79 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1999).
Introduction to Primary Education System in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications Adepoju, T.L.
(2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2008).
Motivational variables and academic performance of urban and rural secondary school students in Oyo State, Nigeria.
KEDI Journal of Educational Policy (Korea), 5,2, 23-39.
Flippo, L.B.
(1975).
Personnel Management 6th Ed.
New York: McGraw Hill Book Company.
Peretomode, V.F.
(2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishing Ltd. Robbins, S.P.
(2001).
Organisational Behaviour: New Delhi: Prentice- Hall.
80 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 3 AN OVERVIEW OF MOTIVATIONAL THEORIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Abraham Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory 3.1.1 Propositions of Hierarchy of Needs Theory 3.2.2 Classifications of Hierarchy of Needs Theory 3.2 Herzberg Two-Factor Theory 3.3 McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y 3.4 Handy’s Satisfaction – Incentive-Intrinsic Theory 3.5 Victor Vroom’s Expectancy Theory 3.6 Mc Clelland’s Theory of Needs 3.7 Pay as a Motivator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 2, you studied the meaning, types and importance of motivation.
In this unit, we are going to examine the various theories on motivation and their applications in organisation, specifically, in educational organisation.
You will also learn about the various issues raised by motivation theorists.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify various theories on motivation • explain the arguments and issues raised in each of the theories • appraise each of the theories.
81 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Abraham Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory In 1943, Abraham Maslow, a renowned psychologist, formulated his theory of human motivation known as Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, which attempted to explain human behaviour in hierarchy.
3.1.1 Propositions of Needs Theory The theory, according to Obilade (1989) and Adepoju (1998; 1999; 2003) has the following four propositions.
1.
Man’s needs are arranged in a hierarchy of importance.
2.
Man is continually insatiable (i.e.
wanting); therefore, all needs are never fully satisfied.
1.
Once a need is fully well satisfied, it no longer motivates behaviour.
Man is then motivated by the next higher level of unsatisfied need.
2.
The needs are interdependent and overlapping.
Since one need does not disappear when another emerges, all needs tend to be partially satisfied in each area.
3.1.2 Classification of Needs Motivation in human being according to Maslow can be categorised into five.
These are: (1) Physiological needs; (2) Safety needs; (3) Social needs (Love needs); (4) Esteem needs (Ego); and (5) Self Actualisation need.
82 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Fig.2: Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs These five categories of needs are operative in human beings and therefore can motivate them.
1.
Physiological Needs These are survival needs as food, air, water, sex, shelter etc., which are very important when they have not been satisfied.
These needs must be satisfied before any others.
If one is hungry, what preoccupies his mind is how to get food rather than safety, love, esteem and self - actualisation; all these will be meaningless to him.
83 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 2.
Safety Needs Following the satisfaction of the physiological needs, are the safety needs.
Safety needs become important when physiological needs have been adequately satisfied.
These needs include, job security, assignment, pension, contract, and protection from danger, illness, economic disaster, physical or psychological abuse.
3.
Social (Love) Needs Social needs tend to be meaningless unless the safety needs have been adequately satisfied; social needs become a motivator when other needs below can no longer motivate.
The need for belongingness, association, acceptance by one’s fellows, class and team become significant and motivates one before honour, promotion and title (esteem needs).
4.
Esteem Needs Esteem needs do not become motivators until the lower level needs have been reasonably satisfied.
Experts have categorised esteem needs into two namely; the type that comprise of self-esteem (i.e.
self-confidence, achievement, knowledge and independence), and the type which involves the need for approval, prestige and recognition of one’s work and respect from one’s fellows.
These needs must be satisfied before the last one in the hierarchy.
5.
Self-Actualisation Needs These are the top-most needs in the hierarchy.
They only become motivators after the lower level needs have been successfully satisfied.
According to Maslow, these needs imply the desire to become everything that one is capable of becoming in his / her lifetime.
This level displays the personal potential of an individual after other needs are fulfilled.
It is however, noteworthy to emphasise here that not everyone reaches this stage.
3.2 Herzberg’s Two-Factor Theory (Hygiene Factor and Motivators) Herzberg (1959) found out that in an organisation, the events, which lead to satisfaction, were of different kinds from those, which lead to dissatisfaction.
Job satisfiers relate to job content, whereas, dissatisfiers relate to the job context.
Among Herzberg’s studies emerged the two- factor theory on motivation.
The satisfiers were labelled “motivators” and the dissatifiers, “hygiene factors”.
Workers were categorised into two, motivators and hygiene seekers.
Herzberg observed that the 84 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION hygiene seekers are interested primarily in working condition factors; when problems are resolved with the conditions, workers’ productivity does not necessarily increase.
Only the motivators, those who are interested in the job content, actually contribute to organisational productivity (Synder and Anderson, 1986).
Satisfiers (motivation factors) include achievement, recognition, work itself, responsibility, and advancement whereas, dissatisfiers (hygiene factors) include, salary (money), possibility of growth, interpersonal relations, status, supervision, policy and administration, working conditions, job security and personal life.
From Herzberg’s observations, satisfiers (motivation factors) stimulate workers’ performance and satisfaction whereas; dissatisfiers (hygiene factors) tend to prevent dissatisfaction but do not lead to satisfaction or to productivity.
3.3 McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y In his book, The Human Side of the Enterprise, published in 1960, McGregor identified two noticeable different sets of assumptions made by managers about their employees.
These are theory X and theory Y.
These two theories developed his ideas of leadership and motivation.
Theory X Assumptions: 1.
The average human being has an inherent dislike for work and will avoid it if possible.
2.
Because of this human characteristic of dislike for work, most employees must be coerced, controlled, directed and threatened with punishment to get them to work.
3.
The average human being prefers to be directed, wishes to avoid responsibility, has relatively little ambition and wants security.
4.
The average person is by nature indolent (he works as little as possible).
5.
He is by nature resistant to change.
This theory emphasises the negative side of an average worker.
Theory Y Assumptions: 1.
The expenditure of physical and mental efforts in work is as natural as play or rest.
2.
External control and the treat of punishment are not the only means of bringing about efforts toward organisational objectives to which they are committed.
85 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.
Commitment to objectives is a function of rewards associated with their achievement.
4.
The average human being learns, under proper conditions not only to accept; but also to seek responsibility.
5.
The capacity to exercise a relatively high degree of imagination, ingenuity and creativity is the solution of organisational problems widely and not narrowly distributed in the population.
6.
Under the condition of modern industrial life, the intellectual potentialities of the average human being are only partially realised or utilised.
This theory emphasises the positive side of an average worker.
3.4 Handy’s Theory on Motivation Handy propounded three theories on motivation as follows: • Satisfaction theory • Incentive theory • Intrinsic theory 1.
Satisfaction Theory: This theory is based on the assumption that a satisfied worker will work harder.
Although, there is little evidence to support this assumption, however, there is possibility for satisfaction to reduce labour turnover and absenteeism.
In other words, if a worker is highly satisfied, his level of performance will increase and he is likely not to engage in absenteeism, but may not necessarily increase individual productivity.
2.
Incentive Theory: This theory is based on the assumption that individual will work harder in order to obtain a desired reward (e.g.
money).
Incentive Theory works under the following conditions: i.
If individual perceives the increased reward to the extra-effort.
ii.
If performance can be measured and clearly attributed to that individual.
iii.
If individual wants that particular kind of reward.
iv.
If increased performance will not become the new minimum standard.
3.
The Intrinsic Theory: This theory is based on the belief that people will work hard in response to factors in the work itself that is the content of the job (participation, responsibility etc.)
The contacts that employees have at work are very important and that the boredom and repetitiveness of tasks are themselves factors that reduce motivation.
86 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.5 Vroom’s Expectancy Theory The development of this theory otherwise called Valence- Instrumentality-Expectancy (VIE) theory is mainly the result of the work of V.H.
Vroom (1964) and E.E.
Lawyer in the United States during the 1960s.
The theory recognises that people will only work when they have a reasonable expectation that their actions will lead to desired goals.
They will perform better if they believe that, money or other incentives will follow effective performance.
Therefore, if money has a positive value for an individual, higher performance will follow.
It places emphasis on performance noting that, there must be a clearly recognised goal relationship between performance and outcome.
Motivation (M) is a function of the Expectancy (E) of attaining a certain outcome on performing a certain activity multiplied by the Value (V) of the outcome for the performer.
M = f (EXV) = O Where: M = Motivation E = Expectation V = Valence or value O = Outcome f = Functional notation Outcomes that are highly valued and having high expectations of being realised will direct a person to make a greater effort in his task.
Outcomes with high expectations, which are less highly valued (or even disliked), will reduce effort expended.
3.6 McClelland’s Theory of Needs McClelland (1962) identified three types of motivating needs.
1.
The need for power: People with a high need for power usually seek positions of leadership in order, to influence and control.
2.
The need for affiliation: People who need a sense of belonging and membership of a social group tend to be concerned with maintaining good relationships.
3.
The need for achievements: People who need achievement have a strong fear of failure.
Such people tend toward personal responsibility, moderately difficult goals and acceptable, realistic levels of risk taking.
87 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION McClelland’s study therefore suggested that: a.
Entrepreneurs tend to rank high on need for achievement and high on need for power.
b.
Chief Executives of large companies, having achieved their ambitions tend to rank low on need for achievement but high on need for power.
c. Successful up and coming managers rank high on need for achievement.
d. A need for achievement can be taught to managers on training courses.
This has potentially important inferences for management development and training programmes.
3.7 Pay as a Motivator This is based on the principle that people are willing to work harder to obtain more money.
The work of Elton Mayo and Tom Lupton had shown however that there are several constraints, which can nullify this basic principle.
These constraints are, 1. the average worker is generally capable of influencing the timings and control systems used by management and so can adjust the figures.
2. workers remain suspicious that, if they achieved high levels of output and earnings then management would alter the basis of incentives rates to reduce future earnings.
3. generally, the workers conform to group norm and the need to have the approval of their fellow workers by conforming to that norm is more important than the money urge.
4. rates of pay is more useful as a means of keeping an organisation adequately staffed by competent, qualified people rather than as a means of getting them to work harder.
5. when employee expects a regular annual review of a salary, increases in pay will not motivate them to work harder.
Despite this, as Adepoju (2002) posited, money can be a motivator, depending on the individuals’ need for money.
Money is not usually an end in itself but it provides the means of buying the things an individual wants, to satisfy his physiological, safety, social, esteem and self actualisation needs.
It is generally agreed that if there is a clear, short- term and direct link between extra effort, results and higher pay then, an individual can be considerably motivated by money e.g.
salesmen commission.
88 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION Motivation is an extremely complex process, which is rarely predictable in the end.
What motivates one man may not motivate another.
What motivates a man at one time may not at another.
However, it is clear that motivation is closely linked with and has important consequences for organisational demand, reward systems, status system and leadership coordination and communication.
Motivation is therefore part of the system of the working environment.
It may be derived from the situation as much as cause it by recognising some of the principles and forces involved in motivating others.
Administrators should find out a well balanced but flexible system in which their members of staff can work with high morale and job satisfaction.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt different perceptions of motivation as advanced by experts.
You have also learnt different theories on motivation as well as their assumptions.
I tried to raise an issue on pay vis-à-vis motivation.
The reason is to let you see how human behaviour can or cannot be influenced by money.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Choose two of the motivation theories discussed in this unit and apply them to real life situation in the school system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1999) Introduction to Primary Education System in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications Adepoju, T.L.
(2004) Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2008) Motivational Variables and Academic Performance of Urban and Rural Secondary School Students in Oyo State, Nigeria.
KEDI Journal of Educational Policy (Korea), 5,2, 23-39.
Flippo, L.B.
(1975) Personnel Management 6th Ed.
New York: McGraw Hill Book Company.
Peretomode, V.F.
(2003) Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical perspective .Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishing Ltd. Robbins, S.P.
(2001).
Organisational behaviour.
New Delhi: Prentice- Hall.
89 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 4 SOCIAL DIMENSION OF EDUCATIONAL ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Social Dimension of School Organisation 3.2 School as an Educational Organisation 3.3 Key Concepts Guiding the Operation of School Organisation 3.4 School Organisation and Social Change 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will study the social dimension of school organisation.
The arguments, which support the thesis that school is a social or human organisation, will be re-echoed here.
A social organisation is essentially, a human organisation, which consists of a number of individuals and group.
School organisation is a typical example of a social system of organisation in which most systems are open and continually interacting with outside environment to produce desired results.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what a social organisation is • explain why an educational organisation is said to be a social organisation • discuss the key concepts guiding the operation of an educational organization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Social Dimension of School Organisation The school is a social system.
It is an open, living social system that can be conceptualised in several ways in terms of systems theory.
The social systems theory developed by Getzels and Guba (1957) is regarded by 90 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION many as the most fundamental theory in the field of educational management and administration.
Getzels and Guba developed a model for explaining social behaviour.
In a social system, the homothetic and idiographic dimensions influence the observed behaviour of each person.
Getzels conceived the social system as involving two classes of phenomena, which are at once conceptually independent and phenomenally interactive.
These two phenomena are the institutions with roles and expectations fulfilling the goals of the system and the individuals with personalities and need dispositions that inhibit the system.
Parson (1959) as cited by Adepoju (1998) summarises his conception of a social system as: a plurality of individual actors interacting with each other in a situation which has at least a physical or environmental aspect…… actors who are motivated in terms of a tendency to the optimisation of gratification and whose relation to their situation including each other, is defined and mediated in terms of a system of culturally structured and shared symbols.
Any social system or human organisation consists of a number of individual groups or departments each of which is a sub-system within the total system.
School organisation is a typical example of a social system of organisation in which most systems are open and continually interacting with outside environment.
Being a human organisation therefore, school system is open in that, it exists in a wider environment of many other larger or smaller organisations or systems.
Thus, since it is a human organisation and a sub-system in its own right, which interacts with other sub-systems in the society (supra-system), we cannot understand the functioning of the school organisation without taking into consideration the influences of other sub-systems.
For example, the behaviour of a school organisation cannot be fully understood without, knowing something about its output (products), inputs, the public, government policies, ministry of education, school board, etc., affecting it.
Like any other social systems, school organisation experiences two major conflicting forces – one is directed towards maintaining the status quo and the other towards change and growth.
91 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Such forces emanate from, (i) increasing rate of change; (ii) increasing pressure from public; (iii) changing values of the workforce including managers; (iv) government policies; and (v) increasing knowledge in behavioural and quantitative sciences.
A school system is also characterised by a multiplicity of sub-systems, each of which is in dynamic interaction with others (Adepoju, 1998).
For example, a single school might be conceptualised as a system; its departments and sections can be viewed as sub-systems and the ministry of education, local school board and the central school board may be conceptualised as supra-systems (Obilade, 1989:45).
In a social system, the observed behaviour of each person is influenced by the homothetic and idiographic dimensions.
The fact that a school organisation consists human beings with a definite rule of behaviour, interactions and the interplay of individuals and organisation’s objectives qualifies it to be a social organisation.
The school system as an organisation consists of the inputs, processing unit or through put and outputs.
The inputs as regards school and social organisation are the students, teachers, instructional materials, time, and books; the processing unit consists of the teaching - learning process while the outputs include school graduates.
The above is a description of a social organisation.
In respect of social organisation as a system, and with particular reference to the school system, the school does not exist in a vacuum or operate as an island; rather, it operates alongside and in relationship with many other organisations or elements in the society.
3.2 The School as an Educational Organisation Schools are regarded as organisations because they meet all the universal, general requirements of an organisation.
For instance, in schools, people are grouped together in orderly, hierarchical structures of authority in order to attain a common objective, namely educative teaching.
Schools, therefore, form systematic and ordered structures within which people are grouped together in the interest of educative teaching (Westhuizen, 2003).
However, schools have their own individual characteristics, which make them different from other organisations.
Schools are structures qualified by educational factors and they cannot like an industry or business, be 92 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION explained in terms of certain input - output processes or a profit motive.
Schools are exclusively concerned with people who are associated with each other in a teaching and learning situation.
3.3 When is a School an Effective Educational Organisation?
According to a report of the British National Commission on Education published in 1993, the following ten features most commonly characterise effective and successful schools (Anon, 1994:3).
• Strong, positive leadership by the head and senior staff • Good atmosphere or spirit generated both by shared aims and values, and by the physical environment which is as attractive and stimulating as possible • High and consistent expectations of all learners • Clear and continuing focus on teaching and learning • Well-developed procedures for assessing how learners are progressing • Responsibility for learning shared by the learners themselves • Participation by learners in the life of the school • Rewards and incentives to encourage learners to succeed • Parental involvement in children’s education and in supporting the aims of the school • Extra-curricular activities, which broaden learners’ interests and experience, expand their opportunities to succeed and help to build good relationships within the school (Westhuizen, 2003).
The important leadership role of the educational leaders in schools is quite evident from these features.
3.4 Key Concepts Guiding School Organisation In a system, five key concepts guide its operation and sustain its existence.
These key concepts are: • The Concept of Interaction: This shows that school system interacts with other elements outside it and elements within it (i.e.
endogenous and exogenous elements).
• The Concept of Interrelationship: Which shows that school system interrelates within itself and outside self e.g.
with politics, economics, etc; • The Concept of Interdependence: This indicates that school system is interdependent within self and outside.
In other words, school structure cannot be easily understood unless there is understanding or diagnosis of other sub-systems within; 93 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • The Concept of Cultural Entity: This shows that, the school system has its own culture or rules of behaviour and with manifest values, tradition, norms, symbols, etc.
• The Concepts of Internal Structure: This indicates that school system has its own internal structure, which comprises formal and informal organisations, channel of communication, and hierarchy of authority.
4.0 CONCLUSION The school is a social organisation, which consists human beings with a definite rule of behaviour, interactions and the interplay of individuals and organisation’s objectives.
As an organisation, school consists of the inputs, processing unit or throughput and outputs.
Some concepts do guide the operation and sustain the existence of the school, such concepts are interaction, interrelationship, interdependence, cultural entity and internal structure.
For a school to be efficient and successful, we have learnt in this unit, that there should be a positive and, strong leadership, good and conducive environment among other factors.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit, the social dimension of school organisation.
Equally, you have been introduced to some key concepts guiding the operation of school organisations.
You have also learnt the features of effective and successful schools in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly explain why a school is a social organisation.
2.
Explain five key concepts that guide the operation and sustain the existence of a school organisation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company Obilade, S. (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration.
Ibadan: Odusote Bookstores Ltd. 94 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION MODULE 3 THE STUDY OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Meaning, Scope and Significance of Educational Administration Unit 2 Task Areas in Educational Administration Unit 3 Principles of Educational Administration Unit 4 Development of Theories in Educational Administration Unit 5 Stages of Development of Educational Administration in Nigeria UNIT 1 MEANING, SCOPE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Administration and ‘Educational Administration’ 3.1.1 Definition of Administration 3.1.2 Meaning of Educational Administration 3.1.3 Implications of the Definitions for Educational Organisation 3.2 Schools of Thought on Educational Administration 3.2.1 Educational Administration as a Science 3.2.2 Educational Administration as an Art 3.3 Levels of Educational /School Administration 3.3.1 Administration at the Primary School Level 3.3.2 Administration at the Secondary School Level 3.3.3 Administration at the Higher Level of Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous module (module 2), the study of human behaviour in the organisation where such issues as motivation, human behaviour, motivational theories and social dimension of educational organisations were extensively discussed.
There is no doubt that you have been developed intellectually on the rudiments of the course.
In this unit, you are going to be introduced to the meanings of educational 95 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION administration, schools of thought on educational administration, levels and significance of the study of educational administration.
These aspects will further strengthen your knowledge in the subject matter.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you are expected to: • define the concepts ‘administration’ and ‘educational administration’ • identify the implications of the definition of administration and educational administration • distinguish the nexus between the two basic schools of thought on educational administration • explain the significance of the study of educational administration • distinguish among the levels of educational administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Administration and Educational Administration 3.1.1 Definition and Scope of Administration The practice of administration is as old as the world itself; however, it is relatively a new idea in Africa and in most developing (Third World) countries.
Its emergence in developing countries of course, constitutes one major academic revolution within the past two decades and correspondingly, with the novelty of this development, controversies abound on what its meaning should be.
In other words, there has not been a consensus definition of the concept administration (Adepoju, 2003).
However, certain things that usually emerge from the different conceptions of the subject matter are basic administrative processes that featured prominently.
These processes are planning, organising, communicating, controlling, decision-making, leading, staffing, and coordinating.
Representatives of several schools of thought have made major contributions to the development of administration by expressing their viewpoints on the subject matter.
For instance, Campbell and Gregg(1957) view administration as: 96 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION The totality of the processes through which appropriatehuman and material resources are made available and made effective for accomplishing the purpose of an enterprise According to Sergiavanni, et.
al (1980, p.5), administration is the process of working with and through others to efficiently accomplish organisational goals.
Breach (1975), in his own viewpoint sees administration as the part of management, which is concerned with the installation and carrying out of the procedures by which programmes, plans and targets are laid down and communicated, and the progress of activities regulated and checked against them.
Heyel (1973) defines administration as “the process of building individuals into organisations and with managing and directing those organisations”.
Nwankwo (1987) have this to say on what administration is; It is the careful and systematic arrangement and use of resources (human and material), situations and opportunities for the achievement of the specific objective of a given organisation.
Peretomode (1991) specifically views administration as concerned with the performance of executive duties, the carrying out of policies or decisions to fulfill a purpose and the controlling of the day-to-day running of an organisation.
Ozigi (1980) opined that; The main primary objectives of administration in anyorganisation is that of coordinating the efforts of people towards the achievement of goals.
According to Ozigi however, administration of organisation aims at improving organisation lines of activities and all the efforts of the administrator or manager of that organisation must be directed towards these lines.
Nwankwo and Lulsegged (1985) defined administration as: A conterminous with leadership, leadership of people towards the achievement of the group goals or the goals of the organisation.
97 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Livingstone (1954) argues that: Administration consists of being pushed by events, finding immediate questions, and the difficulty behind urgency to remain aware of anything ultimate to avoid mortgaging the future.
According to Betram (1964) however; When we look for recorded administrative thought in the more general sense, we found that, in most cases, it is part of a rich-apes-try of philosophic (or even religious) commentary on man and his relations to fellow men, state and society.
From various submissions expressed above on the concept ‘administration’, one may conclude that administration implies wise utilisation of human, material, financial and as well as other resources in the organisation such that the predetermined objectives of such organisation are achieved.
3.1.2 Meaning of Educational Administration Educational administration implies arrangement of the human, material, financial, time and other resources and programmes made available for education and their effective utilisation to achieve the purpose which an educational system set to achieve.
According to Nwankwo (1987), educational administration is the systematic arrangement of human and material resources and programmes that are available for education and carefully using them systematically within defined guidelines or policies to achieve educational goals.
Peretomode (1991) emphasises that educational administration involves the application of the various principles, typologies or taxonomies and theories of management or organisation to education.
According to Peretomode (1991), the basic purpose of educational administration is to enhance teaching and learning.
In other words, educational administration according to Peretomode is not an end in itself but a means to an end.
While differentiating educational managers from educational administrators, Peretomode rightly observed that, “educational managers 98 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION are those who plan and formulate educational policies and programmes, while educational administrators are those who carry out or implement these educational policies and programmes as soon as and after they are formulated’’.
Arising from these definitions is the fact that an educational administrator, whether he operates from the federal, state and local level or from the ministry of education, state school board or at the school level is essentially and functionally a planner, organiser, coordinator, director, controller, reviewer or evaluator of plans, policies and programmes related to education and means for specific educational objectives (Adepoju, 2006).
The major function of an educational administrator is concerned with analysing and interpreting the general plans and policies for education and making specific plans for implementing these plans and policies in his own school in accordance with the specific situation in his school (Nwankwo, 1981, p. 15).
Nwankwo (1981) summarised the general functions of a school administrator to include; • Resources and programmes planning and policy making • Provision and maintenance of funds and facilities • Improvement of instructional programmes • Maintenance of effective interrelationship with the community as an external agency.
From the above, it can be summed up that educational administration implies effective and efficient application and execution of educational plans, policies and programmes through appropriate and judicious use of available human, material, financial and other resources allocated to system of education.
We can also establish from the definitions above that educational administration is the process through which all human efforts and materials are appropriately mobilised and harnessed towards the realisation of goals of the school.
3.1.3 Implications of the Definitions for Educational Organisations According to Adepoju (2003; 2004), it may be emphasised that, the definitions of administration have four implications for the educational administrator and school organisation.
These four implications may be represented with an acronym FPGA.
99 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 1.
Function: Administrators have some functions to perform within the school organisation, even though, such functions may vary from one organisation to another and simultaneously, precipitated or dictated by such area with which an administrator specialises.
However, one obvious observation is that the processes involved are almost the same.
2.
Production: The essence of administration and organisation is to produce goods or render services hence, the ultimate goal or objective of an administrator is to create surplus to prove worthy of his ability, credentials and position which he occupies.
3.
General Application: Administration applies to all kinds of organisation, either profit-making or non-profit making organisations, public sector or private sector.
4.
All Levels of Organisational Hierarchy: Administration applies to all levels of organisational hierarchy – top, middle and lower levels.
Within each organisation, there is a mapped out or designed structure or framework which depicts the flow of authority and who is responsible for what.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Briefly define administration and educational administration in your own words.
3.2 Schools of Thought on Educational Administration 3.2.1 Educational Administration as an Art The representatives of this school emphasise that, the underlying variable that can make or produce a successful administrator is natural gifts, traits or abilities.
Those who regard administration as an art believe that administration like painting, drawing, sculpture e.t.c., belongs to those who have the natural gift, traits or abilities for it.
Therefore, one becomes a good administrator not by training or the mastery of any special techniques of administration but by possessing the essential traits of administration (Nwankwo, 1981).
Nwankwo (1981) citing Ashby (1962) highlighted that; The successful administrator has skills, which have not been reduced to order and codified in textbooks….administration is an un-codified art.
Therefore, the only sure way to learn administration is to administer.
100 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION From the above statement, an administrator is born to be administrator and not trained.
This however, emphasises the need to identify and select good administrators in the organisation rather than how to have them trained.
This school also emphasises that there is no need to subject oneself to a codified principle or technique for one to be a successful administrator (principal or head teacher).
3.2.2 Educational Administration as a Science As modern organisations become more and more complex, studies on administration (Stogdill, 1948; Mayer, 1954; Gibb, 1954; Szilagyi, 1981; Bass, 1982; Donelly, Jr., et al (1984) have shown that a successful administrator today needs more than in-born personality traits.
In other words, there is the need for more than appropriate traits in the application of scientific principles, rules, laws and methods to the solution of organisation problems.
The exponents of this viewpoint use various terms as human or social engineering, human management, resource optimisation or simply management to characterise administrative procedure.
Succinctly put, this viewpoint emphasises that good administrators are not born but are trained through the use of scientific approach, relevant theories, techniques, body of knowledge and modes of inquiry during the various conceptions advanced by experts, administrative theorists and practitioners.
Administration therefore is to an organisation what the central nervous system is to the brain and the central processing unit (CPU) is to the computer operation.
An administrator initiates, directs, controls and monitors the functioning of the different organs of the system.
The central purpose of administration is essentially to co- ordinate the efforts of people and ensures judicious use of resources towards the achievement of some pre-determined objectives ( Adepoju, 2003).
For a serious administrative process to be in operation, certain variables must be considered.
These include: a. the presence of an organisational framework or structure to show who is responsible for what and the flow of authority; b. the presence of a leader or administrator / manager who initiates ideas and activities and who directs and makes policies and decisions; c. the existence of a clearly stated and defined objective or goals to direct actions and activities of the major departments or groups; and d. the existence of an agreed procedure towards the accomplishment of the stated and defined objectives or goals earlier mentioned.
101 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Is educational administration an art or science?
Discuss 2.
Is a good school administrator born or made?
3.3 Levels of Educational/School Administration Three distinct but interrelated levels can be identified in school administration.
These levels are: i.
Administration at the Primary School level; ii.
Administration at the Secondary School level; iii.
Administration at the Tertiary level.
According to Adepoju (2003), these three levels are distinct in their own right but interrelated in the sense that, the output of the first level forms the input of the second level while the output of the second level forms the input of the third level.
If the administration of the first level is dysfunctional, it will have a multiplier effect on the other levels and vice versa.
3.3.1 Administration at the Primary School Level This is otherwise known as Primary School Administration.
It is the type of administration that takes place at the primary school level in which the head-teacher and his assistants are directly involved.
Using Reeser’s (1973) definition of administration as a point of reference here, primary school administration can be defined as: Wise utilisation of both human and material resources withinthe primary school system such that the objectives of the primary school are achieved or accomplished.
Primary school administration is the process through which all human efforts and materials are appropriately mobilised and harnessed towards the realisation of the goals of primary school.
It is also the process through which primary school head teacher (administrator) plans, organises, coordinates, directs and controls the affairs and activities as well as the human, material and financial resources in the primary school maximally to accomplish the corporate goals of the primary school.
102 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.3.2 Administration at the Secondary School Level As the name implies, it is the type of administration that occurs at the secondary school level.
It is also known as secondary school administration and involves the principal, vice - principals and sometimes heads of departments.
Secondary school administration is also the process through which the secondary school principal (administrator) plans, organises, coordinates, directs and controls the affairs and actions as well as the human, material and financial resources in the secondary school maximally to ensure that the corporate goals of the secondary schools are achieved.
It is the responsibility of the principal to mobilise and harness all human efforts in the school where he functions as the administrator.
3.3.3 Administration of Tertiary Institutions This occurs at the higher level of education (polytechnics, colleges of education, universities and other equivalent institutions) where we have the rector, provost and vice-chancellor respectively as the chief executive/administrator.
It is the process through which the rectors, provosts and vice-chancellors effectively harness, mobilise and systematically utilise all the resources at the disposal of their respective higher institutions to achieve the fundamental objectives and corporate goals of the system, which are essentially, teaching, research and community services.
The ability of the chief executive/administrator to plan, organise, coordinate, direct, and control the affairs and activities as well as the human, material and financial resources in the higher institution maximally to achieve the goals of higher institution is known as higher school administration.
3.4 Significance of the Study of Educational Administration in Nigeria Tuoyo (1992) and Adepoju (1998; 2003; 2004) opined that the study of educational administration helps in the following ways: 1.
In Nigeria, like other developing countries, the study of educational administration is very essential because of the growing demand for education at all levels.
Because of the demand, enrolment of students has continued to increase almost to an unmanageable level.
This development has also led to change of attitudes and behaviour of both students and teachers.
Financial and other problems have also pervaded the school system.
In order to cope with all these pressing problems, the study of educational administration becomes more compelling.
103 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 2.
Through the study of educational administration, one becomes more knowledgeable on the vital aspects of school administration such as planning, organising, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting, budgeting, evaluating and controlling.
3.
The study of educational administration makes room for professional development of staff through which a sense of self- fulfillment can be achieved.
4.
The study also helps to equip school administrator with the art of solving complicated school problems.
5.
The study makes the art of administration easier and less confusing.
6.
The basic management techniques of co-ordination of school human and material resources, setting of goals, formulation of policies and the art of programming are all acquired through the study of educational administration.
7.
The study of educational administration helps the school administrators see the need for involving teachers, parents, students and other stakeholders in the process of decision-making in the school.
8.
The study of educational administration also helps to guide the actions and inactions of the school administrator.
9.
Through the study of educational administration, good human relations are promoted between the school administrators and their staff.
10.
The study also facilitates continuity of work of new administrators and their predecessors.
11.
It also helps to achieve set goals and implementation of programmes of action.
12.
The study of educational administration prepares school administrator against the consequences of his actions and inactions.
13.
The study also enables school administrators to allocate educational resources rationally within the school system.
14.
The study of educational administration ensures proper organisation and management of both human and material resources in the school system.
15.
The study of educational administration also broadens the knowledge of educational administrators and makes them experts in their chosen career.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Why should the school administrator have deep knowledge of educational administration?
Provide not less than ten reasons.
104 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION The term administration has been viewed from different standpoints however; there is a consensus on the focus of administration and educational administrator, which is the realisation or achievement of organisational or school goals or objectives.
As discussed in this unit, educational administration is the process through which all human efforts and materials are appropriately mobilised and harnessed towards the realisation of the school goals and objectives.
It is one thing to have human and material resources, it is another thing to have them appropriately mobilised and harnessed.
This therefore emphasises the importance of an administrator who is well grounded in the study of administration.
Modern school organisations are more and more complex and this has contributed to the problems that have engulfed the system in the recent times.
In this unit, we have reiterated the need to acquire knowledge of educational administration in other to cope with problems bedeviling the educational system.
5.0 SUMMARY Our discussion in this unit has intimated us with the meanings of administration and educational administration; you have also learnt about the two schools of thought on educational administration as well as the implications of the meanings provided on the concepts under discussion.
In addition, we have discussed the need for managers and administrators to acquire the knowledge of educational administration in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss in detail, the significance of the study of educational administration within the Nigerian context.
105 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T. L. (1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003).
Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2006).
School Management: An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig.)
Ltd. Nwankwo, J.I.
(1982).
Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
New Delhi: Cican Publishing House Pt.
Ltd. Peretomode, V.F.
(2003) Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Pub.
Ltd. Tuoyo, M.U.
(1992) Definition, Scope and Significance of the Study of Educational Administration, in Adeboyeje, R.A.
(Ed.)
Fundamentals of Education for Colleges and Universities.
Ondo: Ife Oluwa Enterprises (Nig) Ltd. pp24-30.
106 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 2 TASK AREAS IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 School – Community Relationship 3.2 School – Curriculum/Instruction Relationship 3.3 Student/ Pupil - Personnel 3.4 Staff - Personnel 3.5 Equipment and Facilities Management 3.6 Finances and Business Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational administrators have some administrative tasks or responsibilities to discharge apart from their basic functions, which include planning, organising, staffing, coordinating, controlling, reporting, decision - making and budgeting.
The ability to discharge these tasks is usually used to judge their effectiveness.
Educational administrators should be well versed in these task areas and discharge them efficiently towards the realisation of the corporate goal of the system.
These tasks are discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you are expected to: • identify the basic task areas in educational administration • discuss in details, the task areas in educational administration • explain the role which school administrators play • make a distinction between pupils, personnel and staff personnel functions.
107 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Basic Task Areas in Educational Administration Administrative tasks are areas or activities to which educational/school administrators are concerned.
In other words, they are the major responsibilities toward which any educational administrator (at the primary, secondary or higher levels of education) should be focused.
In the literature (Campbell, et al, 1971; Nwankwo, 1982; Peretomode, 1993; Adepoju 1998; 2003; 2004; 2006), six administrative task areas have been identified.
These are to be discussed in the next section of the unit (3.1.1.-3.1.6).
3.1.1 School-Community Relationship: The tasks related to school-community relationship include the following: i. to determine the level of aspiration, interest and desire which the people have for the public schools.
ii.
to ascertain and determine the character and framework of the school and community.
iii.
to disseminate useful information about the school to the community.
This may be done using different strategies or mechanisms such as the mass media, P.T.A or Board meetings e.t.c.
3.1.2 School Curriculum/Instruction Relationship The tasks related to school curriculum and instructions include the following to: i. develop or initiate student – centred programme of instruction.
ii.
develop and encourage continuity of curriculum design in each area of study in the school.
iii.
differentiate between general or broad-based instructions and specific instructions.
iv.
determine and identify the instructional problem and hindrances of effective or purposeful teaching-learning situation.
v. establish and maintain school-wide commitment to the academic achievement of all students.
vi.
develop a uniform system of evaluation of staff performance.
vii.
help teacher to gain more insight into learning styles of children and introduce them to theories that are useful for the job.
108 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION viii.
ensure effective supervision and evaluation of teachers and students performance.
ix.
ensure that school programmes correlate with students’ future vocational achievement.
3.1.3 Student/Pupil-personnel This task involves the realisation of the aims of education of the pupils in the school by the administrator and his cohorts in the school system.
The administrator is charged with the responsibility of ensuring conducive atmosphere for effective teaching and learning in the school system.
Apart from this, the need for child growth and development through proper direction by imparting the right kind of knowledge is very essential in the school system.
The ideal educational administrator ensures that every student is given adequate opportunity, attention and motivation to learn.
This could be realised through various ways by the school administrator thus by: i. ensuring pupil’s discipline.
ii.
directing all the activities in the school towards realising the purpose of child’s education (Child-centred).
iii.
exposing each child in the school to more functional and meaningful education.
iv.
making himself aware of the problems and needs of the child in the school and making provision for meeting the problems and needs.
v. providing opportunity to the children for development of their varying potentials.
vi.
seeing the pupil as the necessary input or ingredient towards the realisation of the objectives of the school system.
3.1.4 Staff-Personnel Just as the school administrator must be ready to assist the pupils in the school in order to achieve the purpose of their education.
He must also be aware of his leadership roles and functions to bring about functional staffing.
He must be fully skilled in matters involving staff personnel and policies such as recruitment, selections, official procedure, delegation of duties and responsibilities, communication, human relations and modern management or administrative techniques.
The following areas should be considered by the administrator in order to bring forth effective staff-personnel in the school.
109 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION He should: i. consult his staff on matters relating to decision-making.
ii.
communicate all important matters and decisions to staff and pupils well in advance.
iii.
provide opportunities for individual staff growth and development.
iv.
create a high sense of morality and professional commitment in the school.
v. delegate function with enough authority.
vi.
avoid nepotism and favouritism.
vii.
avoid exposing confidential matters about teachers.
3.1.5 Equipment and Facilities Management For educational goals/objectives of the school to be achieved in the school system, funds, equipment and physical facilities are not only essential but are also of immense value.
Apart from the provisions of these equipment and facilities, their maintenance should always be taken seriously by the school administrator.
The school administrator must ensure that essential and basic equipment and materials are provided in adequate quantity and in good time.
He should see to the satisfactory storage of the various school items while all the school records must be properly kept and maintained.. All physical facilities such as the school building, libraries, laboratory etc, should be properly maintained and always be put into use.
3.1.6 Finance and Business Administration This is related to school budget and accounting system, which the school administrator must prepare and keep.
Finance is a very vital area in the school and the effectiveness of the administrator can be determined through his ability to prepare and maintain good budget and accounting system.
Because of its sensitivity, school administrators are left with the responsibility of maintaining and preparing school account by the government.
To ensure proper budget and accounting system, school administrators must: i. ensure that receipts are issued for all transactions and money collected such as tuition fees, PTA levy, Examination levy etc.
keep proper record of all items of expenditure on which imprest is expended or spent ii.
ensure that the allocation in the school budget are spent according to the direction of the government and in accordance with the financial regulations and procedures 110 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION iii.
ensure that the school bursar/accounts clerk maintain a good system of accounting in line with the accounting procedures laid down by the government iv.
be trained on how best to ensure good system of budgeting and accounting presumably, through seminars, workshops or other training programmes for the purpose v. be financially prudent and disciplined.
Peretomode (1991, pp 5-8) citing Gorton (1983, 47-49) identifies seven broad categories of administrative task areas of the school administrator.
Six of these areas have been discussed above; the seventh one is called General tasks, which is the administrator’s ability to: i. organise and conduct meeting or conferences ii.
handle delicate interpersonal situation iii.
direct the work of administrative assistants iv.
publicise the work of the school v. diagnose the strengths and weaknesses of the school programme vi.
attend such school functions as assemblies, plays, athletic contest etc.
vii.
respond to correspondence viii.
prepare reports for the local districts and school boards ix.
attend principals or head-teachers’ meetings x. schedules school programmes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE I Briefly discuss the major task areas of a school administrator.
4.0 CONCLUSION Every educational organisation has its predetermined goals and objectives that are intended to be achieved, and, which can only be achieved if the administrators of such organisations appropriately carry out their responsibilities and assigned tasks.
In other words, the success of any educational administrator is adjudged through his/her ability to discharge his tasks and functions respectively.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the major task areas in educational administration.
You have also learnt that these task areas, if successfully carried out by educational administrators, will lead to the realisation of goals and objectives of schools.
111 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate the task areas in educational administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003).
Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2006).
School Management: An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Campbell, R.F.
; Bridges, E.M. & Nystrand, R.O.
(1971).
Introduction to Educational Administration.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc. Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981).
Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
New Delhi: Vicas Publishing House Pt.
Ltd. Obilade, S. (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration.
Nigeria: Odusote Bookstores Ltd. Peretomode, V.F.
(2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publisher Ltd. 112 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 3 PRINCIPLES OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Principles of Educational Administration 3.2 Fayol’s 14 Principles of Educational Administration 3.3 General Principles of Educational Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Modern approach to organisation has informed the use of some principles to replace guesswork or rule of thumb.
These principles guide the operations of educational organisations.
The complexity of modern educational organisation has almost ruled out rule of thumb hence the need for the application of the principles for the realisation of organisational goals and objectives by educational administrators.
In the context of this unit, you will be acquainted with these principles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the basic principles of educational administration • mention the general principles of educational administration • state Henri Fayol’s 14 principles of educational administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Principles of Educational Administration Good and effective organisation does not exist in a vacuum or by mere coincidence instead, it is the outcome of considerations of some fundamental principles or rules.
These principles determine largely, the realisation of the stated objectives and goals, which the system or organisation aims at achieving.
School organisation like any other human organisations is a professional environment, which has a pyramidal structure with the leader in control at the top (head teacher or 113 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION principal or provost, rector or vice-chancellor) and subordinate staff (teachers) in lower levels ( Adepoju, 2004; 2006).
The basic principles that are essential for the realisation and administration of primary, secondary and even higher institutions include the following: 1.
Single Executive This principle states that, for school to be effective it must have a single executive head (principal or head teacher or provost, rector and vice- chancellor as the case may be) who must control and coordinate all the activities of the school.
2.
Unity of Purpose/Objectives This principle states that school like any other formal organisations must have a defined or specified purpose/objective or goal.
Admittedly, the main objective of primary school is to provide primary education to pupils of ages 6 - 11+ in Nigeria.
This goal must be jointly determined by the entire staff to avoid friction and conflicts.
3.
Unity of Command This principle states that orders, directives or instructions to a staff in the school should be given by a superior officer.
Orders or directives should not come from more than one superior officer (source).
This is to ensure organisation’s efficiency which is pronounced when members know what is expected of them and to whom they are responsible.
4.
Division of Labour Since it is not possible for a head of the school to perform all tasks and functions alone, he should therefore divide the work into number of task areas such that others are charged with the responsibilities of carrying out these tasks.
This principle leads to specialisation and engenders higher efficiency and greater productivity.
5.
Span of Control This is otherwise known as span of management or span of supervision.
The objectives of the school can be effectively accomplished when the school head have under him the required number of staff and pupils that can be directed or supervised conveniently.
A number of factors such as: (i) administrator’s ability, (ii) nature of job, (iii) experience, 114 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION (iv) qualification, (v) physical technicality of the organisation, to mention a few have been identified as important determinants of the number of staff to be controlled by an administrator or manager.
6.
Stability of Operation The achievement of primary and secondary schools objectives is enhanced by continuing policies and evaluation.
If policies and programmes affecting the school system are carefully defined, diagnosed, attained and given a thorough trial before been abandoned or changed, success will always be maintained.
Good policies or programmes should be given enough periods to operate.
7.
Delegation of Authority and Responsibility This principle demands that all responsibilities must be accompanied with commensurate authority.
The effectiveness of the school organisation is enhanced when the head delegates assignments to the teachers (subordinates) and with appropriate authority to carry them out successfully.
It should however be noted that while authority can be delegated, responsibility cannot be delegated.
8.
Standardisation It is the process of maintaining the standard.
That is, work should be done in the same efficient way by every staff.
For instance, development of standard procedures of record keeping, examination and other vital activities should be adequately maintained and should be a continuous process.
This principle plays a significant role towards the realisation of the stated objectives of the organisation.
9.
Flexibility This principle makes provision for innovative ideas and changes.
The need for flexibility of administration and organisation increases in the period of rapid change and development.
School programmes, policies, and procedures must be broad in order to allow innovations and accommodate necessary changes when the need arises.
When innovative ideas and changes are not encouraged, then, the organisation may not stand the test of time.
10.
Security of Tenure 115 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION When security is provided, the members work well for the attainment of the school goals.
Different members of the school have individual needs but the need for security is paramount and universal.
This implies making the job of the workers more permanent instead of casualisation of labour.
11.
Proper Setting Proper setting and conduciveness of an organisation determine to a very large extent, the efficiency and effectiveness of such organisation.
This may involve the promotion of individuals with specific aims of promoting knowledge and developing individual members’ professional development.
This can be achieved when there is proper setting and conducive working environment for the members.
This principle also implies good climate.
12.
Personnel Policies Good personnel policies evolve from good personnel administration or management.
Good and effective personnel policies and programmes relating to staff welfare should be incorporated to allow job satisfaction for the members of staff and increase productivity for the organisation.
Personnel policies include selection of competent staff, introducing training programmes (including induction training) and provision of incentives for the staff.
Good personnel policies reduce labour turn-over and increase efficiency in the organisation.
13.
Evaluation There is the need for constant evaluation system in the organisation to enable the objectives of the system to be accomplished.
Evaluation allows the review of performance, and the juxtaposition of both plan and implementation, to know what has been achieved and what has not been achieved.
Any observed deviation should be quickly addressed (see Adepoju, 1998; 2003).
14.
Defined Structure This principle states that, in the organisation, a defined and definite structure should be established such that every worker will know his / her functions without going off the track.
In order words, clear understanding of the procedures for selecting leaders would be known and their roles defined.
3.2 Fayol’s 14 Principles of Educational Administration 116 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Apart from the five administrative functions otherwise referred to as the basic elements of administration, which include planning, organising, coordinating, commanding and controlling, identified by Fayol in his book Generale and Industriale Management, published in 1916,he prescribed 14 principles which administrators/managers have been cautioned to adapt to their particular needs (see Adepoju, 2004).
These principles are: • Division of Work • Authority and Responsibility • Scalar Chain/Chain of Command • Unity of Command • Unity of Direction • Espirit de Corps • Subordination of Individual Initiative Interest to General Interest • Centralisation • Discipline • Order • Equity • Stability of Tenure • Remuneration of Personnel • Initiative 1.
Division of Work: This involves the concept of specialisation of labour whereby work processes are split or broken down in which experts are assigned to the departments where they can most function effectively and efficiently.
This can lead to increase in productivity and greater efficiency can be achieved.
2.
Authority and Responsibility: According to Fayol, authority and responsibility must always go together that is, any official assigned specific responsibility must be given a commensurate authority to enable him perform as expected of him.
3.
Discipline: Fayol believed that superiors have a right to obedience, application of due energy and outward marks of respect from employees.
4.
Unity of Command: This implies that employees should receive orders from one source (superior) only.
Orders only from a source will practically reduce the problem of frictions, confusions, commotion, and conflicts in the organisation.
5.
Unity of Direction: According to this principle, work or activities that are related to a group or department and with the same objectives must have a leader and a plan.
117 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 6.
Subordination of Individual Interest to General Interest: This principle recognises that, there are general or corporate goals of the organisation and specific goals of the individuals within the organisation.
However, it emphasises that the corporate goals of the organisation must take precedence over individual goals.
7.
Remuneration of Personnel: This principle emphasises that remuneration and methods of payment should be fair and afford the maximum possible satisfaction to employees and employer.
In other words, no party should be adversely affected by the method employed for rewarding performance.
8.
Centralisation: According to Henri Fayol, centralisation of authority is a natural tendency of organisations, since a few people at the top of the structure typically make all major decisions.
The idea of centralisation believes that a central point should be identified as the source of authority.
9.
Scalar Chain: This is also called chain of command.
Fayol defined this as the line of command or the flow of authority from the highest to the lowest rank.
10.
Order: According to Fayol, order as a principle is defined as a “place for everything and everything in its place”.
11.
Equity: Loyalty and devotion should be elicited from personnel by a combination of kindness and justice on the part of the managers when dealing with subordinates.
12.
Stability of Tenure: In his own contention, Fayol argued that unnecessary turnover should be avoided in the organisation.
He therefore, opined that, employees should be encouraged to settle down to a job and perform satisfactorily.
Thus, organisations should encourage the long-term commitment of their employees which can best be offered when they have stability of tenure.
13.
Initiative: This principle involves the power to conceive ideas and execute a plan of action without necessarily following the procedures of the past that are not the best.
Innovative ideas and change should be allowed and encouraged in the organisation.
14.
Espirit de Corps: This is also called team spirit or morale and harmony or unity among an organisation’s staff.
According to Fayol, harmony and unity among personnel are important, as this will help them to arrive at their common objectives successfully.
3.3 General Principles of Educational Administration Principles are general guides to management.
The wise and modern manager/administrator is one who can identify and use these principles when they become relevant to particular situation.
The following are therefore offered as general guide to the organisation and control of 118 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION management/administrative practice.
Under each of the principles are sub-principles.
1.
The Fundamental Principle • Responsibility • Delegation of Authority • Communication 2.
The Humanitarian Principle • Democracy • Justice • Human Relations 3.
The Prudential Principle • Economy • Responsibility and Authority • Loyalty 4.
The Principle of Change • Adaptability • Flexibility • Stability 5.
The Bureaucratic Principle • Division of work • Impersonality in Official matters • Hierarchy of Authority • Rules and Regulations • Career Orientation • Emphasis on Documentation 1.
The Fundamental Principle a.
Responsibility: This principle holds that, at all times, and at all levels of the organisation, each person in his own area and capacity must act responsibly.
It further states that, once a staff of an organisation has accepted to perform an obligation, he must be accountable for such obligation.
119 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION b. Delegation of Authority: By this, sectional or departmental functions are entrusted to a person or group of persons based on biographical location, expertise, position or roles.
This principle therefore confirms the fact that no person can do everything in any complex organisations.
Authority or functions are delegated because excessive centralisation can weaken a system and can encourage inefficiency.
c. Communication: This principle states that easy and quick flow of information is very essential for organisation survival.
It further states that, information is the life-wire of any successful organisation.
2.
The Humanitarian Principle a.
Democracy: The basic idea behind this principle is the recognition of individual worth.
It further emphasises that, all people/workers to be affected by a decision, rules, laws and regulations must have a say in the formulation and development of such decision, rules, laws and regulations.
In other words, workers should be involved in the decision making process and each be given due recognition.
b.
Justice: This principle implies rigidity to established rules and regulations without victimisation or repressiveness (this could be likened to the concept of the Rule of Law in Political Science being propounded by A.V.
Dicey in 1885).
c. Human Relations: This principle holds that, “friendliness begets friendliness”.
It relates to the principle of justice and fair play.
Human relations as a principle entails that, workers should be seen as human beings first before any consideration and they must be seen as individuals who have personal needs that must be satisfied.
3.
The Prudential Principle a.
Economy: This principle holds that, since resources are very limited and scarce, the available resources must be effectively allocated and optimally utilised to achieve maximum output.
b.
Responsibility and Authority: The principle demands that, all responsibility must be accompanied with commensurate authority.
This will ensure that the tasks being delegated are effectively performed.
120 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION c. Loyalty: Here, loyalty must be given to the organisation, tasks and functions to support the goals of the organisation.
Loyalty implies working towards ensuring the corporate existence of the organisation by workers rather than working against it.
4.
The Principle of Change This principle advocates for ‘change’ to take place in the organisation but emphasises that such ‘change’ should be incorporated and allowed to take place only when necessary.
a. Adaptability: This principle demands that, organisation must be able to adapt to change to stand the test of the time.
Adaptability is necessary if the organisation is to survive many ‘threats’.
b.
Flexibility: This addresses the situational nature of change and development in the organisation.
It emphasises that organisation’s programmes, policies, objectives, structure, activities and procedures must be made flexible and not rigid to accommodate necessary changes and innovative ideas.
c. Stability: This principle sounds more antithetical to the principles of adaptability and flexibility.
The implicit interpretation of this principle is that, there is a need to conserve or retain the good goals, practices, ideas, policies, programmes, rules and regulations of the past.
5.
The Bureaucratic Principle a.
Division of Work based on Functional Specialization: According to Weber (1946), assignments should be allotted individual workers based on their technical knowledge, expertise and capability.
This, he says, would bring about efficiency and high productivity to the organisation.
b.
Hierarchy of Authority: In Weber’s view, it is the job of the higher officers to supervise and control the junior officers.
He emphasised that in an ideal-type organisation where things work well, each lower officer is under the control and supervision of the higher one.
c. Impersonality in Official Matter (Impersonal orientation): This principle means that, since the rules of the office in a bureaucracy are technical, the managers should be impersonal in their official dealings and should not personalise the means of production.
They should therefore neither reflect their personal interest nor protect the interest of anybody in dealings with 121 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION official matters.
Impersonality implies that if the relation of the manager fails to discharge his duties and responsibilities, he should be treated officially the way non-relations are treated.
d. Emphasis on Documentation and Written Records: Officialsof the organisation (school) are required by regulations to keep records of administrative activities, decisions, instructions, business and communication between them and the external agencies e.g.
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Trade, e.t.c.
e. Rules and Regulations: This is a continuous organisation functions bound by rules and regulations.
It is one of the characteristics of a formal organisation.
Weber’s bureaucracy believes in creating rules and regulations, which cover the rights, duties, and operations of all members.
f. Employment and Promotion of Staff based on Technical Knowledge (Career Orientation): Weber (1946) emphasised that employment and promotion of staff should be based on technical knowledge or competence.
It should be emphasised here that, these general principles emerged from the idea of various schools of thought on administration and management.
Some of the representatives of the various schools that subscribed to these principles are Taylor (1911), Fayol (1916), Mayo (1953), Simon (1957), Banard (1938), Urwick (1937), Gulick (1937), Follet (1924) and Weber (1946), to mention few of them.
Modern administrative and management theorists have in their recent studies, come up with shortcomings of most of the works of the earliest organisation theorists such as Taylor, Fayol and Max Weber, who were the notable representatives of the classical approach to the study of organisation.
For instance, Campbell, et al (1971) argued that Taylor took a narrow view of management and that Taylorism tended to ignore the psychological or personal aspects of mobilising human effort.
They therefore, discouraged the use of Taylorism in the school system.
Some of his critics have also referred to weberian bureaucratic model as a machine model.
For instance, Katz and Kahn (1966) and Shelekar (1984) stated that, the model could not count for important human elements.
In a summary provided by Shelekar (1984), it was opined that Bureaucracy cannot offer satisfaction for higher level of employees.
122 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Make a list of Fayol’s 14 principles of educational administration 2.
Why do you think a school administrator should know how to use the principles of administration to guide his operations instead of rule of thumb?
4.0 CONCLUSION A professional educational administrator should be acquainted with the principles that guide the operations of an organisation since effective educational organisation does not exist in a vacuum.
The knowledge of these principles and their appropriate usage help in no small way in achieving the corporate goals of an educational system.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been acquainted with the principles of educational administration.
Some of these principles are called basic principles while some are classified into general principles.
The 14 principles developed by Henri Fayol were also discussed in the unit.
These principles are essentially guides in the operations of educational organisations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and discuss the basic principles of educational administration.
123 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003) Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004) Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2006) School Management: An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Campbell, R.F.
; Bridges, E.M., & Nystrand, R.O.
(1971) Introduction to Educational Administration.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc. Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981).
Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
New Delhi: Vicas Publishing House Pt.
Ltd. Obilade, S. (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration.
Nigeria: Odusote Bookstores Ltd. Peretomode, V.F.
(2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publisher Ltd. 124 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENT OF THEORIES IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Theories in Educational Administration 3.1.1 General System Theory 3.1.1.1 Importance of System Theory in Educational Administration 3.1 2 Bureaucratic Theory 3.1.2.1 The Impact of Bureaucratic Theory on Educational Administration 3.1.3 Leadership Theory 3.1.3.1 Attributes/Qualities of a Good School Manager/Leader 3.1.4 Decision Making Theory 3.1.4.1 Meaning of Decision-Making 3.1.4.2 Forms of Decision 3.1.4.3 Process of Decision Making 3.1.4.4 Decision Making Model 3.1.5 Role Theory 3.1.5.1 Meaning of Role Theory 3.1.5.2 Usefulness of Role Theory in School Administration 3.1.6 McGregor Theory of Human Management 3.1.6.1 Theory X – Description and Assumptions 3.1.6.2 Theory Y – Description and Assumptions 3.1.6.3 Usefulness of McGregor Theory X and Theory Y to the School Administrators 3.2 The Place of Theory in Educational Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION After Nigeria’s independence in 1960, educational administration has been viewed from the perspective of the behavioural scientist that sees human beings whose needs, situations and reactions vary from place to place and from time to time.
The ideas of the advocates of the classical school through the neoclassical and to the modern schools have been variously adopted to bring about efficiency in the educational system.
125 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Several theories were developed in the system in an attempt to have empirical explanation of issues and concepts.
However, facts have emerged that in educational administration, theory is not as precise as in the physical sciences.
Some of the theories that have been developed in educational administration include the following; general system theory, bureaucratic theory, leadership theory, decision making theory, role theory and so on.
These theories are useful tools in the practice of educational administration.
In unit 1 of the first module, you have learnt what theory is, the knowledge so gained then will be used here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you are expected to: • identify the various theories in educational administration • explain the characteristics of each of the theories • enumerate the uses of the theories in educational administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Theories in Educational Administration Several basic theories have emerged in educational administration, these theories that were developed by educational theorists to explain, describe, predict and analyse issues in educational administration are as follows: 3.1.1 System Theory A system is defined as an assemblage of different but interrelated components or entities.
The components on their own form an entity but systems within a supra system.
It is a series of interrelated and interdependent parts such that the interaction or interplay of any of the sub-systems (parts) affects the whole (Adepoju, 2004).
Griffiths (1975) defined a system as a complex of elements in mutual interaction.
From the definitions above, a system can be described as series of interrelated and interdependent parts that work and relate together towards achieving a common objective.
All systems have the following properties: • They exist in time-space • They tend toward a state of randomness and disorder, the ultimate of which is entropy or inertia.
126 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • They have boundaries • They have environment which is external to them • They have factors that influence the structure and function.
System theory provides a means of viewing the school in terms of its general properties and the specific dynamics.
It focuses on the interrelationships and linkages between and among the subunits of the school as well as on the relationship of the school to its larger environment.
A system approach to administration of school has been divided into two major categories viz; system analysis and system synthesis.
Kaufman (1970) viewed system analysis to include the following steps; 1. identification of the problem; and 2. determination of solution, requirements and alternatives System synthesis also involves the following three steps; a. choosing a solution strategy from alternatives b. implementing the solution strategy; and c. determining performance effectiveness.
System design therefore includes all the five steps highlighted above.
The properties of general systems apply to the school and provide a model for examining the school as a dynamic institution.
It also provides a holistic approach for planning and implementing programmes for improving the school’s instructional and personnel services.
3.1.1.1 Importance of System Theory in Educational Administration a.
System Theory enables the school administrator to relate, describe and interpret the school problem to other societal factors, which operate sub-systems in the society and could influence education.
b.
System Theory enables the school administrator to choose a particularl level, analyse action or organisational issues and problems while keeping in mind that he is dealing with a total system.
c. System Theory enables school administrator to identify and find a solution to specific educational problems.
d. System Theory enables the school administrator to be sensitive to the interaction of the school system with the supra system and the society.
127 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION e. Adequate knowledge of the system theory enables the school administrator to recognise the need to keep the school open so that it can exchange resources and information with its immediate larger system.
f. System Theory helps the school administrator to understand the relationship between and among the units and sub-units within the school and between the school and the larger environment.
3.1.2 Bureaucratic Theory This theory was developed by Max Weber (1947).
The concept of bureaucracy according to Weber (1947) is “hierarchical, pyramidal organisational structure in which all power for decision making flows from super-ordinates to subordinates’’.
In other words, bureaucracy is an organisational structure designed specifically to make maximum use of administrative specialists who possess a high level of expertise and technical competence.
According to Weber (1947), three types of organisation exist, these are: i Traditional organisation where the right to ascend or occupy positions of power or authority is inherited or handed down from generation to generation.
ii.
Charismatic organisation where a single leader to whom everyone owes loyalty and allegiance by virtue of the leader’s personalities is in charge.
iii.
Bureaucratic organisation where authority is based on the supremacy of the existing laws, where positions are created on a functional basis and office holders are recruited to fill them on the basis of their technical competence.
Weber emphasised that an ideal-typical of modern organisation consisted of regulated official tasks and duties, subject to a functional division of labour and specialisation, ordered in a hierarchy of officers, regulated procedural rules and staffed by expert and officials appointed on merit and one of impersonal orientation in official matters.
According to Weber (1946), bureaucracy is the most efficient type of organisation in that, it minimises irrational, personal, and emotional attachments and maximises decision-making and administrative efficiency.
In organisation where bureaucracy exists, tasks and assignments are allotted to individual workers as official duties based on a division of labour and specialisation, which encourages a high degree of efficiency and technical expertise among staff.
This model is also characterised by dependence on formal rules and regulations, which are established to guide and control official action and behaviours of 128 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION members.
Rules and regulations not only ensure conformity and uniformity, they also promote organisation’s continuity even, when changes of personnel occur.
Bureaucratic model of organisation according to Adepoju (2003), stresses the employment of staff based on their technical qualifications and not on political, family or ethnic grounds.
Since employment by an organisation constitutes a career prospect for its employees, there should be job security for all.
In addition, advancements or promotion should be based on seniority and achievement or both.
Authority, position or offices according to Weber should be organised or structured into a hierarchical order in which all power for decision - making flows from the top management level (super-ordinates) to the lower level (subordinates).
The school system is characterised by bureaucratic apparatus just like any other formal and modern organisation.
Several features of bureaucracy as indicated above still predominate in the administration and organisation of educational system in Nigeria.
Such features are: i.
Hierarchy of Authority ii.
Rules and Regulations iii.
Division of Labour and Specialisation iv.
Career Orientation v. Impersonality vi.
Official Record Keeping A cursory examination of the features above reveals that Weberian bureaucratic elements exist in our educational system (primary, secondary and higher education sub-sectors) even though, Weber’s ideal-type is being criticised as it renders the subjective springs of the school’s social action less and less relevant.
In the words of Bennis (1965), bureaucratic techniques and methods were not in themselves sufficient to achieve the purposes of an organisation and could sometimes conflict with substantive rationality (Adepoju, 2003).
Despite all these criticisms of Weber’s model and applications in the school system, his (Weber) bureaucratic apparatus represented the most rational form of administration simply because, it was the one best designed to achieve predictability, stability and a narrowly conceived efficiency.
Peretomode (1991) citing Blaug (1956) has stated that, to administer a social (formal) organisation such as a school system, purely on technical criteria of rationality and formality is irrational because, that ignores the non-rational aspects of social conduct.
Kramer (1977) also argued that 129 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION bureaucracies in practice are not paragons of pure efficiency as often claimed.
3.1.2.1 The Impact of Bureaucratic Theory on Educational Administration Bureaucratic theory has greatly influenced the practice of educational or school administration in the following ways: i.
School administrators delegate authority to their subordinates based on interest, ability, competence and specialisation.
ii.
Hierarchy of authority exists in the school system with the school administrator occupying the position of Chief Executive.
iii.
In every school, there are clearly defined rules and regulations that guide the actions and inactions of individual members of the school system.
iv.
There is impersonal orientation towards discharge of duties by the teachers.
Teachers even regard their jobs as ‘government work’.
v. Professionalism is considered when recruitment is to be made.
In the same vein, promotion is based on qualifications and experience on the job.
3.1.3 Leadership Theory Stogdill (1950) as cited by Adepoju (2003) defines leadership as the process of influencing the activities of an organised group toward goal setting and interpersonal influence, directed through the communication process and toward the attainment of some goals.
Morphet, et al (1974) conceptualised leadership as the influencing of actions, behaviours, beliefs and feelings of an actor in a social system by another actor with the working cooperation of the actor being influenced.
Leadership as described by Adepoju (2003; 2004; 2006) can be conceived in two basic ways viz: i. as an organisational position and/or ii.
as an influence process.
As an organisational position, leadership refers to an individual who has been placed in a leadership or decision making position or role by government or the management of the organisation.
On the other hand, the influence process suggests that to be a leader, one must inspire others to follow willingly.
This view also suggests that the dynamic of leadership is a process of influencing others towards the achievement of the organisational goals.
130 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION From the definitions provided above, it can be inferred that leadership, is a process through which one influences the other(s) to carry out an action and the willingness of doing such action without being forced or coerced.
Leadership roles include planning, organising, directing, coordinating, controlling, decision making, guiding, staffing and delegating.
Therefore, a leader is expected to be equipped with these administrative functions in order to ensure the realisation of the stated and defined objectives of the educational organisation where he leads (Adepoju, 2009).
The discussion so far made has revealed that: i. leadership involves the use of influence ii.
leadership is a process iii.
leadership focuses on the achievement of goals or objectives earlier set iv.
leadership involves the person who leads (superordinate or leader) and the person who follows (subordinate or follower) (Adepoju, 2003:34).
3.1.3.1 Attributes/Qualities of a Good School Manager/Leader Adesina (1980) asserts that the leader in any situation must have both social and psychological attitudes in order to succeed on the job.
The effective leader is the person who is not only able to make his subordinates want to do what they have to do but also recognises that, they must be motivated to ensure that the goals and objectives of the institution, organisation or system are met.
The following according to Adepoju (1998) are some of the attributes generally considered desirable for a school leader to be effective.
i.
He must be intelligent and knowledgeable ii.
He must be self-confident and firm iii.
He must be academically sound iv.
He must be professionally superior to his staff v. He must be sociable vi.
He must possess good human relations vii.
He must be morally and ethically upright viii.
He must be disciplined ix.
He must be humane and modest x.
He must be honest and trustworthy xi.
He must have a developed intuition xii.
He must possess sound judgment xiii.
He must always have consideration for others xiv.
He must be one with stable character.
131 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What are the impacts of the system theory and bureaucratic theory on educational or school administration?
2.
List the attributes of a good leader in educational system 3.1.4 Decision Making Theory 3.1.4.1 Meaning of Decision-Making Decision - making occupies a vital position in any kind of administrative activity.
It involves devising ways and means by which data can be gathered, analysed, and interpreted for the use of the managers in order to achieve the identified goal of the organisation.
It is a process of choosing a specific course of action from alternatives offering the best choice.
Systematic decision-making is an on-going procedure and not an occasional process.
New decisions are made and continually old ones are modified daily.
The quality of a decision may well determine the ultimate success or otherwise of business and its destiny (Adepoju, 2004).
Decision - making in school system aims at studying alternatives in a problem situation, with a view to providing a qualitative basis for arriving at an optimum solution in terms of the goals sought.
A few decisions can be of routine, short term or long term while some can be made easier and faster by means of special techniques.
The approaches to decision - making involve the use of different models which set out a logical sequence of events commencing with problem formulation, data collection, analysis and interpretation of data and evaluation of possible solution.
Decision - making and problem-solving in school system involve decisions on examinations, provision of accommodation, in terms of classroom, assessment of current staff strength to determine the need for extra teachers, etc.
Decisions can be policy decisions, which are deliberate and specific.
It is a planned course of action by which goals may be pursued.
Administrative decision emanates from policy decisions.
They focus on how to achieve the goals of the unit (Adepoju 2004).
3.1.4.2 Forms of Decision Decisions range from those of vital, once-for-all nature to those of a routine and relatively trivial nature (Cole, 1999).
They can be immediate in their effect or they can be delayed.
The major categories of decisions according to Cole (1999) are as follows: 132 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 1.
Strategic Decisions These are the basic long-time decisions, which settle the organisation’s relationship with its environment.
It is the management prerogative to achieve an objective pertaining to overall survival of an organisation.
Also included here would be the major policy statements of the organisation.
Such decisions tend to be non-routine and non-repetitive.
They are usually complex, especially in terms of the number of variables, which have to be considered before final choices are made.
They cannot be quantified.
2.
Operating Decisions: These are the short-term decisions, which settle issues such as academic and examination issues.
Fewer variables are involved in the decision making process and repetitive by nature.
Operating decisions tend to take priority over others because of the weight of their volume and their ability to show results in the short-term.
They can be quantified.
3.
Administrative Decisions: These decisions arise from and are subject to the conflicting demands of strategic and operational problems.
They are essentially concerned with settling the school organisation’s structure.
They are focused on how to achieve the goal of the institution.
If the school authority designs the course content, provision of accommodation in terms of classroom, assessment of current staff strength or determines the need for extra teachers, such school authority is making administrative decisions.
4.
Programmed Decisions: These are routine decisions made within prescribed situation.
They are capable of being worked out by a computer.
This means that the variables are quantifiable and the decision rules can be clearly stated.
These criteria would certainly apply to numerous operating decisions.
A non- programmable decision cannot be quantified and so, human judgments have to be made in taking decision.
Examples are strategic decisions.
3.1.4.3 Process of Decision - Making The process of decision - making in the school system according to Adepoju (2004) involves the following: 1.
Problems Identification Definition: The problem must be identified and defined.
133 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION For example, if the school authority increases the number of students admitted into the school, a decision must be taken whether to increase the strength of the teaching staff, to increase the workload of the teachers or to employ part-time teachers to complement the existing staff.
The best choice must be made.
2.
Situation Analysis: The current situation affecting the problem must be analysed.
It is possible that out of the current situation, solution might be feasible or got pertaining to the problems.
3.
Collection of Reliable Data or Information: There are many ways of collecting relevant data or information.
It may be through the following instruments: a.
Desk research b.
Observation methods c. Experimentation d. Questionnaire e. Interview f. Telephone etc.
g. Secondary data h. Transportation i.
Laboratory j.
Administration k. Opinionnaire 4.
Analysis and Interpretation of Data: Sources of data could be primary or secondary i.
Primary Data: They are original sources.
They are specifically collected for a purpose.
They include interviews, rating scales, surveys, educational reports etc.
Primary data provide on the sport or firsthand information.
ii.
Secondary Data: These include abstracts, periodicals, educational journals, yearbooks, and publications.
Once the data are gathered, they must be analysed to arrive at the needed information.
5.
Possible Solution: The objective is to find the best solution to the problems because the quality of a decision may well determine the ultimate success and destiny of the organisation.
Therefore, there is need for genuine and accurate judgment.
6.
Evaluation of Alternative Course of Action: Each option or solution is compared with others in terms of operating income, incurring costs; the best solution would be accepted for implementation.
In selecting from among alternatives, school managers/ administrators have three bases for decision open to them; these are experience, experimentation, and research and analysis.
134 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.1.4.4 Decision Making Model Fig.3: Decision Making Model Source: Cole, G.A.
(1999) Management: Theory and Practice.
London: Letts Educational.
Decision-making models are techniques developed to aid the processes of problem definition, devising solution options and evaluating their possible consequences.
There are several techniques available to the school managers/administrators to help them to cope with decision- making.
These techniques range from broad, rational approaches, which set out a logical sequence of events commencing with problem definition and concluding by measuring results of chosen solutions, to highly quantifiable approaches in which information and options are produced leading to the better decision being taken.
Some of these techniques are discussed below: 1.
Operational Research: Operational Research comprises a collection of techniques, which apply the use of scientific models to represent real situation.
The model utilises mathematical and statistical terms to express the variables included in a decision.
Operational research techniques assist with the analysis of problems and the development of solution.
The basic approaches of these techniques are that they: 135 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION i. Formulate the problem in the context of the total system concerned ii.
Construct a mathematical model iii.
Derive a solution from the model iv.
Test the model v. Install a feedback mechanism vi.
Implement the solution.
It should be noted that operational research techniques do not implement decisions themselves but they provide the school administrators/managers with information and options that can lead to qualitatively better decision being taken.
2.
Decision Trees: This is a conceptual map of possible decisions and outcomes in a particular situation.
It is an approach towards seeing risks and probabilities in a problem situation involving uncertainty, or chance or events, by sketching in the form of a “tree” decision points, or chance or events, and the probabilities involved in various courses that might be undertaken.
The decision “tree” makes it possible to see directions that action might be taken from various decision points and the decision point relating to it in the future.
This decision-making model is very significant.
In the first place, it makes it possible for the educational administrators / managers to see the major alternatives open to them and the fact that subsequent decisions may depend upon events of the future.
In addition, by incorporating probabilities of various events in the tree, it is possible to understand the true probability of a decision leading to the desire results.
3.
Risk Analysis: This is an approach/analysis that weights risks in a situation by introducing probabilities to give a more accurate assessment of the risks involved.
This model attempts to develop for every critical variable in a decision problem, a probability distribution curve.
These decisions can be derived by asking each specialist who estimated a variable to gauge the range and probability of each variable.
4.
Preference Theory: This is also called utility theory.
It is an approach problem analysis, in which individual attitudes toward risk vary from statistical probabilities with some individuals being willing only to take lower risks than indicated by probabilities and others taking greater risks.
136 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.1.4.5 Principles Guiding Effective Decision-Making in the Educational Organisation The following are the principles that guide decision making in educational organisation: 1.
A careful and critical examination of the alternatives must be made as much as possible.
2.
Decisions must be timely made and following the established procedures governing that particular situation.
3.
Decisions made must be based on consultation, deliberation and participation by those to be directly affected by such decisions.
4.
Avoid taking a decision under emotional stress.
Be patient enough to think through the problem before arriving at a decision.
5.
Delegate as many decisions as you deem fit to other subordinates, especially the minor things in the school system.
6.
Decisions made must be communicated through appropriate channels, well in advance, to those who would execute them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Enumerate the stages involved in decision - making in educational system.
3.1.5 Role Theory 3.1.5.1 Meaning of Role Theory Role is a position that has expectations evolving from established norms.
It means not only overt actions and performances but also covert expectations held by an observer or a group of observers.
Role theory gives a way of viewing the behaviour of individuals in a group and of groups as they respond to and make demands upon individuals in the group.
It means several models that are useful for viewing, assessing, analysing and improving the principals and teachers’ roles performance.
This permits assessment of the role expectations held by the principal or teacher himself and by his significant reference groups-parents, students, central office personnel, other principals, etc.
The knowledge of the role theory will enable the principal or teacher to understand, adapt, modify and fulfill his significant social role.
Hence, concepts such as role enactment, role expectations, role conflict and role perception are paramount.
A role can also be described as specific task that a person performs in an organisation.
In the school system for instance, school administrator’s 137 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION roles include the task-areas in school administration earlier discussed in the previous unit (Unit 2 of this module) which are; school-community relationship, school curriculum instruction relationship, students/pupils- personnel, staff personnel, equipment and facilities management and finances and business management.
In the school system, each role incumbent is expected to perform certain specific tasks in his relations with the persons with whom he interacts.
Getzels and Guba (1957), described the organisation as a social system which features hierarchical role structures, and for role in the structure there are certain behaviour expectations.
Everyone in the social system is an observer of others and thus has certain perceptions and expectations of how those in other roles will behave.
For instance, there are certain behaviours associated with role of the teacher or the role of principal and thus the teacher is the observer of the principal’s behaviour when performing his role in the school and vice-versa (Afolabi, 1992).
There is also an institutional role expectation for the incumbent of each position, that is, things he must do, things he must not do, decisions he must take, and so on.
However, the role incumbent is a person with all distinctive personality characteristics and needs.
Thus, according to Getzels and Guba (1957) the observed behaviour in an organisation is a function of the interaction between the organisational or nomothetic and the individual personality or idiographic dimensions.
This model is presented in Figure 4.
Normative (Nomothetic) Dimension Personal (Idiographic) Dimension Fig.
4: The Normative and Personal Dimensions of Social Behaviour Source: Adapted from Getzels, J. N. and Guba, E. (1957).
138 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION This model shows that every behaviour in a social system is a function of the interaction between a given institutional role defined by the expectations attaching to it and the personality of a particular role incumbent defined by his need dispositions.
3.1.5.
2 Usefulness of Role Theory in School Administration a.
Through role theory, the school administrator becomes more aware of the need to define, allocate and integrate roles and to maximise the probability of achieving the goals of the school.
b.
Role theory makes it imperative for school administrators to take both role and personality into account when allocating persons to positions within the school system.
c. Through role theory, the school administrator is able to deal realistically with factors, which contribute to conflict and job satisfaction.
d. As a way of enhancing the accomplishment of school goals, the school administrator struggles to reinforce those personality needs, which enhance the roles of the individuals in the school system.
In other words, the administrator strives to achieve the goals of the school as well as satisfy the personal needs of the individuals.
3.1.6 McGregor Theory of Human Management Douglas McGregor (1960) came up with two theories (Theory X and Theory Y) to guide proper management of people and to achieve organisational goals.
3.1.6.1 Theory X – Description and Assumptions The fundamental to this theory is a philosophy of direction, close- supervision, external control and authoritarian and directive style of leadership.
McGregor based this Theory X on assumptions and propositions generally associated with the conventional or efficiency views of management (i.e.
classical organisation schools of thought), as suggested by adherents of Taylorism.
These assumptions are: 1.
The average human being has an inherent dislike for work and will avoid it if possible.
2.
Because of this human characteristic of dislike for works, most employees must be coerced, controlled, directed, and threatened with punishment to get them to put forth adequate effort toward achieving organisational objectives.
139 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.
The average human being prefers to be directed, wishes to avoid responsibility, has relatively little ambition and wants security.
4.
The average person is by nature indolent.
5.
He lacks ambition, dislikes responsibility, and prefers to be led.
6.
He is inherently self-centred, indifferent to organisational needs 7.
He is by nature resistant to change.
3.1.6.2 Theory Y – Description and Assumptions McGregor’s dissatisfaction with Theory X management and its assumptions; failure to consider certain human needs that relate to self- fulfillment, self-actualisation, ego satisfaction and the social needs, led him to formulate Theory Y which reflects a less authoritarian leadership style, as it would rely on employees’ self-control and self-direction.
This theory is based on the following assumptions: 1.
The expenditure of physical and mental efforts in work is as natural as play or rest.
2.
Eternal control and the threat of punishment are not the only means of bringing about effort toward organisational objectives to which they are committed.
3.
Commitment to objectives is a function of the rewards associated with their achievement.
3.1.6.3 Usefulness of McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y to the School Administrators • Theory X and Theory Y help school administrators to formulate meaningful personnel policies in the school system toward the achievement of the school goals.
• Theory X and Theory Y help the school administrator to know the two sides of human beings in the school system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Briefly explain the usefulness of Role Theory and McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y in School Administration 2.
What are the assumptions of Theory X and Theory Y as propounded by McGregor (1960).
3.2 The Place of Theory in Educational Administration Theory as earlier discussed is a systematic and deductive way of thinking about reality in order to explain, understand, predict and control such reality.
It is a proposition, which helps in describing, 140 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION understanding, explaining, predicting, controlling and synthesising events, situations and issues.
In educational administration, theory is very useful in the following ways: 1.
Theory helps to provide or create proper framework for the explanation of ideas or facts to be understood, explained, analysed, predicted, controlled and synthesised.
2.
Theory also provides possible answers, suggestions, approaches and occurrences to administrative situations.
3.
Through the use of theory in educational administration, rational decision- making are made possible and easier too.
4.
Theory also helps the educational administrator to synthesis his views, ideas, opinions, role and his relationship within the educational system and on the phenomena of leadership and achievement.
5.
Through the use of theory, the erroneous belief that administration of educational institutions is essentially based on mere common sense, experience and intuition rather than practice, has been discarded.
6.
Theory helps educational administrator to explore other disciplines such as mathematics, statistics and other behavioural sciences to collect relevant facts about administrative problems.
7.
Through theory, complex situations, issues and problems are resolved in educational administration.
8.
Theory allows educational administrators to discover new ideas and provides aids and direction to apply the ideas to solving new problems.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Enumerate the usefulness of theory in educational administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION Theory is a useful guide that helps the educational administrator to predict events, situations and solve problems.
It is a useful tool in the practice of educational administration.
Apart from the fact that theories provide a framework for explaining facts or ideas, they also help to understand, explain, analyse, predict, control and synthesis events and phenomena in educational administration.
141 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt again what theory is as you have done in the introductory unit to the course (Module 1, Unit 1).
The knowledge you acquired then must have helped you to fast track comprehension of the concept.
You have also learnt in this unit, the basic theories in educational administration and their distinctive features.
Equally, the uses of theory in educational administration have been explained to you.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain why the knowledge of theory is very useful to educational administrators.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adegboyeje, R.A. (1992).
Historical and Theoretical Foundations of Educational Administration in Nigeria, in Adeboyeje, R.A. (Ed).
Fundamentals of Education for Colleges and Universities.
Ondo: Ife-Oluwa Ent.
(Nig) Ltd. Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003).
Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2006).
School Management :An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Adepoju, T.L.
(2009).
Administrative Theory.
Mimeograph.
Department of Educational Administration and Planning, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife.
Afolabi, F.O.
(1992).
Administrative Theory, in Adeboyeje, R.A.
(Ed.)
Fundamentals of Education for Colleges and Universities.
Ondo: Ife Oluwa Ent.
(Nig) Ltd. Peretomode, V.F.
(1991).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective for Students and Practitioners.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. 142 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 5 STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Development of Educational Administration in Nigeria 3.1.1 The Pre Independence Period 3.1.2 The Post-Independence Period (1960 – 1969) 3.1.3 The Oil Boom Period (1970-1980) 3.1.3.1 Government Take-over of School 3.1.3.2 Introduction of Universal Primary Education (UPE) Scheme 3.1.3.3 Local Government Reforms 3.1.3.4 National Policy on Education 3.1.4 The Period of Launching of Universal Basic Education Scheme, Resuscitation of National Open University and Establishment of More Private Universities (1990-2009) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The most distinct fact about the Nigeria Educational System is the constant change in educational policies and programmes.
Various governments in Nigeria (both Military and Civilian) have introduced different policies in relation to the management, administration and control of education that affect the three basic education sub-sectors (Primary, Secondary and Tertiary) in the past.
Consequently, these policies have necessitated the management, administration and control of this factor to be placed in different hands and levels.
The knowledge of the historical perspective of educational administration in Nigeria is very important for any student in the field of educational administration.
143 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the development of educational administration in Nigeria • identify the features of each programme(s) and policy(ies) introduced by various governments • identify the levels of the sector that are mostly affected by the policies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Historical Development of Educational Administration in Nigeria 3.1.1 The Pre-Independence Period Formal education in Nigeria began around the middle of 19th Century.
Educational management and control during this period was exclusively in the hands of the Christian Missionaries.
Until the 1960s, management and control of education was a regional affair while the Federal Government only played a role in maintaining standards.
Apart from Yaba Higher College that was established in 1932 and formally opened in 1934 and the University College Ibadan (UCI) now, University of Ibadan (U.I) that was established in 1948 few primary and secondary schools were in existence (Fafunwa, 1974; Taiwo, 1980).
Untill 1951; education at the three levels and its management could be regarded as unplanned and haphazardly done (Adepoju, 2004).
According to Mgbodile (1986) Nigeria’s educational system had quite a number of interesting characteristics during this period.
One of such was the absence of a centralised or national planning of education.
Meaningful education policy started with the Richard Constitution of 1946.
With the regionalisation of education in 1951, the Western and Eastern Regional governments placed higher priority on education by introducing the Universal Free Primary Education in 1955 and 1957 in their regions respectively.
Educational planning was regionalised during this period following the three major regional divisions of the country – the East, the West and the North; each region planned and executed its own educational programmes without reference to another or to the central government (Mgbodlie, 1986).
By implication, there was decentralisation of the local government, which brought the grassroots into educational policymaking (Fagbamiye, 1982).
Because of this absence of centralised planning, there were regional differences in the structure, control and management of the educational system in Nigeria 144 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION prior to the independence in 1960.
Another major characteristic of the primary and secondary education during this period was the ownership by voluntary agencies or the missionaries, communities and private proprietors with minimal contribution by the government.
3.1.2 The Post-Independence Period (1960-1969) The first national policy that influenced education sector in Nigeria most especially, the secondary and tertiary levels emerged in 1960 following the Report of the Ashby Commission.
The Commission was set up in April 1959 to among other things; Conduct an investigation into the country’s manpower needs in the field of post-secondary and higher education over the next twenty years (1960 – 1980).
(Federal Government of Nigeria.
1960, p. 2) The Commission, which was headed by Sir Eric Ashby, submitted its Report in September, 1960 less than one month before independence and titled it Investment in Education.
The report of the commission led to the establishment of four more universities in Nigeria.
These are; University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, the University of Ife (now Obafemi Awolowo University (OAU) and the University of Lagos, Yaba.
These brought to five, the number of Universities in existence in the country.
In 1962, the National Universities Commission (NUC) was also established, to coordinate and control the growth of Universities in the country on behalf of the Federal Government.
The Management and control of primary and secondary education was more or less a partnership in the 1960s as government increased its interest in education unlike in the past when voluntary agencies dominated the affairs (Adepoju, 1998; 2004).
3.1.3 The Oil Boom Period (1970-1980) The period, 1970-1980 was characterised by government absolute control of educational system at all levels in Nigeria.
The period also witnessed the introduction of major educational policies such as: • Government take-over of schools • Introduction of the Universal Primary Education (UPE) Scheme • Local Government Reforms • Introduction of the National Policy on Education (NPE) 145 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.1.3.1 Government Take-Over of Schools (1974) The take-over of schools in the early 1970s by the Federal government in Nigeria following the civil war of 1967-1970 recorded another development in the area of secondary education and its management and control.
In Akangbou’s (1985) view, there is no evidence to suggest that, this was due to the poor “quality” of the schools taken over.
It is widely believed that such action is not unconnected with the increased interest of these governments in the functioning of the educational institutions in their states.
However, one way of achieving this is by assuming full control, both in finance and functioning, of these institutions.
During the period of take-over, all the secondary schools in the country were taken over by the government.
Consequently, the management and control of these secondary schools were in the hands of the government.
Schools management boards were consequently established accordingly by the government to assist in this direction.
3.1.3.2 Introduction of Universal Primary Education (UPE) Scheme The Universal Primary Education (UPE) scheme was launched in 1976 by the Federal Government to provide free primary education throughout the country following the Somade Commission Report in 1973.
The scheme also intended to make the operation of primary education uniform throughout the country.
Towards the commencement of the scheme in 1976, Federal Government emphasised three principal agents thus: • The Federal Government was to lay down the policy guidelines • The Federal Government to provide the Funds • The State Governments to act as agents.
UPE scheme was very significant to the development of education (primary education in particular) in Nigeria.
Having observed the serious imbalance in the educational development of the various states, the Federal government then, introduced a nation-wide universal primary education scheme with effect from September 1976.
The scheme no doubt, provided for the first time, opportunity to every Nigerian youth to go to school without the payment of fees.
The financial burden by the time the programme was launched was the responsibility of government (federal, state and local governments).
During the period, educational policymaking was a concurrent responsibility of the federal and state governments.
By implication, the federal and state governments assumed the management and control of primary education in Nigeria.
146 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.1.3.3 Local Government Reforms of 1976 The Local Government Reforms introduced in Nigeria in December 1976, brought about new development in the management and control of education at the primary level.
As Fagbamiye (1982) rightly puts it, these reforms made references to school administration at the local level as a Local Government function.
The reforms state interlia; Schools system and …..their management….should grow out of the life and social Ethos of the community which they serve.
The management and control of primary education was however shifted to the Local Government following the Local Government Reforms.
By this time, the Federal government responsibility for primary education has gradually declined in financial terms and the state governments were no longer interested in primary education.
The reforms empowered the Local Government Education Authorities (LGEAs) to carry out the functions delegated to them by the States Ministry of Education through the Education Committee set up for the purpose.
The LEA was among other things; to maintain school plant and carry out improvement programme for the staff at its area of jurisdiction as well as other functions delegated by the Commissioner for Education.
3.1.3.4 National Policy on Education (1977) Some major reforms in the structure and content were brought into the secondary and tertiary education in Nigeria following the introduction of the National Policy on Education in 1977 and the revised editions in 1981, 1985, 1995, 1998 and 2004.
The National Policy on Education (2004) was introduced to create equal educational opportunities, provide quality in education among other objectives.
The policy recognised formal education of a 6-3-3-4 structure.
Under the policy, the management/control of primary education was the responsibility of both the Federal and State Governments while the state controls secondary education at the state level.
Federal Government would ensure that uniform standard is maintained.
Apart from the primary education, all secondary schools are under the supervision and control of the state ministries of education.
The Federal Government solely finances federal secondary schools.
Prior to the commencement of the implementation, the Inspectorate Division had been created at the Federal level in 1973, which was a partial response to the need to maintaining uniform standards (see Adepoju, 2004).
Various educational bodies and agencies were assigned and set-up by the government to assist in the management and control of education at 147 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION each of the level of education.
For instance, the schools management boards were established to take care of the primary and secondary schools.
The National Universities Commission (NUC) was established to be in charge of co-ordination, financing and overall development of the Universities in the country.
NUC was also charged with the responsibility of maintaining high standards in Nigerian Universities.
Accordingly, the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) was established to manage and control all Colleges of Education in Nigeria on behalf of the Federal Government.
The National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) was also established to manage and control all Polytechnics and Colleges of Technology in the country (see Module 5 for the roles of educational agencies and parastatals in details).
3.1.4 The Period of Launching of Universal Basic Education Scheme, Resuscitation of National Open University and Establishment of More Private Universities (1990-2009) Prior to 1991, the responsibility for the management and control of primary education in Nigeria had been shared by both the federal and state Governments.
However, in 1991, the federal government handed over the management and financing of primary education to the local government.
Even though, this was for a short period, many problems emanated until the policy was reviewed in 1994 when the federal government took up the responsibility again, through the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) that was earlier established under Degree 31 of 1988.
This commission was to be assisted at the state and local government levels by the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) and the Local Government Education Authorities (LGEAS) respectively.
During this period, secondary schools owned by the federal government were managed and controlled by the federal government through the Federal Ministry of Education.
Accordingly, those institutions owned by the states were managed and controlled by the state governments through the States Ministries of Education.
Establishment of higher institutions was placed in the concurrent legislative list.
In addition, during this period and particularly in 1999, the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) was scrapped and another commission known as the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) was established following the introduction of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme.
At the state and local government levels are the State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) and 148 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION Local Government Universal Basic Education Board (LGBEB) respectively.
This period, 2000 - 2009 witnessed unprecedented increase in the number of private universities in Nigeria to complement the efforts of the conventional public universities toward provision of more access and equity.
As at October, 2009, the number of universities in Nigeria had risen to 96 out of which public ones are 59 (Federal 27, State 32).
The number of private universities has risen to 37 from 3 between 1990 through 1999 (Adepoju and Owoade, 2009).
The period under consideration also recorded the resuscitation of the National Open University in Nigeria to provide wider access to university education in the country.
Hitherto, the Act that established the institution in 1983 was suspended in 1984.
It took 18 years after, that is, 2002 before the institution could be resuscitated.
4.0 CONCLUSION The development of educational administration in Nigeria has shown that, educational system in Nigeria has passed through several stages of development.
Each of the levels of the sector has also experienced major reforms since Nigeria’s independence in 1960.
At different times, the Federal, State and Local Governments have also played their roles in respect of administration of primary, secondary and tertiary education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the stages of development of educational administration in Nigeria; from the pre-independence period to the post- independence period through the period of oil boom in the 1970s and 80s.
Equally, the reforms introduced in respect of the government takeover of schools, introduction of the Universal Primary Education (UPE) scheme; Local government reforms and the introduction of the National Policy on Education (NPE) were discussed in this unit.
The policies introduced in the 1980s and 1990s and above, were also discussed in the unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly trace the development of educational administration in Nigeria and highlight the major features of each policy/programme.
149 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(2003).
Educational Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. and Owoade, R. O.
(2009).
An Evaluation of Private Sector Participation in University Education in Nigeria.
In Journal of the World Universities Forum (Australia).
2, 1, 89 – 103.
Mgbodile, T. (1986).
Educational Administration and Supervision.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nig) Ltd. Obilade, S. (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration.
Ibadan: Odusote Bookstores Ltd. Ogunnu, M. (2000).
Introduction to Educational Management.
Benin- City: Mabogun Publishers.
150 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION MODULE 4 INSTITUTIONAL MACHINERIES FOR ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL OF EDUCATIONAL ORGANISATIONS IN NIGERIA Unit 1 The Major Education Ministries Unit 2 Basic Education Regulatory Machinery Unit 3 Higher Education Agencies Unit 4 Research/Training/Development Council Unit 5 Measurements and Evaluation/Examination Machinery Unit 6 Education Decision Making Councils and Other Regulatory Councils/Parastatals UNIT 1 THE MAJOR EDUCATION MINISTRIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Federal Ministry of Education 3.2 State Ministries of Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The administration and control of education in any country (developed or underdeveloped) are usually placed under ministries or department of education (as the case may be).
The essence of this is to ensure that government policies are adhered to strictly.
Because of the volume of their assignments federal and state ministries of education used to create parastatals or agencies that can assist them to achieve the objectives which they are set to achieve.
In this unit, attempt will be made to acquaint you with the functions which the Federal and State Ministries of Education perform in respect to administration and control of education in Nigeria.
151 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the functions of the federal ministry of education in Nigeria • discuss the functions of the respective state ministries of education in Nigeria • identify the compositions of federal and state ministries of education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Federal Ministry of Education (FME) The functions of the Federal Government in relation to education are carried out through the Federal Ministry of Education and in collaboration with those of its parastatals and agencies.
The Federal Ministry of Education is headed by a Minister who is responsible for the formulation of policies and decision-making in the ministry.
The head of the administration in the ministry is the Permanent Secretary.
There are various units or sections or departments in the ministry.
These include; Higher Education Unit (Department), Secondary Education Unit (Department), Evaluation and Examinations Unit (Department), Inspectorate Unit (Department), Planning, Research and Statistics (PRS) Unit (Department), e.t.c., each of the units (departments) is headed by a director.
According to the National Policy on Education (2004), the Federal Ministry of Education is charged with the following responsibilities: • The determination of a national policy on education in order to ensure uniform standards and quality control; • Co-ordination of education practice in Nigeria; • Advisory services in respect to all levels of education below the university.
• Federal inspectorate advisory services to help improve and maintain standards; • Planning and research on a national scale through PRS unit (department) of the ministry; • Coordination of non-formal education including adult education, vocational improvement centres, correspondence courses, etc; • Coordination of educational services and programmes; • International co-operation in education; 152 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • Co-ordination of national school examinations and relevant teacher examinations- testing and evaluation; • Establishment of a central Registry for teachers; • Prescribing minimum standard for education at all levels.
3.2 State Ministries of Education (SME) State Governments play an intermediate role in the provision, management and control of education.
They are able to perform this role through the parastatals or agencies of the ministry of education and other bodies at the state level.
The state ministry of education is headed by a Commissioner who is responsible for the formulation of policies and decision-making in the ministry.
The head of the administration in the ministry is the Permanent Secretary.
Just like we have in the federal ministry of education, there are various units or sections or departments in the state ministry.
These include; Higher Education Unit (Department), Secondary Education Unit (Department), Evaluation and Examinations Unit (Department), Inspectorate Unit (Department), Planning, Research and Statistics (PRS) Unit (Department), e.t.c., each of the units (departments) is headed by a director.
According to the National Policy on Education (2004), the Federal Ministry of Education is charged with the following responsibilities; In the National Policy on Education (2004) guideline, the functions of the SME are outlined as follows: • Policy, control and administration of education in the primary and secondary levels at the state level; • Planning, research and development of education at state level; • Inspectorate services to improve and maintain standards through regular school inspection and supervision; • Provision of education services; • Co-ordination of the activities of school boards and/or local education authorities; • Examinations, particularly, certification of primary and secondary school teachers, testing and evaluation; • Establishment of state registries for teachers; • Preparing educational development plans for the state, taking into account the social, economic and other needs of the states concerns; • In addition to all the above, performing some other related functions of the state governments in relation to education includes: - Supply of equipment and books to schools; - Formulation of rules and regulations for the enforcement of 153 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION discipline among staff and students in the state school system; - Awarding scholarships and bursaries to deserving students of the state origin; • Conducting basic and applied researches for the improvement of the quality of education in the state; • Prescribing guidelines for the establishment of new primary and post- primary schools in the state; • Educational financing as a joint venture with the Federal and local government, local communities, parents and guardians, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Federal and State Ministries of Education are playing vital roles in the administration/management and control of education industry in Nigeria just like any other ministries perform in other sectors.
These two major ministries also have some parastatals or agencies that are established to assist them perform their responsibilities.
These parastatals or agencies will be discussed in the subsequent units of this module.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the functions of the Federal Ministry of Education in Nigeria.
Also, we have discussed the functions which the State Ministries of Education are performing in respect to the administration / management and control of Education in the respective states of the federation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly highlight the major functions of the Federal Ministry of Education and State Ministries of Education in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003).
Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy of Education (Revised Edition).
Lagos: NERDC.
154 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 2 BASIC EDUCATION REGULATORY MACHINERY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) 3.2 State Basic Education Board (SUBEB) 3.3 Local Government Universal Basic Education Board (LGUBEB) 3.4 Village Education Committee 3.5 Parent- Teacher Associations 3.6 School-Based Management Committee 3.7 National Council for Nomadic Education (NCNE) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Administration of education at the basic education level should require attention of the three tiers of government (federal, state and local governments).
For instance, education at this level is expected to be a monumental national enterprise and its success will depend largely on the extent to which its efficient administration and management can be assured.
It is mainly for this reason that administration and management becomes a topical issue in the continuous policy dialogue on UBE (Obanya, 2001).
The UBE is a reform measure by Federal Government which is aimed at rectifying the existing distortions in the basic education sub-sector of Nigerian education system.
Its major goal is to bring about positive changes by making programme implementation responsive to the needs of the people and ensuring that individuals and communities becomes actively involved in the provision of basic education.
I have tried in this unit to acquaint you with basic functions of some education agencies that are saddled with the responsibility of administering basic education programme in Nigeria.
155 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state and explain the functions of the Universal Basic Commission • highlight the roles which the State Basic Education Board and Local Government Universal Basic Education Board perform • identify the composition of the school-based management committee.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) The Universal Basic Commission is headed by a National Coordinator.
There are six departments at the commission headed by directors.
Such departments are Monitoring and Evaluation, Teacher Training and Curriculum Development, Social Mobilisation, Administration and Supplies, Finance and Accounts and Planning Research and Statistics (PRS).
The management structure of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) is a model in cooperative and consultative federalism, involving all the three tiers of government (federal, state and local governments) and even extending to the community.
Of important to note is that there are twelve (12) zonal offices of the UBEC located across the country in Ibadan, Ado-Ekiti, Benin, Uyo, Owerri, Enugu, Makurdi, Ilorin, Bauchi, Yola, Kano and Sokoto ( i.e.
2 in each of the 6 geo-political zones in which the country is divided).
The creation of the zonal offices is to ensure proper and effective monitoring of the UBE programme in the states and local governments.
The following units in the National Coordinator’s office complement the efforts of the department; Special Projects, Internal Audit, Public Relations and Protocol and Legal.
The following are the functions of the Universal Basic Commission (UBEC).To: • Prescribes minimum standards for basic education throughout the country; • Coordinates, supervises and monitors the implementation of the UBE programme; • Initiates and monitors the execution of specific programmes for the attainment of UBE objectives after consultation with all state governments and relevant stakeholders; 156 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • Sensitises and mobilizes stakeholders for their effective involvement and participation in the UBE programme; • Collates, analysis and publishes information relating to basic education in Nigeria; • Carries out regular personnel audit in each state of the federation; • Advises the Federal Government on the funding of basic ducation in the country; • Receives the grant meant for basic education from the Federal Government and disburses the funds to states, local governments and any other aspects of the UBE programme based on approved guidelines; • Carries out regular audit of UBE funds at the states, local governments and other agencies implementing the UBE programmes; • Publishes a comprehensive list of basic education teachers in each state of the Federation; • Consulting with state governments in producing master plans for balanced and co-ordinate development of basic education in Nigeria.
Such plans will be in the area of: - Proposals for the basic education curriculum and syllabus tailored to meet the needs of the country; • Carrying out such other functions as may be directed from time to time, by the president of the Federal Republic of Nigeria through the Federal Ministry of Education.
You should note at this point, that the establishment of the Universal Basic Education Commission was informed by the introduction of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme in September, 1999.
Hitherto, in 1988, the Federal Military Government of Nigeria established the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) under decree number 31 of 1988, but, this commission was scrapped following the introduction of UBE programme, which have a- 9-year basic education structure (primary and junior secondary education) in Nigeria.
3.2 State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) Following the emergence of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) at the National level, o monitor and oversee the operation of the Universal Basic Education programme throughout the country, each state of the federation was mandated to establish a board to be known as State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB).
The State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) was created to saddle with the responsibility of the control of the UBE programme at the state level.
157 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION The Board is headed by a Chairman with the Executive Secretary as the administrative head.
There are six departments at the board headed by directors.
Such departments are Monitoring and Evaluation, Teacher Training and Curriculum Development, Social Mobilisation, Administration and Supplies, Finance and Accounts and Planning Research and Statistics (PRS).
The following are the functions of the State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) • See to the day-to-day running of the universal basic education programme at the state level • Formulate policies for UBE matters at the state level • Appointment, promotion and discipline of teaching and non- teaching staff on grades level 07 and above • Disbursement of funds provided to it by the UBEC; • Posting and development of teachers, including inter- state transfer at the state Level • Setting up an effective and functional supervisory unit • Supervision of other units set up under the board jurisdiction • Providing guideline on the establishment of new schools and new capital projects • Retirement and re-absorption of teachers subjects to the prevailing policy of the state government • Approval of annual estimates and establishment of proposals from the Local: - Government Basic Education Board • Responsible for the approval, training and retraining of teaching and non-teaching staff at the basic education level • Assessment and funding of salaries and allowances of teaching and non-teaching staff based on the scheme of service drawn by the board • Ensuring that annual reports are rendered by heads of schools on teachers appointed to serve under them • Preparing testimonials and certificates of service for teaching and non-teaching staff whenever necessary • Dealing with leave matters including annual vacation • Ensuring proper accounting; and annual auditing; and • Perform any other functions as may be delegated by the Commissioner or State UBEC Chairman 158 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.3 Local Government Universal Basic Education Board (LGUBEB) The Local Government Universal Basic Education Board (LGUBEB) is established in each local government area of every state of the federation.
The board is to be under the control and supervision of the state universal basic education board.
LGUBEB is headed by Education Secretary.
Each of the departments is headed by a director.
The functions of the local government universal basic education board are as follows: • The day to day administration of the basic education in its area of jurisdiction; • The appointment posting, transfer, promotion and discipline, of teaching and non-teaching staff on grade levels 01-06 in its area of jurisdiction; • Making recommendation to the SUBEB on promotion and discipline of teaching and non-teaching staff on grade level 07 and above in its areas of jurisdiction; • Collection of approved dues; • Payment of salaries, allowances and other benefits to all teaching and non-teaching staff in its area of jurisdiction; • Submission of annual estimates, annual accounts, and monthly returns to the state universal basic education board; • Acquisition and distribution of materials and equipment to all primary and junior secondary schools in its area of jurisdiction; • Undertaking capital projects, and the general maintenance of primary and junior secondary schools buildings’ and jurisdiction; • Stimulating, promoting and encouraging communal participation in the running of primary and junior secondary schools in its area of jurisdiction; • Ensuring that annual reports are rendered to SUBEB on all activities of the board committee during the previous year, especially, on teaching and non-teaching staff in its area of jurisdiction; • Providing regular feedbacks to SUBEB on the people’s reaction to government education measures in its area of jurisdiction; • Performing such other functions as may be delegated by the state basic education board.
3.4 Village Education Committee (VEC) The Act that established the Universal Basic Education Commission provides for the establishment in “each village, in each district of a 159 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION government area of a state, a village education committee”.
The village education committee applies more to the Northern and Eastern States of the Federation.
This committee is to operate under control and supervision of the district education committee.
Its functions are outlined as follows: • Promoting, encouraging and sustaining communal interest and participation in the running of primary and junior secondary schools in the village; • Ensuring good environment and full attendance in all primary and junior secondary schools within the village; • Identifying the needs of the primary and junior secondary schools within the village and submitting recommendations to the district education committee; • Keeping the district education committee informed of all education committees; • Performing such other functions as the district education committee may, from time to time, assign to it.
3.5 Parents-Teacher Association (PTA) A Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) is a democratic organization which attempts to bring parents’ and teachers, together in the interest of the child.
The role of the PTA can be described as follows: • It is a forum for passing information about the goals and aspirations of the school to the parents’ sympathy on and to elicit participation in solution of problems likely to prevent the realisation of school goals.
• It gives moral, emotional and financial support to the school.
• It encourages the participation of local community in the total education of their children.
• PTA provides an effective link between the home and the school • It helps in decision-making in school by offering suggestions and recommendations to the constituted authority in the school so as to create conducive teaching –learning environment.
• It encourages the existence of discipline in the school.
3.6 School - Based Management Committee School-Based Management Committee is the transfer of decision making concern in the planning, management and the overall development of the school level.
When a group of people are appointed or selected to meet regularly or as the case may be to make decisions at the individual school level, the committee is called school-based 160 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION management committee (SBMC).
The need to move school management to the local level stakeholders informed the establishment of SBMC particularly, when there is the need to improve efficiency and quality at the primary school level through involvement of the local level stakeholders in planning the curriculum, school budgetary planning and control, financial management, school plant facilities planning and maintenance, employment, and retraining of teachers to mention a few.
Every primary school in Nigeria has been mandated by government to have SMBC with the following membership: • A member of the traditional council of the community where the school is located • A member of the community • The headteacher • Two other teachers in the school • Representative of women organization • A member of PTA • Representative of faith based organization • Representative of artisans/professional organization in the community.
The functions of the SMBC include the following: • To sensitise and mobilize parents to send all their children to primary schools, ensure regular attendance and completion • To participate in the recruitment of teachers • To support the headteachers to supervise and monitor school activities • To participate in school budgeting and planning • To ensure the maintenance of the school facilities • To participate in the procurement of school teaching and learning materials • To participate in the development in the development of annual school programmes including term dates • To serve as medium of transmission of skills, knowledge, value and traditions of the community to younger generation.
The tenure of SBMC is expected to be three years in the first instance and a member can be re-elected for another three years.
SBMC members are expected to meet twice in a term except for emergences to discuss issues relating to the development of the primary school.
161 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Provide a structures of UBEC, SUBEB and SBMC of a primary school.
3.7 National Council for Nomadic Education (NCNE) The National Council for Nomadic Education (NCNE) was established in 1989 by the Federal Government of Nigeria by Decree No.
41 of 12th December, 1989.
The Council has a Governing Board which administers controls and directs all its operations and activities.
The objectives and functions of the Council include the following: • Formulation of policy and issue guidelines in all matters relating to nomadic education in Nigeria • Provision of funds research, development programmes and equipment • Arrangement for effective monitoring and evaluation of the activities of agencies concerned with nomadic education • Establishment, management and maintenance of primary and nomadic children • Implementation of guidelines and ensuring geographical spread of nomadic education activities and targets for the nomadic people who cross state boundaries • Liasing with Livestock Department of the Rural Development, the Directorate of Food, Road and Rural Infrastructures and with the state governments, to form an effective inter-ministerial committee that will carve out reserves, settlement, grazing area and dams for the nomadic people.
• Establishment of schools in the settlements carved out for nomadic people • Cooperating with relevant ministries and parastatals • Ensuring regular and effective inspection of nomadic schools • Collation and publication of relevant information relating to nomadic education in Nigeria • Determination of standards of skills to be attained in nomadic schools • Act as agency for channeling all external aids to nomadic school in the country • Performing all other functions for the promotion of nomadic education in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List all that you have gained in this unit.
162 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION In the process of ensuring that educational policies and programmes at the basic education sub-sector are successfully formulated and implemented at the national, state and local government levels, the universal basic education commission and boards were put in place by the government.
This commission and boards were established to assist the federal and state ministries of education to oversee the operation of basic education programme at the three levels of education in the country.
The commission and the boards have been the focus in this unit 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the functions of three major parastatals that are saddled with the administration and control of basic education sub- sector in Nigeria.
These are the universal basic education commission, the state universal basic education board and the local government universal basic education board.
Also, we have discussed the functions of other agencies that help in the realization of the school goals at the primary and secondary schools.
These are the school-based management committee, the parent-teacher association and the village education committee.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the functions of the Universal Basic Education Commission?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig.)
Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy of Education (Revised Edition).
Lagos: NERDC Federal Republic of Nigeria (2009).
The 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum.
Abuja: NERDC Obanya, Pai (2001).
Major Management Challenges of UBE.
UBE Forum 1, 1,13-22.
163 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 3 HIGHER EDUCATION AGENCIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 National Universities Commission (NUC) 3.2 National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) 3.3 National Board for Technical Commission (NBTE) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The administration of tertiary institutions in Nigeria is defined by the Federal and State governments’ legal instruments which established them.
University education is administered by the government through the parastatal of the Federal Ministry of Education known as the National Universities Commission (NUC) while Colleges of Education are under the supervision of the National Commission for Colleges of Education.
The National Board for Technical Education is saddled with the responsibility of managing polytechnic education in the country.
The functions of these three major parastatals will be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • highlight the functions of the National Universities Commission (NUC) • explain briefly the history of each of the parastatals • define the scope of the National Commission for Colleges of Education and the National Board for Technical Education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 National Universities Commission (NUC) National Universities Commission (NUC) was established in 1962 following the recommendation of the Ashby Commission Report of 1960.
The commission is a statutory body charged with the responsibility for the co-ordination, development and financing of Nigerian universities.
The commission is the only link between the government and all the universities in the country.
Apart from 164 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION establishing standards among all the universities, the commission also ensures that all universities are appropriately funded.
The Federal Government in 1974 by degree No.1 gave the NUC power; hitherto, the commission only existed as an interim body without statutory power.
The National Minimum Standards and Establishment of Institutions Degree No.
16 of 1985 also broadened the scope of the commission’s operation to include setting minimum standards for all universities and accreditation of their degrees and other academic awards (Ogunu, 2000).
Among other functions of the NUC according to Adepoju (1998; 2004) and Ogunu (2000) include the following: • approval of the establishment of new programmes, universities other degree awarding institutions in Nigeria.
• accreditation of courses and programmes in all Nigerian universities.
• co-ordination and development of all universities in the country.
• formulation of policies and conduct researches toward the development of Universities education in the country.
• linking the government with the Nigeria universities.
• disbursement of federal government grants to the universities and oversees the judicious use of such grants.
• ensuring the development of curriculum and programmes pursue in the universities in the country.
• undertaken of periodic reviews of the terms and conditions of service of personnel in all universities.
• collection, collation and analyzing information relating to university development and education in Nigeria.
• acting as agency for channeling of external aid to Nigerian universities.
• recently, the NUC has extended its scope to grading the Nigerian universities according to the performances with respect to their programmes, facilities and academic staff.
Other NUC activities in improving quality in Nigerian universities include the following: • Maintenance of minimum academic standards • Monitoring of universities • Giving guidelines for setting up private universities • Monitoring of private universities • Prevention of the establishment of illegal campuses • Appropriate sanctions 165 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why do you think a commission like the National Universities Commission should be established to administer and control university education in Nigeria?
3.2 National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) The National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) was established by the federal military government under decree No.
3 of 1989 and has its headquarters in Kaduna.
The commission’s functions are similar to that of the NUC and NBTE.
While the NUC is to all the universities in the country and NBTE is to all polytechnics in the country, the NCCE is to all colleges of education in the country.
The national commission for colleges of education among other things: • advises government on the creation of new programmes and colleges of education in the country.
• accredits the approved courses and programmes in colleges of education.
• prepares periodic master - plans for the balanced and coordinate development of all colleges of education.
• stipulates entry qualifications into all colleges of education.
• disburses government grants into all colleges of education in the country.
• oversees the judicious use of the grants in all colleges of education.
• undertakes periodic reviews of the terms and conditions of service of personnel in colleges education.
• develops general programmes and courses to be pursued by the colleges in order to ensure that they are fully adequate for the development of teacher education and production of qualified teachers for primary and secondary schools in the country.
• establishes standards and develops curriculum for all colleges of education in the country.
• collates, analyses and publishes information relating to teacher education and teachers in the country.
The National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) has also been noted for organising and sponsoring conferences, seminars and workshops for the development of educational programmes, practices and teacher education vis-a vis its roles in national development in Nigeria since its inception.
Some of the proceedings of these conferences, seminars and workshops have consequently been published in educational journals and books of reference (see Adepoju, 2004).
166 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION The NCCE handbook recently published contains all the programmes and courses approved by the NCCE to be undertaken in all colleges of education in the country.
As a parastatal of the Federal Ministry of Education, NCCE is responsible to the parent ministry.
3.3 National Board for Technical Commission (NBTE) The National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) was established as a parastatal of the federal ministry of education.
The board was established to cater for all institutions of learning undertaken technical education programmes in the country.
These include polytechnics and colleges of technology that are either owned by the federal government or state governments.
The Board was established by Degree No.
9 of 1977 and reconstituted by Degree No.
8 of 1993 as amended.
The functions of the NBTE include the following: • advises government on the creation of new programmes and polytechnics and colleges of technology.
• accredits the approved courses and programmes in polytechnics and colleges of technology.
• stipulates entry qualifications into all polytechnics in the country.
• disburses government grants and oversees the judicious use of such grants in all polytechnics in the country.
• collects, collates, analyses and publishes information relating to technical and technological education in the country • sees to the development of technical education in the country.
• undertakes periodic reviews of the terms and conditions of service of all personnel in polytechnics in Nigeria.
• establishes standard and develops curriculum for all polytechnics in the country.
• allocate funds to polytechnics in Nigeria.
• assesses the financial needs of the polytechnics.
• establishes and maintains minimum standards in skills to be attained as it deems fit from time to time • makes recommendations to the government on the national policy necessary for the training of teachers, craftmen and other middle level and skilled manpower needed The NBTE is responsible to the federal ministry of education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Make a list of the functions of the National Commission for Colleges of Education and the National Board for Technical Education.
167 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION From the discussions so far made in this unit, you have observed that agencies or parastatals such as the NUC, NCCE and NBTE play vital roles in the administration and control of tertiary education in Nigeria.
Apart from setting the minimum standards, they also see to the quality assurance of the institutions under their jurisdictions.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt the functions of the National Universities Commission in this unit.
Equally, the functions of the National Commission for Colleges of Education have been discussed.
The functions of the National Board for Technical Education have also been explained to you.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly explain the scope of two of the three parastatals discussed in this unit 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig.)
Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Ogunu, M. (2000).
Introduction to Educational Management.
Benin City: Mabogun Publishers.
168 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 4 RESEARCH/TRAINING/DEVELOPMENT COUNCILS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) 3.2 National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The importance of trainings for educational administrators and managers is recognized by the federal government in Nigeria.
It is the belief of the government that when educational administrators and managers are adequately trained, the system will be able to achieve its set objectives In the process of providing educational organisations at all levels (primary, secondary and tertiary) and other relevant federal and state governments’ parastatals with efficient and effective administrators and managers, some institutions are put in place to assist Federal Ministry of Education to organize training programmes, seminars and courses for prospective administrators of primary, secondary and higher educational institutions in Nigeria.
Also, government also recognizes the need to introduce and publish approved teaching materials and curricula for schools as well as ensuring that educational products are suitable for use in schools.
In this unit, you will learn about some of the agencies that are saddled with the responsibility of the tasks expressed above.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the functions which the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) perform • discuss the functions of the National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) • identify some of the needs for training educational administrators in Nigeria.
169 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) The National Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) was established in 1971 to stimulate and conduct educational researches and curriculum development in Nigeria.
This body comprises experts and specialists from various fields who are competent to conduct researches in their areas of specialization.
NERDC has its activities covering the publication of educational materials and researches papers, organisation or sponsorship of conferences relating to new discoveries in education, test and measurement.
Other functions of the NERDC include: • Introducing and publishing approved teaching materials and curricula for schools.
• Introducing and promoting the publication of materials for both teachers and pupils.
• Coordinating, publishing books on educational development.
• Organizing in – service training programme for teachers • Developing and trial trusting new products in education.
• Ensuring that educational products are suitable for use in schools.
Among the major achievement of NERDC in Niger was the organization and publication of the National Curriculum Conference of 8-12 September 1969.
This conference to a greater extent forms the basis of the National policy on Education in 1977 (1981 revised).
The outcomes of that historic conference were published in a book and by 1972, a high powered committee was set up to study the report of the NERDC and present recommendations based on its formulation into a new national policy on education (1977).
NERDC has also assisted in propagating and introducing social studies as a subject in primary schools in Nigeria through development projects, workshops, seminars and conference in 1972, 1973, 1988, etc.
After the conferences, NERDC recommended the teaching of social studies not only at the primary school level but also at the secondary school level (Adepoju, 1998).
The current curriculum for the 9-year basic education programme in Nigeria was designed by the NERDC with supports from other stakeholders in education.
170 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.2 National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) The National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA), Nigeria was established by the Federal Ministry of Education in collaboration with UNESCO-IIEP, Paris.
The institute is a sub- regional staff college with the main operational mandate and mission of developing a critical mass of education sector planners and managers for effective and efficient planning and management of the education system through capacity building, continuous training, monitoring and management information dissemination.
The institute is located in Ondo, Ondo State.
Objectives and functions of the institute include the following: • provision of specialized and relevant planning skills for Nigerians; • provision of educational management and development activities like training, consultancy services, research and development; • continuing professional development of practitioners through programmes directed at equipping and enhancing the competence of services to the educational planning and administrations; • organisation and management of programmes of consultancy services to educational system; • development of relevant programmes for the improvement of the national and international educational system; • projection and forecast of future trends in educational management and practices and relevance to education in Nigeria; • monitoring and review of regional and world trends in educational management and planning practices; • serving as a resource centre and network of information in educational planning in Nigeria; • provision of training for principals / hearteachers and teachers in primary and secondary schools in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have noticed in this unit that the two agencies, NIEPA and NERDC, discussed are very important in terms of trainings of educational administrators and managers and publishing approved teaching materials and curricula for schools as well as ensuring that educational products are suitable for use in schools.
The establishment of these agencies becomes necessary because of the need to ensure that educational systems in Nigeria are put in the right track.
Since research is one of the key areas in the development of educational system at 171 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION whatever level, the two agencies covered in this unit used to conduct researches on issues and problems that persist in education in Nigeria.
The results of such researches influence the contents and strategies adopted in education curricula in Nigeria over the years.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit, the functions of the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) and the National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA).
It has been established in this unit that, these two agencies play strategic roles in the development of Nigerian education system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Highlight briefly, the functions of the NERDC and the NIEPA.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig.)
Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Ogunu, M. (2000).
Introduction to Educational Management.
Benin City: Mabogun Publishers.
172 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 5 MEASUREMENTS AND EVALUATION/ EXAMINATION MACHINERY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) 3.2 The West African Examinations Council (WAEC) 3.3 The National Examinations Council (NECO) 3.4 National Business and Technical Examinations Board (NABTEB) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Evaluations and assessment of education inputs, processes, outputs and programmes is very important.
In Nigeria, there are several agencies saddled with the responsibilities of evaluating and assessing education inputs, processes, outputs and programmes.
In this unit, attempts are made to discuss with you those agencies with their specific functions and/or objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • highlight the functions of the JAMB, WAEC, NECO and NABTEB • explain briefly the history of each of the parastatals.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) The Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) was established in 1977 as an independence body to arrange and organise admissions into the Nigerian universities and the National Youth Service Crops (NYSC), a scheme which every Nigeria graduate of a higher institution is expected to participate.
The board is saddled with the responsibility of conducting uniform examinations for entry into Nigeria universities.
It is also the responsibility of the board to ensure that qualified candidates 173 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION are given places in the universities provided there are vacancies.
Recently, the functions of the board have been extended to cover all colleges of education and polytechnics in the country.
In other words, the board now admits candidates into all universities, colleges of education and polytechnics or colleges of technology in the country (both federal and state owned institutions of higher learning).
The board is made up of representatives from all the universities, colleges of education and polytechnics or colleges of technology in the country.
Other members of the board are drawn from professional bodies and educational agencies such as the WAEC, NECO, STAN, etc.
Among such examinations being conducted by JAMB are: (i) Universities Matriculation Examinations (UME) and (ii) Polytechnics and Colleges of Education and Monotechnics Matriculation Examinations (PCME) 3.2 The West African Examinations Council (WAEC) The West African Examinations Council (WAEC) was established in 1952 but started operation in 1953.
The council was established to conduct and regulate examinations for five English – speaking countries in West African countries.
These countries are the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Ghana, Liberia and Nigeria.
The council has its headquarters in Accra, Ghana.
The council has successfully conducted uniform examinations such as the senior secondary certificate examinations (SSCE), the general certificate of education examination (GCE) and other relevant examinations for the countries that are members.
Currently, WAEC is conducting researches and organizes regular seminars on how to reduce the rate of examination malpractice’s and how to maintain high standards of its examinations in the five countries mentioned above.
3.3 The National Examinations Council (NECO) The National Examinations Council (NECO) started as a Centre for Educational Measurements (CEM).
CEM was formerly a unit set up in 1991 under the Federal Ministry of Education and was charged with the responsibility of conducting Junior Secondary School Certificate Examinations for JSS 3 students in Federal Unity Schools in Nigeria.
In 1992 following the movement of CEM from Lagos to Kaduna, The National Board for Educational measurement (NBEM) was created.
174 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION This Board took over the conduct of Common Entrance Examinations to Federal Unity Schools, which hitherto was conducted by WAEC.
In April, 1999, the National Examination Council (NECO) was set up.
To facilitate effective take-off of the new Council, the National Board for Educational Measurement was named as an existing examination body to transform into the National Examinations Council (NECO).
It took over the earlier functions of NBEM and her staff The functions of NECO include the following: • Conduct the Senior Secondary School Certificate Examinations • Conduct Junior Secondary School Certificate Examinations for JSS 3 students in Federal Unity Schools.
• Conduct Junior Secondary School Certificate Examinations for JSS 3 students in conventional secondary schools 3.4 National Business and Technical Examinations Board (NABTEB) National Business and Technical Examinations Board (NABTEB) was established in 1970 by the enabling Act of the Board No.
70.
The Act charges the Board with the responsibility of conducting all Technical and Business Examinations at craft level in the country.
It also empowers the Board to conduct Common Entrance Examinations into Federal and state Technical Colleges and allied institutions.
Among other functions of NABTEB are as follows • Conduct examinations leading to the award of the following certificates i .
National Technical Certificate ii.
Advanced National Technical Certificate iii.
National Business Certificate iv.
Advanced National Business Certificate • Take over the conduct of technical and business examinations hitherto conducted by the Royal Society of Arts of London, City and Guilds of London and the West African Examinations Council • Conduct entrance examinations into Technical Colleges in the country • Prepare annual report on standards of education • Issue results and certificates 175 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • Monitor, collect and keep records of continuous assessment in Technical Colleges in the country.
• Carry out any other activities that are necessary for effective operation and realization of the objectives of the board 4.0 CONCLUSION From the discussions so far made with you in this unit, you can establish the need for the setting up of the agencies such as the JAMB, WAEC, NECO and NABTEB that are saddled with the responsibilities of evaluations and assessment education inputs, processes, outputs and programmes in Nigeria 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt brief history of the following agencies, JAMB, WAEC, NECO and NABTEB.
You have equally learnt the functions which each of them performs.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Highlight briefly, the functions of the JAMB, WAEC, NECO and NABTEB.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of school administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003).
Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2006).
School Management: An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Ogunu, M. (2000).
Introduction to Educational Management.
Benin City: Mabogun Publishers.
176 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION UNIT 6 EDUCATION DECISION MAKING COUNCILS AND OTHER REGULATORY PARASTATALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 National Council on Education (NCE) 3.2 The Joint Consultative Council (JCC) 3.3 Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN) 3.4 National Teachers Institute (NTI) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 5 above, you have learnt about the agencies that are saddled with the responsibilities of evaluating and assessing education inputs, processes, outputs and programmes.
In this unit attempt will be made to acquaint you with education decision making and other regulatory parastatals in Nigeria.
Decisions on the practice of education at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels in Nigeria are prescribed by some decision making and regulatory bodies such as the 1.
National Council on Education (NCE); 2.
The Joint Consultative Council (JCC); 3.
Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN); and 4.
National Teachers Institute (NTI) You will learn more about the agencies in the unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain why NTI and TRCN were established • highlight the functions of NCE and JCC • distinguish between NCE and JCC.
177 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 National Council on Education (NCE) The National Council on Education (NCE) is a vital advisory educational body, which helps the federal ministry of education to formulate and harmonise educational policies in Nigeria.
The body also helps FME to co-ordinate educational practices in the country.
The NCE is a body, which comprises the federal minister of education and all the state commissioners of education in the federation.
The council meets to consider current educational issues and make appropriate recommendations in relation to national education policies and development.
The commissioners of education who are the representatives of the states of the federation are expected after the meeting to put into practice, the policy decisions agreed on.
The National Council on Education ensures uniformity of educational system and practices in Nigeria.
It also ensures compliance of the effectiveness of the 6-3-3-4 system of education.
3.2 The Joint Consultative Council (JCC) The Joint Consultative Committee on Education (JCC) was established in 1955 as a professional body that exerts much influence on Nigerian educational system.
The need to establish the JCC became inevitable when serious divergences in development, policy and practices were very obvious in Nigerian prior to Nigerian independence in 1960.
As the highest professional body, its membership is made up of professional educationists and experts drawn from Nigerian universities, Institutes of Education, the West African Examinations Council, the National Examinations Council, the Nigeria Union of Teachers, the National Manpower Boards, the Ministries of Education and other bodies or agencies that have functions and activities directly concerned with the development of education at the national levels.
The establishment of the JCC has gone a long way in ensuring that, there is uniformity in educational practices in the country.
For instance, the JCC contributed immensely to the formulation of the 6-3-3-4 educational system currently being practiced in Nigeria.
The functions of the JCC include the following: • To ensure uniform educational practices in Nigeria.
• To provide professional advice on issues and matters relating to educational practices.
• To ensure that courses and programmes undertaking in universities, colleges of education and polytechnics are relevant to the manpower needs of the country 178 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • To provide an avenue through which experts can exchange ideas on educational issues.
• To make suggestions and policies relating to educational growth and development in the country • To study and make periodic review of educational curriculum and development in Nigeria.
3.3 The Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN) The Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN) was established by TRCN Act 31 of 1993.
The Act charges the Council with the following functions, among others: • Determining, who are teachers for the purpose of this Act.
• Determining, what standards of knowledge and skill are to be attained by persons seeking to become registered as teachers under this Act and raising those standards from time to time as circumstances may permit.
• securing, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the establishment and maintenance of a register of teachers and the publication from to time, of the lists of those persons.
• regulating and controlling the teaching profession in all its aspects and ramifications.
• classifying from time to time, members of the teaching profession according to their levels of training and qualifications.
• performing, through the council established under this Act, functions conferred on it by this Act.
3.4 National Teachers Institute (NTI) National Teachers Institute (NTI) was established by the federal government in 1974 when the need to up-grade and up-date teacher education programmes and teachers’ quality in Nigeria became expedient and inevitable.
The institute has its headquarters in Kaduna however; its activities covered the whole federation through the establishment of NTI centers in all the states of the federation.
The major finance used by the institute comes from the federal government with assistance from the state governments when the need arises.
Its functions include the following: • Improving the quality of teacher of teacher education programmes in Nigeria.
• Provides necessary facilities for the development of teacher education programmes in the country.
179 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION • Ensures that teachers in the country are professionally developed and provided with necessary incentives.
• Organises distance-learning programmes for those that could not undertake a full time teacher programmes and courses in universities and colleges of education in the country.
• Organises training programmes, conferences, seminars and workshops toward the development and achievement of qualitative education in the country.
• Liases with relevant educational bodies and agencies such as NERDC, FME, SME, UBEC, SUBEB, etc.
in order to foster research and development.
• Engenders suitable curriculum and instructions and ensuring result-oriented teaching learning process in the schools.
4.0 CONCLUSION Major development in education cannot be realized without effective decision making, in this unit, some of the agencies saddled with the responsibility of making decision with respect to educational practice in Nigeria are put into focus.
The decisions of the agencies, to a very large extent, have been dictating the tone of Nigerian education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the education decision making and regulatory agencies such as the National Council on Education (NCE), The Joint Consultative Council (JCC), Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN), and National Teachers Institute (NTI).
Equally, the functions of the agencies have been explained to you.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the functions of two of the following decision making and regulatory agencies: i.
National Council on Education (NCE); ii.
The Joint Consultative Council (JCC); iii.
Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN); and iv.
National Teachers Institute (NTI) 180 EDA801 ORGANISATIONAL THEORY IN EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adepoju, T.L.
(1998).
Fundamentals of school administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Alafas (Nig) Company.
Adepoju, T. L. (2003).
Educational Administration at a Glance.
Ibadan: Corporate Publications.
Adepoju, T. L. (2004).
Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Adepoju, T.L.
(2006).
School Management : An Analytical Approach.
Ibadan: Educational Industries (Nig) Ltd. Ogunu, M. (2000).
Introduction to Educational Management.
Benin City: Mabogun Publishers.
Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (2005).
Teachers Code of Conduct (Revised).
Abuja: TRC.
181
