 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDP 807 COURSE TITLE: IMPLEMENTATION OF EDUCATIONAL POLICY PLANS 1COURSE GUIDE EDP 807: IMPLEMENTATION OF EDUCATIONAL POLICY PLANS Course Developer: Prof J.K. Adeyemi, Department of Educational Studies and Manageme University of Benin Benin City.
Unit Writer: Prof J.K. Adeyemi, Faculty of Education University of Benni Course Editor: Prof Remi Longe Faculty of Education University of Ibadan Programme Overseer Dr Ogundiran S O School of education National Open University Of Nigeria Victoria island Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr Ogundiran S O National Open University of Nigeria Victoria island Lagos 2  CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to the Course Guide 3.2 A Guide through the Course 3.2.1 Course Aims and Objectives 3.2.2 Course Materials and Structure 3.2.3 How to get the Most from the Course 3.3 Course Delivery 3.3.1 Facilitation 3.3.2 Tutorials 3.3.3 Counselling 3.4 Assessment 3.4.1 Self Assessment Exercises 3.4.2 Tutor-Marked Assignments 3.4.3 Final Examination and Grading 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A guide to a course is referred to as Course Guide.
Self- instructional materials are usually accompanied by a Course Guide.
The course guide helps you to navigate through this course effectively.
It is an access device designed to introduce you to the course materials and to guide you on how to use them.
A course guide also functions as a reference tool for the learners to consult when they have questions about the course.
Such questions could include: how to plan the time available in studying the course?
When to submit assignments?
and the support that is available to you.
It is equally meant to guide you to perform tasks, such as designing your personal time-table for study.
The course guide is therefore provided to give you a broad overview of the course and its delivery.
3 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the purpose of a course guide • outline the structure and contents of the course • provide a summary of what the course is about • describe how to study the course and • provide information on support services and assessment of the course.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction Welcome to EDP 807: Implementation of Educational Policy Plans.
It is a two (2) credit unit course, offered at the Ph.
D level.
It has been developed with appropriate local examples for the Nigerian audience.
This course guide is for distance learners enrolled in the Ph.
D programme of the National Open University of Nigerian.
This guide is one of the several resource tools available to help you to successfully complete this course and ultimately your programme.
In this guide, you will find very useful information about this course.
They include: aims, objectives, what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using, available services to support your learning, information on assignments and examination.
It also offers you guidelines on how to plan your time for study; the amount of time you are likely to spend on each study unit;and your tutor-marked assignments.
I strongly recommend that you go through this course guide and complete the feedback form at the end before you begin your study of the course.
The feedback form must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator along with your first assignment.
This guide also provides answers to several of your questions.
However, do 4 not hesitate to contact your study centre if you have further questions.
I wish you all the best in your learning experience and successful completion of this course.
3.2 A Guide through the Course 3.2.1 Course Aims and Objectives 1) Course Aims This course aims to equip the learners with the knowledge and understanding of the implementation process and strategies of educational policy plans.
2) Course Objectives There are objectives to be achieved in each study unit of this course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
On completion of this course, you should be able to: • explain the nature of educational planning and plans; • outline the strategy components of planning and educational planning; • describe the role of educational planning in the designing of implementation strategy; • highlight the areas of priority in the planning strategies based on the peculiarities of nations; • explain the importance of data in the designing and evaluation of policy strategies; • explain the policy making process; and • outline the implementation strategies to various aspects of national education goals and aspirations.
3.2.2 Course Materials and Structure Course Summary 5MODULE 1: Nature and Components of Planning Educational Planning and Plan Implementation Unit 1: Overview of Planning and Educational Plan Implementation.
Unit 2: Strategy Components of Planning and Educational Planning.
Unit 3: Evolution of Policy Plans in Education.
Unit 4: Stages of Policy Planning and Resources Required in Nigeria.
Unit 5: Issues in Educational Planning and Plan Implementation Processes.
MODULE 2 Planning and Designing of Plan Implementation Strategies Unit 1: Education Policy Development Analysis Unit 2: Strategies for Policy Plan Implementation Unit 3: Data and Information in the Designing and Evaluation of Planning Strategies Unit 4: Preparing Educational Plans for Implementation Unit 5: Allocation of Resources for Planning and Plan Implementation MODULE 3: Implementing Educational Policy Plans for National Aspirations Unit 1: National Education Aspirations Unit 2: Responsibilities and Strategies for Policy Implementation in Achieving National Aspirations Unit 3: Challenges and Problems of Policy Planning and Plan Implementation Unit 4: Management of Plan Implementation Study Plan This table is a presentation of the course and how long it should take you to complete each study unit and the accompanying assignments.
Unit Title of Study Unit Weeks/ Assignment 6 Activity Course Guide 1 Course Guide Form Nature and Components of Planning, Educational Planning and plan Module 1 Implementation Overview of Planning and Educational 1 Assignment Plan Implementation.
2 Strategy Components of Planning and 2 Assignment Educational Planning.
TMA to be 3 Evolution of Policy Plans in Education 3 submitted Stages of Policy Planning Resources Required 4 4 in Nigeria Issues in Educational Planning and plan 5 5 Assignment Implementation Processes Module 2 Planning and Designing of Plan Implementation Strategies 1 Education Policy Development Analysis Assignment 6 2 Strategies for Policy Plan Implementation Assignment Data and Information in the Designing 3 Assignment and Evaluation of Planning Strategies 7 Preparing Educational Plans for 4 Assignment Implementation Allocation of Resources for Policy 5 8 Assignment Planning and Plan Implementation Module 3 Implementing Educational Policy Plans for National Aspirations 1 National Education Aspirations 9 Assignment Responsibilities and Strategies for Policy 2 Implementation in Achieving National 10 Assignment Aspirations Challenges and Problems of Policy 3 11 Assignment Planning and Plan Implementation TMA to be 4 Management of Plan Implementation 12 submitted References/Further Readings Abernethy, D.B.
and Coombs, T. (1960) (cid:8220)Education and politics in developing countries(cid:8221), Harvard Education Review, 33 (3) 7Adesina, S. (1982) Planning and development in Nigeria, Ibadan: Boards Publications Ltd. Adeyemi, J. K. (1995) (cid:8220)Stages in the planning process in Peretomode, V. F. (ed) Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Publishers, 145 (cid:8211) 156.
Aghenta, J.
A (1993) Principles and Practice of Educational Planning: Focus on the developing Countries.
Benin City: NSEP.
Akangbou, S.D.
(1982) Qualitative and quantitative aspects of educational planning, Monograph, Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
Babalola, J.B (2003) (cid:8220)Educational policy analysis and an examination of Nigerian educational policies(cid:8221) in Babalola, J.B. (ed) Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Dept.
of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, 39-75.
Dunham, D.B., and Price, D.E.
(1973) A language for planning and hierarchy of terms.
Salem: Oregon Department of Education.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) National Policy on Education.
Lagos: Federal Republic of Nigeria.
FRN (1999) Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Abuja: Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Hanson, K. (1968) (cid:8220)Planning change(cid:8221) in Morphet, E.L., and Jesser, D.L.
(eds) Cooperative Planning for Education.
Denver, Colo: Conference of State Representative.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981) Government and education.
Mimeograph.
Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
Nwadiani, M. (2000) Economic dimension of educational planning in Nigeria: Theory and Practice.
Benin city: Monose Amalgamates.
8 Musazzi, J.O.S.
(1982) The theory and practice of educational administration.
London: Macmillan Pubs.
Stewart, M.S.
; Powers, B.C.
; Murphy, P.D., and Crosby, R.K. (1978) (cid:8220)Using resources to support planning functions(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) idem.
Virginia: the American Vocational Association Inc. 129-151.
Tuttle, F.T.
and Hopkins, C.O.
(1978) (cid:8220)Implementation of planning programme(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) idem.
Virginia: the American Vocational Association Inc. 203-210.
3.2.3 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the Study Units replace the university lecturers.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the course materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Just as a lecturer might give you in-class exercises, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times.
Each of the Study Units has common features, which are designed to aid your learning.
The first feature is an introduction to the subject-matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the units.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
Self Assessment Exercises are interspersed throughout each study unit.
These exercises are designed to help you recall what you have studied and to evaluate your learning by yourself.
You should do each Self Assessment Exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
The Summary at the end of each unit also helps you to recall all the main topics discussed in the main content of each unit.
There are also Tutored-Marked Assignments at the end of each unit.
Working on these assignments will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments, which you will submit and the final examination.
9It should take you about three hours to complete a study unit, the exercises and assignments.
When you have completed the first study unit, take note of how long it took you and use this information to draw up a time-table to guide your study for the rest of your course.
The wide margins on the left and right side of the pages of your course book are meant for you to make notes of main ideas or key points at which you can use when revising the course.
If you make use of all these features, you will significantly increase your chances of passing the course.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Outline the objectives you intend to achieve at the end of this course.
3.3 Course Delivery As an open and distance learner, you learn through several ways.
You learn when you interact with the content in your course materials in the same way as a student interacts with the teacher in a conventional institution.
You also learn when you are guided through the course; however, you are not taught the course.
Instead, your course material is your teacher, and as such you will not be able to get answers to any questions, which may arise from your study of the materials.
It is for this reason that, in addition to the course material, which you have received, the delivery of this course is supported by tutorial, facilitation, and counselling support services.
Although these services are not compulsory, you are encouraged to take maximum advantage of them.
3.3.1 Tutorial Sessions The total number of tutorial hours for this course is 8 hours.
Tutorial sessions form a part of your learning process as you have an opportunity to receive face-to-face contact with your tutorial facilitator and to receive answers to questions or clarifications, which you may have.
Also, you may contact your tutorial facilitator by phone or mail.
On your part, you will be expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units.
Write your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from tutorial sessions.
Information about 10 the location and the time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Tutorial sessions are a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You will need to contact your study centre to arrange the time schedule for the sessions.
You will also need to obtain your tutorial facilitator(cid:8217)s phone number and e-mail address.
Tutorial sessions are optional.
However, the benefits of participating in them provide you a forum for interaction and your group discussions, which will minimize the isolation you may experience as learner.
3.3.2 Facilitation Facilitation is learning that takes place both within and outside of tutorial sessions.
Your tutorial facilitator guides your learning by doing the following: • co-ordinate group discussion; • provide feedback on your assignments; • pose questions to confirm learning outcomes; • co-ordinate, mark and record your assignment/examination score; and • monitor your progress.
The language of instruction for this course is English.
The course material is available in print, CD formats, and also on the university website.
On your part, you will be expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units.
Write your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from facilitation.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Time of facilitation is a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You should contact your tutorial facilitator if: • you do not understand any part of the Study Units; • you have difficulty with the Self Assessment Exercises; 11• you have a question or a problem with assignment, with your facilitator(cid:8217)s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Counselling Counselling forms part of your learning because it is provided to make your learning experience easier.
Counselling is available to you at two levels, academic and personal counselling.
Student counsellors are available at the study centre to provide guidance for personal issues that may affect your studies.
Your study centre manager and tutorial facilitators can assist you with questions on academic matters such as course materials, facilitation, grades and so on.
Make sure that you have the phone numbers and e-mail addresses of your study centre and the various individuals.
3.4 Assessment There are three components of assessment for this course.
Self Assessment Exercises and Assignment at the end of each study unit; the Tutor-Marked Assignments; and a written examination.
In doing these assignments, you are expected to use the information gathered during your study of the course.
Below are detailed explanations on how to do each assignment.
3.4.1 Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) There are Self Assessment Exercises spread out through your course material.
You should attempt each exercise immediately after reading the section that precedes it.
Possible answers to the exercises are provided at the end of the course book; however, you should check the answer only after you must have attempted the exercises.
The exercises are for you to evaluate your learning; they are not to be submitted.
There are also questions spread through each study unit.
You are required to attempt these questions after you have read a study unit.
Again, the questions are to help you assess your knowledge of the contents of the unit.
You are not required to submit the answers for the SAE .
3.4.2 Tutor-MarkedAssignments (TMA) 12 There are four Tutor-Marked Assignments for this course.
The assignments are designed to cover all areas treated in the course.
You will be given your assignments and the dates for submission at your study centre.
You are required to attempt all the Tutor- Marked Assignments.
You will be assessed on four, but the best three performances will be used for your continuous assessment.
Each assignment carries 10% and together will count for 30% of your total score for the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator for formal assessment on or before the stipulated dates for submission.
The work that you submit to your tutorial facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of your total course score.
Guidelines for writing Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
On the cover page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMA1, TMA2 etc), and date of submission, your name and matriculation number.
It should look like this: Course Code: Course Title: Tutor-Marked Assignment: Date of Submission: School and Programme: Name and matriculation Number: 2.
You should endeavour to be concise and to the point in your answers and adhere to the word limit where given.
Your answers should be based on your course material, further readings and experience.
However, do not copy from any of these materials.
If you do, you will be penalized.
Remember to give relevant examples and illustrations.
3.
Use ruled foolscap sized paper for writing answers.
Make and keep a copy of your assignments.
4.
Your answers should be hand-written by you.
Leave a margin of about 1.5 inches of the left side and about 5 lines before the answer to the next question for your tutorial facilitator(cid:8217)s comments.
13 5.
When you have completed each assignment, make sure that it reaches your tutorial facilitator on or before the deadline.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your study centre manager and tutorial facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
3.4.3 Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDP 807 will be of 21/ hours duration, 2 and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of Self Assessment Exercises and questions in the Tutor-Marked Assignments, which you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your answers to Self Assessments and Tutor-Marked Assignments before examinations.
For you to be able to be eligible to sit for the final examinations, you must have done the following: 1.
You should have submitted all the Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course.
2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
The deadline for examination registration will be available at your study centre.
Failure to submit your assignments or to register for the examination (even if you sit for the examination) means that you will not have a score for the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out the marks that constitute the total course score.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 (Four to be Three assignments submitted, but the best three marked, each10%, of all the assignments totaling 30%.
selected).
14 Final Examination 70% of Overall Course Score.
Total 100% of Course Score SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the three major characteristics of course taken by distance learning delivery mode.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, all the features of this course guide have been designed to facilitate your learning in order that you achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
They include the aims and objectives, course summary, course overview, Self Assessment Exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments.
You should ensure that you make maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
5.0 SUMMARY EDP 807: Implementation of Educational Policy Plans provides the knowledge base upon which you master the strategies of policy plan implementation in the educational system.
Upon completing the course, you should be able to explain the nature of education planning and plans; outline the strategy components of educational planning; describe the role of educational planning in the designing of educational strategies.
You will also be able to explain the importance of data in the designing and evaluation of policy strategies; explain the policy making process, and outline the implementation strategies to various aspects of national education goals and aspirations.
I wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it interesting and useful.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 15 1.
Highlight what you should do to get the most from this course.
2.
Outline the guidelines for writing Tutor-Marked Assignments.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS NOUN (2009) Course material development in open and distance learning.
Training manual.
Lagos: NOUN.
Inegbedion, J.
(2006) Guidelines to course material development.
Femi Peters and C. Ofulue (eds).
STRIDE, Indira Ghandi National Open University (2006) Programme guide, M.A in distance education.
New Delhi.
IGNOU.
16 EDP 807: IMPLEMENTATION OF EDUCATIONAL POLICY PLANS Course Developer: Prof J.K. Adeyemi, Department of Educational Studies and Management University of Benin Benin City.
Unit Writer: Prof J.K. Adeyemi, Faculty of Education University of Benni Course Editor: Prof Remi Longe Faculty of Education University of Ibadan Programme Overseer Dr Ogundiran S O School of education National Open University Of Nigeria Victoria island Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr Ogundiran S O National Open University of Nigeria Victoria island Lagos 17MODULE 1 NATURE AND COMPONENTS OF EDUCATIONAL PLANNING AND POLICY PLAN IMPLEMENTATION Unit 1: Overview of Planning and Educational Plan Implementation.
Unit 2: Strategy Components of Planning and Educational Planning.
Unit 3: Evolution of Policy Plans in Education.
Unit 4: Stages of Policy Planning and Resources Required in Nigeria.
Unit 5: Issues in Educational Planning and Plan Implementation Processes.
UNIT 1 OVERVIEW OF PLANNING AND EDUCATIONAL PLAN IMPLEMENTATION.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Planning as a Management Concept 3.1.1 Meaning of Planning 3.1.2 Types of Planning 3.2 Concept of Educational Planning 3.2.1 Meaning of Educational Planning 3.2.2 Purpose of Educational Planning 3.2.3 The Coverage of Educational Planning 3.3 Plan Implementation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor (cid:8211) Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION All human activities require planning so as to ensure effective implementation process.
Planning is a future(cid:8211)oriented activity and a product of series of decisions.
Central to planning is the making of choices.
Like general planning, educational planning is a process of preparing a set of decisions about education for future actions.
The essence of planning is to lead to the emergence of decisions, policies or plans that are to be implemented for the growth and development of education.
In this unit, you will learn the meaning and types of planning, meaning and purposes of educational planning, as well as its coverage.
You will also learn the basic meaning of plan implementation.
18 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concepts of planning and educational planning • outline the types of planning • highlight the purposes of educational planning • describe the scope of educational planning • explain the concept of plan implementation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning as a Management Concept 3.1.1 Meaning of Planning Generally, planning is a process of identifying choices for future actions based on the available resources so as to address the societal problems.
According to Longe (2003), planning implies given thoughts to the goals, aspirations and priorities of a nation.
According to Oxford Advanced Learner(cid:8217)s Dictionary (2000), to plan is to device, to design, to arrange before hand.
Dior (1963) defined planning as (cid:8220)the process of preparing a set of decisions for action in the future and directed at achieving goals by optional means(cid:8221).
Thus, planning involves the preparation of a series of decisions.
The decisions are meant to address the future.
The decisions are to address the objectives of the society or organization of which it is a part.
The resources available, which are in most time limited, are to be considered in the process.
Planning, as a process, reflect the way in which people acting through organized entities endeavour to reconcile their goals with available resources through the best means (Nwankwo, 1981).
According to Aghenta (1993), planning can be simply described as the process of drawing or sketching an object on a flat surface just like the earliest form of building plans.
Planning is a process of designing of a project or programme to be executed for a purpose.
Therefore, planning is the first activity that should precede Implementation.
Planning is a deliberate and organized process.
It is also rational and continuous.
Planning can be carried out by individuals, organizations and corporate bodies.
3.1.2 Types of Planning Planning is classified variously according to its functions, structure and level of decision.
It can also be classified according to time horizon and scope of 19the plan.
Planning classifications are diverse and over-lapping.
Because of this we will only discuss the classification by level of planning, time horizon and scope of the plan.
1.
Using the level of planning, planning can be classified as follows: a. Normative Planning b.
Strategic Planning c. Operational Planning d. Management Control Planning a) Normative Planning Normative planning takes place at the highest level of the polity.
This planning process involves the formulation of policies that address the values and aspirations of the society.
The future needs of the people are the governmental priorities.
Under an ideal situation, normative planning is participatory and largely democratic.
b) Strategic Planning The strategic level of planning is made up of the strategic and tactical planning.
Tactical planning concerns the allocation of resources among stated goals.
Strategic planning on the other hand concerns the acquisition of resources, whether new or from other sources.
Strategic planning is a long- range planning, and takes a long look ahead to determine future occurrences and actions.
It is non-recurring.
It has a long time horizons and it is done at managerial level.
Strategic planners are to envision and establish plans and programmes to serve the needs that will be in place in 5-10 years ahead.
Strategic planning makes use of long-range planning, which encompasses current directions and trends over a period of time, rather focusing only on existing programmes.
Strategic Planning recognizes the need for new programmes and the elimination of others.
Structurally, Nwadiani (1998) opined that strategic planning derives its frame from normative planning.
This could be because it is the political authority that determines the level of planning to adopt.
The activities of strategic planning are functionally proactive that is anticipation and planning for change are many.
At this stage, the policies that are formulated at the normative level are translated into operational programmes and plans.
According to Nwadiani (1998), the process of strategic planning involves the following: - specification of goals and objectives - identification and analysis of alternative strategies 20 - selection of the best strategy - implementation of the selected alternatives - monitoring and evaluation of outcomes there from.
Strategic planning considers the resources situation in the implementation of the plans and programmes.
Operational Planning At the level of operational planning, planned policy programmes are translated into projects for effective implementation.
Operational planning lays out the frame of what should be done and how it should be done.
Operational planning deals with the feasibility of a programme and ranks all objectives in order of priority.
This is necessary because of the limited resources to carry out implementation.
Operational planning gives rise to a yearly or annual plan.
This can take the form of an annual budget as we have in Nigeria.
Operational planning analyses the limits of the available resources for action.
However, it is meant for a short-range planning.
Management Control Planning Management control planning is concerned with the planning for operations, accounting, and administrative responsibilities in the process of programme implementation.
What should be done for operations must be precisely defined.
For accounting, the projected activities or events need to be structured in such a manner that accurate information on management decisions can be obtained.
Planning for administrative responsibilities is concerned with the utilization of the available resources to achieve the stated goals (Moss and Pucel, 1978).
The management control planning, short-range planning or work planning is of the programme or project type.
It is concerned with the immediate task of planning, organizing, scheduling, and resource controlling.
It is often done in connection with the preparation of annual budget.
Under this planning, the work plan will indicate the following: - the work to be done or objective to accomplish - a description of resources required - a set of alternative methods - provision for evaluating performance after the plan has been placed in operation.
212.
Using the time horizon classification, planning can be divided as follow: a.
Short-term Planning b. Medium-term Planning c. Long-term Planning Note that there is no serious rigidity in time duration between them.
a.
Short-Term Planning:- The implementation of short-term planning does not exceed one year, that is, one fiscal year.
b. Medium-Term Planning:- This planning falls between two to five or even ten years c. Long-Term Planning:- Planning of a long-term duration falls between ten to twenty years, or even above.
3.
Using the scope of the plan, planning can be classified as follow: a) Micro-level Planning b) Macro-level Planning a) Micro-Level Planning:- This is concerned with any planning activity that is carried out at local government or institutional level, that is, the school level.
It includes the planning activities by the Local Education Authority, School Managers, and teachers concerning facility planning, time-tabling, time scheduling and curriculum planning.
b) Macro-Level Planning:- This involves policy making, resource allocation and target setting at state, national and international levels.
However, the above classifications apply to all kinds of planning in organizations.
The kinds of planning include: (a) Educational planning (b) Physical planning (c) Academic planning (d) Town and Regional planning (e) Development planning (f) Economic planning (g) Social planning (h) Curriculum planning etc.
SELF ASSESSSMENT EXERCISE 1 22  1.
Define the term planning?
2.
Outline the classification of planning, using the level and scope of planning.
3.2 Concept of Educational Planning 3.2.1 Meaning of Educational Planning Educational planning can be described as a process of making education decisions about future actions.
It can be seen as a critique and readjustment of the present state of education so that the future may be influenced.
It is a way of influencing the future of the education system by our actions of today.
It can also be described as the process that uses information in an organized and rational way to make decisions about the future of education, which are designed to attain desired goals more effectively (Moss and Pucel, 1978).
Beeby (1966:4) defined educational planning as (cid:8230)the exercise of foresight in determining the policy, priorities and cost of an educational system, having due regard for economic and political realities, for the systems potential for growth and for the needs of the country and the pupils served by the system.
Educational planning, like the general planning is comprehensive and continuous.
You should not lose sight of the keywords in Beeby(cid:8217)s definition.
They are foresight (future), policy determination, priorities, and cost of educational system.
Others are due regard; economic and political realities of the system; and the needs of the country.
Educational planning deals with the analysis and synthesis of facts and information relevant to education to make rational decisions that concerns educational policies, programmes and plans.
This brings the appropriateness of Coombs (1970) definition, which explains educational planning as (cid:8220)the application of rational, systematic analysis to the process of educational development with the aim of making education more effective and efficient in responding to the needs of its students and society.
(cid:8221) Therefore, a plan is a product of the planning process.
It is a blueprint for action towards organizational goal attainment.
In the same vain, educational plan constitutes the document or blueprint that is an offprint of the educational planning process, which is meant to direct actions in education (Agabi, 1995).
233.2.2 Purpose of Educational Planning Providing education for the citizens in a country like Nigeria is becoming complex and demanding.
This is coupled with the rising cost of education in the midst of dwindling financial allocation to education; the growing influence of technological and social change; the politics and politicization of education; the need to ensure standard of and quality of education; and the need to achieve the national educational and developmental goals and aspirations have all made planning education imperative.
There are many purposes of planning education.
Aghenta (1993) broadly put them as two, they are to: (i) Ensure that the educational system is effectively and efficiently planned and operated.
(ii) Ensure that education serves the needs and aspirations of the society in general and the students in particular.
Specifically, education planning is useful for the following reasons: (a) Educational planning enables the education managers gain economic insights in the use of resources, which are in most cases limited, educational planning ensures rational allocation of resources to various education programmes, projects and among the levels of education.
(b) Because educational planning processes data and information on education through in-depth analysis, it ensures rational and adequate facilities and equipment provision and distribution in the educational institution.
(c) Education is planned to ensure internal efficiency of the school system.
That is, to reduce or eliminate wastage in the system.
(d) Educational planning ensures the harmonization of the interests of the various stakeholders in education business.
That is, the interests of the students, parents and the society.
(e) Education planning gives direction to actions and facilitates the control of education resources, and provides basis for monitoring and evaluation of the standards, benchmarks and guidelines.
(f) Educational planning integrates various knowledge areas, such as mathematics, statistics, computer science, economics, sociology etc to operationalize the planning of education.
(g) Education is planned to ensure relevance to societal values and aspirations.
24 3.2.3 The Coverage of Educational Planning Educational planning is an integral part of the overall national planning.
It focuses on the formulation of system-wise philosophy, goals, and objectives for the educational system.
Educational planning covers the organization of relevant data and information; the determination of personnel; space and materials.
It also covers the examination of alternatives to establish priorities.
It provides for communication and information retrieval, resources analysis, assessment and evaluation of education objectives.
Specifically, the coverage of educational planning includes the following educational interests: (i) Finance:- Educational planning is interested in the judicious use of funds allocated to education.
It plans for revenue, handles costing and budgeting in education.
(ii) Personnel:- The adequacy in quantity and quality, training, the specialization, the trend in growth overtime constitute the part of education planning coverage.
(iii) Physical Resources:- The provision in quantity and quality of facilities, their utilization, their distribution and the general plant planning is within the ambit of educational planning.
(iv) Programmes and Services:- The organization, the patterns of activities and development overtime.
(v) Aims and Objectives:- The formulation, the expectations and aspirations, the expected outputs are parts of educational planning interests.
(vi) Alternative Decisions:- The preparation, which enables policy makers to make rational choices is an integral part of educational planning coverage.
3.3 Plan Implementation Formulating a policy or designing a plan is meaningless except it is implemented.
Implementation is the transformation of education plan or policy into action.
Plan implementation is a critical stage in the policy planning process.
Implementation links the policy plans to their actual performance.
During implementation, the following are rules rather than the exceptions (Haddad 1994: 26).
25- Circumstances related to implementation cause policy or plan modifications to take place; - Feedback obtained during implementation causes reassessment of aspects of policy or plan decision and subsequent modifications by policymakers; and - The mere translations of abstract policy intentions into concrete implementation cause reassessment and redesign.
These changes occur with great frequency because implementation problems are often greatly underestimated during the stage of policy planning.
Whatever the case, there are problems and surprises in the course of implementation.
In implementing a plan, changes may be necessary due to unsatisfactory results or pressures emanating from outside, which may cause reassessments.
There are various aspects of implementation to be considered.
They include: staffing, directing and controlling.
The qualifications of the personnel to handle the implementation of any plan must be seriously considered.
There shall be a clear description of expectations and the actual performance expected in the specified task.
Directing and controlling are both action oriented.
The actions involve the tasks to be performed, responsibilities of personnel and methods of accomplishing activities.
Trial and error should be avoided during implementation of education plans.
As such implementing personnel should be persons that are sound technically.
They should be skillful and knowledgeable.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 1.
Give the meaning of educational planning.
2.
Why should we plan education in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, it can be concluded that planning as a process of preparing for the future should precede all human activities, because it reconciles people(cid:8217)s goals and aspirations with the available resources through the best means.
Educational planning, being an integral part of the general planning also involves a process of making future decisions about education.
It is guided by the stated objectives and the available resources.
Educational planning is essential for rational and optimal use of resources to achieve stated goals.
26 The eventual policies and plans emanating from planning processes must be translated to actions through viable implementation before they can be meaningful.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the various meanings of planning and educational planning.
You have learnt that both the general planning and educational planning are activities that focus on the decisions for future actions.
You have learnt the types of planning through various classifications.
Such classifications could be based on time horizon, level of decisions, structure and the scope of plan.
We discussed the purpose and the coverage of educational planning.
We also discussed what plan implementation is about.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
1.
Briefly explain the concept of educational planning.
2.
Highlight the rational for educational planning 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Agabi, O. G (1995) (cid:8220)Educational Planning: An overview(cid:8217) in Peretomode, V.F (ed) Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Educational Research and Publishers ltd. Aghenta, J.
A (1993) Principles and practice of educational planning: Focus on the developing Countries.
Benin City: NSEP.
Beeby, C.E (1966) The quality of education in developing countries.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Coombs, P. (1970) What is educational planning?
UNESCO: IIEP.
Dror, Y.
(1963) (cid:8220)The planning process(cid:8221), in International Review of Administrative Sciences, 29 (1):46-58.
Hadddad, W. D. (1994) The dynamics of education policymaking.
Washington D. C: The World Bank.
Longe, R. S (2003) (cid:8220)Introduction to educational planning(cid:8221) in Babalola, J.
B (ed) Basic Text in Educational planning, Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, 1-34.
27Moss, J. E. and Pucel, D. J.
(1978) (cid:8220)A strategy of comprehensive programme planning(cid:8221), in Lamar, C. S (ed) Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education: A Guide for Administrators.
Virginia: The American Vocational Association.
Nwadiani, M. (1998) Educational management for Sub-Saharan Africa.
Benin City: NSEP Nwakwo, J. I (1981) Educational planning: Theory and methods.
Lahore/Karachi: IZHARSONS.
UNIT 2: STRATEGY COMPONENTS OF PLANNING AND EDUCATIONAL PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 28 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of planning strategy 3.2 Strategy Components of Planning and Educational Planning 3.2.1 Goals and Target-Setting 3.2.2 Policy and Plan Design 3.2.3 Resources 3.2.4 Costing and Budgeting 3.2.5 Means 3.2.6 Implementation 3.2.7 Monitoring and Evaluation 3.3 Areas of Priority for the Planning Strategies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are several components of planning and educational planning that are strategic for planning operations.
These strategic components must be provided, some must be carried out and some must be attained for planning efficiency so that planning can impact positively on the national development in general and educational development in particular.
In this unit, you will study the characteristics of planning strategy; the strategy components of planning and educational planning; and the component areas of priority in planning strategy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Outline the characteristics of planning strategy • Identify the strategy components of planning and educational planning • Explain the strategy components of planning and educational planning • Highlight the areas of priority in the planning strategies 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of Planning Strategy There are four basic characteristics of planning strategy.
They are the following: 29 a.
It should help planning to tend towards a rational approach to decision- making that will maximize the outputs from the available resources, which are scarce in most cases in a country like Nigeria.
According to Moss and Puel (1978), the strategy should require that the specific values and ends used in decision-making process should be made explicit, thereby encouraging and focusing continuing discussion concerning them.
b.
The strategy should encourage a zero-based budgeting decision.
In other words, it should apply to period of plenty as well as the period of scarcity.
c. The planning strategy should go beyond the traditional process of un- coordinated incrementalism, that is a process which only allows marginal changes (changes at the margin) instead of directional changes, that is change in major directions.
d. Planning strategy should prioritize the plans and projects, so that variations in resource allocation can be accommodated.
In this case, the most crucial programme, plan or project should be selected for implementation.
3.2 Strategy Components of Planning/Educational Planning Before starting any serious and meaningful planning exercise, certain key components of planning should be considered.
Some of them are relevant in the conception of planning.
They are essential in guiding and directing the planning process.
They could be indicators, parameters, variables, some of them are crucial during the planning process and implementation.
They are: • Goal and Target setting • Policy and Plan Design • Resources • Costing and Budgeting • The Means • Implementation • Monitoring and Evaluation.
The list could be longer, but some components are embedded in the above list.
When we discuss them in detail, they will be exposed to you.
3.2.1 Goals and Target Setting 30 Goals guide planning and the planner.
In the same way, educational goals guide educational planning, as well as the educational planner.
Goals can be defined as the expression of intended needs and aspirations.
Usually, the national goals give rise to sector goals, such as the educational goals.
There are broad goals, as there are specific goals.
The national goals of Nigeria as contained in Section 1 (3a-e) of the National Policy on Education (NPE) (Federal Republic of Nigeria FRN, 2004:6), which are supposed to be the foundation for the National Policy on Education are the building of: a. a free and democratic society; b. a just and egalitarian society; c. a united, strong and self-reliant nation; d. a great and dynamic economy; and e. a land full of bright opportunities for all citizens.
The national educational goals are derived from the national goals so that education can serve as medium and weapon of achieving them.
The national educational goals are stated in the NPE, Section 1 (7) (FRN, 2004:7-8).
Education is to inculcate national consciousness, unity, right values and attitudes for survival.
Education goals also include training to understand the world and acquisition of appropriate skills.
Therefore, for education planning to function meaningfully, it has to be guided by both the national goals and national education goals.
From them, educational planning goals are derived.
It is the goals that guide, direct and drive the activities of educational planning.
The goals also affect the set target, while the set target informs the mission and operations of educational planning.
The objectives of planning are listed in Section 12 (107) of the NPE (FRN, 2004:56).
3.2.2 Policy and Plan Design The essence of planning is to scientifically formulate policies and design plans, making use of relevant information and data.
Educational policy is a statement that contains the principles, rules and regulation that govern education decisions.
Educational policies are crucial in the realization of the overall goals of the educational system and subsequently the national goals.
Education policies constitute the guiding ways through which education system is effectively operated.
Policies address various issues in the educational system.
Such issues include: access to education; equity; equality and educational opportunities; structures; efficiency in education; funding etc.
31Educational Plans are products of various policies.
They could be simple or complex; they could be for a short or medium or long term.
Educational planners are to prepare education plans, using various standards, guidelines and models.
It is the plan designed by the planner that guides the implementation agency, institution or government.
You should understand that educational policies are derived from educational goals, while educational policies are to be broken into implementable plans and projects so as to achieve the overall national goals.
For these reasons, educational policy and plan construction are strategic to educational planning process.
3.2.3 Resources Resources can be described as the necessary inputs into the productive processes of any system.
The quality and quantity of resource inputs into a system will largely determine the quality of outputs or products from such system.
Educational planning requires huge resources for its operations.
The resources required include: - human resources - physical resources - financial resources - time - information Planning requires a broad interpretation of these resources to generate options and alternatives.
Not only these, the quantum of resources available impact on the effectiveness of educational planning.
1.
The Human Resources: - The human resources contain the students, the teachers, non-teachers, planners.
Their number and quality are crucial to planning of education.
The planning personnel(cid:8217)s level of expertise and technical know-how are essential component of planning procedure.
The information on students and school personnel are equally essential in guiding the planners.
2.
Physical Resources:- They include facilities and equipments for planning, and for the teaching-learning activities.
The knowledge of the infrastructural facilities, such as classroom, laboratory and workshop buildings; and library and health facilities is crucial to planning.
They also include the instructional materials like furniture, reagents, books, equipment and so on.
The school general plant planning and physical planning are strategic components of educational planning.
The 32 adequacy overtime of these items are projected and predicted by planners to bring about efficiency and effectiveness in the educational system.
3.
Finance:- Education, as a social service is very cost intensive.
It requires adequate funding for policy implementation.
It determines largely the quality of planning to be involved as well as implementation.
The quality and adequacy of other educational resources and activities rest on the adequacy and utilization of allocated funds.
The vision and direction of educational planning is seriously guided by the available funds.
Planning can either be done manually or technologically, depending on the money available.
The extent of data and information gathering, collation, processing, analysis and interpretation that guide policy analysis and formulation is much dependent on funding.
4.
Time:- Time is a crucial resources in planning.
It is often said that (cid:8216)time is money(cid:8217).
The duration of planning and planning time-frame are essential in education planning.
Planning could be short, medium and long period.
Planning could be for annual, rolling or developmental.
Annual is yearly, such as the annual budget.
It could be rolling or medium term planning, while the developmental plans take a long gestation period.
Educational planners and other planners are guided in their operation by the time-frame available to them or given to them by the policy makers and implementers.
5.
Information:- Data and information are very strategic to educational planning.
Information is the aggregation of processed data to provide intelligence or knowledge.
Information is generated by matching relevant data elements to the variables of problem.
It will not be an over- statement to say that planning can not be done without data and information.
Such data and information could be qualitative or qualitative.
According to Stevenson, Bowers and Morton (1978) information might be conceived as opportunistic data, data awaiting a sensitive, competent decision maker(cid:8217)s skillful honing into a useful format.
The competent and skillful persons to use relevant data and information efficiently for educational management are the educational planners.
Without data and efficient information management system, he or she may not be effective at making right projections for the future needs and aspirations of the educational system.
Any planner that worth his or her name should know that timely and accurate information is a key component of his or her planning responsibilities.
Educational planning requires constant data and information regarding the labour and unemployment situation; economic conditions, the educational system itself and other substantive information that identify the trends in a country and the world at large.
3.2.4 Costing and Budgeting 33 Today, education financing is phenomenon.
Because of the increasing financial constraints on educational investment, costing and budgeting are becoming very strategic components of educational planning.
There is increasing need to place price value on educational items, plans and activities.
There is growing need to scientifically project and predict the cost of education in the process of determining policy options and planning alternatives.
Costing and budgeting are strategic in determining the cost effectiveness of educational choices and activities.
Costing is also essential in carrying out effective cost analysis.
To plan for any event or activity, you need to know the cost, parameters and methods to adopt.
Costing and budgeting enable the planner to choose the cheap and efficient means and programme (s).
Costing is a crucial component of programme planning.
According to Aghenta (1993), costing is very necessary in the understanding of the educational system.
He believes that it will help to improve the efficiency of the system and also in the evaluation of the performance of the educational systems vis-à-vis the system(cid:8217)s goals and objectives.
3.2.5 The Means According to Lamar, Gyuro, Burkett and Gray (1978), the means of carrying out planning activities constitute a key component of planning.
To them, means provide the basis for consideration of alternatives, which will result in the selection of a course of action that encompasses technical, managerial, legal and organizational aspects.
The means chosen for a planning process can either be traditional or modern, crude or scientific, manual or technical.
The (cid:8216)means(cid:8217) can simply imply the method or technique of planning.
It can also imply the expertise of the planners.
That is, relevant officers to be involved in the activities of planning.
Modern machines can enable the planner to easily simulate and forecast the future options based on today(cid:8217)s data and situation.
Planning in the 21st century should do away with the traditional and manual techniques for efficiency and effectiveness.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
State briefly the characteristics of planning strategy.
2.
Justify the resources as strategy components of educational planning?
3.2.6 Implementation Implementation is the action stage of the planning process.
In fact, the success or otherwise of any plan is measured by the success of its implementation.
It is the stage where the formulated policies and prepared 34 plan document are executed (Adeyemi, 1995).
It is the most difficult stage of the policy planning process.
During implementation, it is helpful if those involved observe and assess the process.
This is because changes could be necessary so as to achieve the desired objectives.
Various aspects of implementation to consider include staffing, directing and controlling.
Implementation requires a high dedication from the people in power, accurate data and information; qualified personnel; adequate funding; and competence on the part of the planners and managers; as well as the availability of the guiding rules and regulations.
The success of the implementation of any new policy or plan, especially in a country like Nigerian, depends largely on careful planning.
While the success of the implementation of plans rest on careful planning, also planning requires that the policies and plans it has come up with should be successfully implemented.
A beautifully contrived/conceived plan that can not be implemented is a failure.
As such implementation - its process, strategies and means becomes a key concern of the education planning.
3.2.7 Monitoring and Evaluation Monitoring and evaluation constitute key components of educational planning.
They allow managers of education review the planned accomplishments against the actual accomplishments of each operational system.
Hence, planning activities should be monitored to ensure specification compliance of the plan during implementation so as to review the process for possible acceptance of plan, or the revision, or total reversal of the plan, or programme or project.
Monitoring implies (cid:8220)watching(cid:8221), (cid:8220)recording(cid:8221) and (cid:8220)keeping track(cid:8221) of events or objects in an implementation of a programme process in order to detect faults and inadequacy of implemented plan.
Evaluation is placing value on any plan.
Both monitoring and evaluation rely mainly on the process of collecting and interpreting evidence and using same to judge the specification and worth of the implemented plan.
Planning is called to action once again to analyse the data obtained during monitoring and evaluation.
This is to ensure continuous planning and possible re- designing of the plan.
This is why monitoring and evaluation are parts of the strategy components of planning.
3.3 Areas of Priority in the Planning Strategies 35 There are some key areas of priority in the planning strategies, which planning must interact with for optimal performance.
These must be continually considered throughout the planning process.
They are identified by Lamar, et.
al (1978) as: (a) Effectiveness (b) Efficiency (c) Utility (d) Feasibility (e) Compatibility (f) Productivity (g) Accountability (h) Impact These key areas guide the thoroughness and quality of planning.
They are discussed below.
(a) Effectiveness:- Planner must always ask whether he or she is doing the right things at the right time and for the right interest groups.
Here, the process, the time or timing and the goals must continuously agitate the mind of the planner during planning.
(b) Efficiency:- This deals with cost, value and judicious utilization of resources.
Planners should ask whether things are being done in the most productive and cost effective way.
(c) Utility:- This concerns the relevance of the plan and the planning process, especially to the end users.
It is to show the extent to which the planning process can be used by those it is meant for.
If a school is planned for the kindergarten pupils and located in a marshy area or close to a river, the utility rate may be very low, because many parents will not allow their children in such schools for security reason.
(d) Feasibility:- The reality and workability of the planning process are important consideration planners should be guided with.
Consideration must be given to whether the planning process is compatible with and supportive of reality and whether it is workable.
(e) Compatibility:- Planners should be able decide whether the planning process can support the existing policies, methods and procedures and at the same time comply with the required regulations.
He or she should consider whether the planning process can facilitate change when and where required.
(f) Productivity:- This deals with the extent at which the planning process can bring return on investment.
It considers whether the planning process can maximize return on investment.
Returns on the investment 36 on education is not quick to determine, but can be done over a time period.
(g) Accountability:- This deals with the extent to which the aims and objectives of the plan and the planning process are achieved.
To determine whether the planning process accomplishes and supports the expectations, aims and objectives.
(h) Impact:- The positive difference a planning process is to bring to the system should be part of the planning conception and activities.
It should be considered whether the planning process will make a worthy difference or not.
If the goal of a policy plan is to implement vocational education, then the impact assessment should be done after implementation to decide whether such policy plan has impact on the students.
SELF ASSESSSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Outline the strategy components of educational planning.
2.
List the correlate strategy components of planning.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have studied the characteristics of planning strategy to include maximization of outputs from available resources; that planning should cover both the period of plenty and security; that planning strategy should go beyond marginal charges; and should prioritize the plans and project.
The unit has also exposed certain key components and correlate strategy components of planning.
They are the critical parameters, indicators and variable that guides the direction, the method and pattern of planning and educational planning.
Without these components, the planning operation would neither be efficient not effective.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the characteristics of planning strategy.
We have outlined the strategy components of planning and educational planning to include goals and target- setting, policy and plan design resources.
Others are the means of implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
You equally learnt the key areas of priority in the planning strategies, which include: effectiveness, efficiency, utility, feasibility compatibility.
Others are: productivity, accountability and impact.
You learnt that these components guide the planning operations, activities and process.
37 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the key components of resources as strategy components of educational planning 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemi, J. K. (1995) (cid:8220)Stages in the planning process in Peretomode, V. F. (ed) Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Publishers, 145 (cid:8211) 156.
Aghenta, J.
A (1993) Principles and practice of educational planning: Focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: NSEP.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) National policy on education, Lagos: Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Hadddad, W. D (1994) The dynamics of education policymaking.
Washington D. C: The World Bank.
Lamar, C. F., Gyuro, S. J., Burkett, L.A. and Grey, K.E.
(1978) (cid:8220)An overview of comprehensive planning(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education.
Virginia: The American Vocational Association Inc., 13- 45.
Moss, J. E and Pucel, D. J (1978) (cid:8220)A strategy of comprehensive programme planning(cid:8221), in Lamar, C. S (ed.)
Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education: A Guide for Administrators.
Virginia: The American Vocational Association.
Stevenson, W. W., Bowers, E.M., and Morton, J.B (1978) (cid:8220)Information systems for planning(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.F.
(ed.)
Ibid , 97 - 123.
38  UNIT 3: EVOLUTION OF POLICY PLANS IN EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Policy, Programme, Plan, and Project (4Ps) 3.1.1.
What is Policy?
3.1.2.
What is Programme?
3.1.3.
What is a Plan?
3.1.4.
What is a Project?
3.2 Scope of Policy 3.3 Education Policy Making 3.4 Framework for Policy Evolution in Education 3.4.1 Policy Framework 393.4.2 Factors of Policy Emergence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION To bring a functional educational development, many people are involved politically and technically through various contributions in the process that lead to the emergence of policies and plans.
Their actions involve the processes through which educational issues that are important to the societal growth and development are raised and analysed.
The analysis could give birth to policy formulation and generation of plans, programmes and projects, which are implemented, assessed, evaluated and possibly redesigned.
In this unit, you will learn the meaning of policy, policy-making and policy evolution framework.
You will equally learn the factors that could influence the emergence of policy and subsequently policy plans.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of policy, programme, plan and project • describe the scope of policy • explain the concept of policymaking • describe the framework of policy • outline the factors influencing policy emergence 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Policy, programme, Plan and Project (4Ps) 3.1.1 What is Policy?
Simply put, policy can be described as a plan of action agreed or chosen by an individual or a group of people or government to solve a problem.
According to Haddad (1994), policy can mean an explicit or implicit decision or group of decisions, which may set out directives for guiding 40 future decisions, or initiate, sustain or retard action, or guide the implementation of previous decisions.
Webster (1976:890) defined policy as (cid:8220)a definite course or method of action selected from among alternatives and in light of given conditions to guide and determine present and future decisions(cid:8221).
It is taken to be the over-all plan embracing the general aims and objectives and procedures of a government or an organization.
There are many other meanings of policy, but they are not relevant to the subject being discussed.
Thus, we have national education policy that encompasses the aims, objectives and decisions concerning all aspects of education to guide the nation.
3.1.2 What is Programme?
Advanced Learner Dictionary describes programme to mean a plan of things to be done or that are included in the development of things to be done.
Programme is usually a product of policy.
The Universal Basic Education is a policy programme aimed at providing access to basic education for all.
It also encompasses other sub-programmes, such as: special programmes for the nomadic population; education for the physically challenged; non-formal education; formal education at primary and junior secondary school etc.
3.1.3 What is a Plan?
Plan can simply mean an intention to do something.
You may plan to build a house or carry out a project.
It can also imply an arrangement of a set of things to be done in order to achieve a goal that has been considered in detail.
It can imply a design, a drawing or (cid:8216)road map(cid:8217) that has been technically conceived and ready to be implemented.
It is usually an output of policy programme, which is ready for execution.
You can have the school plan, the work plan, the school building plan etc.
3.1.4 What is a Project?
A project can be explained to mean a planned piece of work that finds information about something.
It is a piece of work that involves careful study of a subject over a period of time.
The first meaning is the one that we are interested in, while the second meaning applies mainly to research project.
A project can also mean a massive plan.
There are several projects in the educational system.
We can have a building project, library project, and laboratory and workshop projects.
A project may be seen as the concrete manifestation of a plan.
3.2 Scope of Policy 41 Policies are of different types and kinds.
They differ in their scope, complexity, decision environment, range of choices, and decision criteria.
This range is diagrammatically explained by Haddad (1994).
He identified the: issue specific policies; single programme policies; multi-programme policies and strategic policies.
The complexity of a policy can be low or high; the decision environment can be precise or imprecise; the number of alternatives can be low or high; and the decision can be narrow or broad.
Issue Specific Programme Multiprogramme Strategic Complexity Low High Decision Precise Imprecise Environment Number of Low High Alternatives Decision Narrow Broad Criteria Figure1: Schematic Representation of Policy Scope Source: Adopted from Haddad, W. D (1994) The Dynamics of policy- making.
Washington, D. C. World Bank.
4.
The issue specific policy is a day-to-day, short-term policies aimed at addressing a particular problem or an issue.
A policy may be made to solve the problem of late-coming in a school.
Lateness is just an issue.
A programme policy is a policy that focuses a single programme.
It is concerned with the designing of a programme a in particular area.
For example, a policy addressing how school libraries should be sited in schools is a programme policy.
A multi-programme policy deals with decisions that address competing programme areas.
For example a policy decision to address the primary and 42 junior secondary education within the UBE programme is a multi- programme policy.
The strategy policy deals with large scale decisions, which require huge resource allocation.
The UBE policy programme is a good example.
It involves decisions on the childhood education, primary education, junior secondary education, non-formal education, special education.
It involves broad resource allocation on personnel, facilities and equipment, structures, mid-day meals etc.
Our discussion so far is to inform us that scope of a policy determines its complexity.
In other words, the broader the scope of a policy, the more problematic it is likely to become, vice versa.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Distinguish between policy and programme; and between plan and project.
2.
Identify with examples the types of policy.
3.3 EDUCATION POLICY-MAKING Educational policy can be described as the explicit or implicit (written or unwritten) statements of actions that guide the future of education.
Babalola (2003) asserted that educational policy is a general statement, which contains the guiding principles and rules that govern many of the decisions that guide the management of education.
In Nigeria, we have the National policy on Education, a document that encompasses the aims, objectives, structure and all aspects of the educational system.
Educational policy-making is the process through which policies are made to guide the effective management of education.
As afore-said, the policies are the written or unwritten rules, regulations and guidelines, which are made by government or the authority of an educational institution or through their agencies or representatives.
Educational policy-making has two major dimensions.
They are the ACTORS and the PROCESS.
The actors are the (cid:8216)doers(cid:8217), that is, who make the policies?
While the process is the (cid:8216)how(cid:8217) of policy-making, that is, how policy is made?
I will add the third dimension, which is: why is policy made?
Or who is the policy made to serve?
This is very important, because the (cid:8216)why(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)whose interest(cid:8217) of policy making will largely guide the formulation of the aims and the objectives of policy.
43 Six steps have been identified by Kaufman (1972) as the procedure in the process of policy making.
It is a system approach.
They are: - needs identification - problem selection - identification of the requirements for problem solution - selection of solution from alternatives - methods and means obtained and implemented - Evaluation of results.
You can see that these six steps cover the planning, the design, the implementation, assessment and evaluation of implementation.
With regards to the actors, that is the makers of education policies, they usually occupy the highest echelon of the decision making ladder.
They are usually technically sound and politically empowered.
The government at all levels can make policies to guide education management.
The head of educational parastatals, agencies and institutions can also make policies.
Their policies are however, to be in tandem with the government vision and aspirations.
3.4 FRAMEWORK FOR POLICY EVOLUTION IN EDUCATION The emergence of any policy begins by problem identification, situational analysis and ends with policy plan implementation, assessment and evaluation, and policy readjustment.
The process of policy evolution can be conceptually explained with a model, outlining the frame of analysis.
3.4.1 POLICY FRAMEWORK IN EDUCATION Policy evolution framework is a conceptual model meant to explain the reality of the elements that should be detected and analysed to capture the process of any policy -making model.
You know that the nature of education and educational development is unique because of the social service it renders and the social expectations from education, the education policy-making can be simply explained in a cyclical framework as presented in figure 2.
44  Identificati Analysis of on of Problem (s) Problem (s) Policy Generation Adjustment of Options/Alt ernatives Policy Formulatio Evaluation n of Policy Policy Planning Implement for Policy ation Implement ation Figure 2: Framework of Policy Evolution Source: Adapted from Haddad, W. D (1994) ibid The framework has highlighted eight processes of policy evolution.
They are: 1) Identification of Problems 2) Analysis of the identified problem (s) 3) Generation of options or alternatives choices 4) Policy formulation 5) Planning for policy formulation 6) Policy implementation 7) Policy evaluation 458) Policy adjustment or re-design 1.
The process of policy-making in education starts by problem identification.
The problem could be funding, enrolment, facility, staffing, which may be inadequate and consequently affecting educational productivity.
2.
The identified problem must be analysed by the experts.
The causes of the problem, the impact of the problem at the current date and the consequences of the problem at a later date if not addressed effectively must be analysed.
The resources requirement to solve the problem and the possible expectations after the problem must have been addressed should be analysed.
Analysis is done to know the feasibility of alternatives.
3.
The next thing to be done is to generate alternatives.
Policy options are generated to identify the most feasible option for formulation.
Here, policy analysts, who are technically equipped, rely on available data and information to generate options.
Options can also be generated by using the existing body of professional knowledge, which are derived from conventional wisdom, research synthesis, comparative indicators etc.
However, certain intellectual, social and political factors may constrain the range of policy options.
We should also note that what is feasible is not always desirable; as such polity-makers are guided many times by opportunity cost.
Sometimes, the internationalization of education could guide the choice of option.
This is a process, whereby foreign experts can guide in the choice of option.
4.
Policy is formulated after evaluating the various policy options.
The best and the most feasible option are usually chosen.
The feasibility of option is a function of finance, personnel, time and needs of stakeholders.
The operational and implementability of the chosen option must be considered.
5.
Planning for policy implementation begins after policy has been formulated.
The schedule of implementation should be planned.
This is the time to put plans into action.
The implementation plan must include how to mobilize the people, financial and physical resources.
Plans must be developed to mobilize all the stakeholders on the need for such policy.
6.
Policy implementation takes place after it should have been well planned for.
It is usually difficult to implement policy, no matter how well thought-out it is.
It is the period of surprises and unanticipated occurrences either due to over-estimation or underestimation.
7.
A policy must be evaluated after implementation by conducting impact assessment analysis.
This is to reveal the strength and weaknesses of the implemented policy.
46 8.
The framework ends at the policy adjustment level.
Policy adjustment is a reaction to the weaknesses observed in the implemented policy during evaluation.
Such weaknesses are equally analysed and goes back to the policy cycle for possible re-design and implementation.
3.4.2 Factors of Policy Emergence In formulating any policy, there should be the analysis of the identified problem together with the environment where the formulated policy would be implemented.
In addition to the environmental analysis, the sector analysis should be carried out.
This to say that situation analysis should be done for both the community, local, state, national environment and the education sector itself.
The factors to be critically examined before any policy is formulated for implementation can be grouped as follow: a) Environmental Situation Factors.
Under this we have: - Politics of the environment - Economy of the environment - Population and other demographic factors - Tradition} - Religion }Cultural Values - Social factors - Geography/physical terrain.
b) Education Sector Factors.
They include: - Access and education opportunity - Equality and equity factors in education - Education structure in existence - The level of efficiency, both internal and external - Management and organizational arrangement on the ground a) Environmental Situational Factors It is generally believed that the general character of any geographical entity, be it a district, local government area, a state and a country will definitely impact on policy analysis, policy evolution and implementation.
These characters or factors have been stated above.
47Most countries are multi-cultural, multi-racial, multi-ethnic, multi-lingual and multi-religious in composition.
According to Haddad (1994), there exist within these groups social and economic stratification, with increasing general trend of stratification.
For this reason, the business of policy making is arduous in many situations.
This is because of the various ways different groups accept and value education, especially the western education.
This is Nigerian situation, because of this; the demand for education differs among the people and across the nation.
Therefore to come up with any education policy in Nigeria, the situation analysis must be thorough so as to remove or reduce unnecessary tension, agitation and un-acceptability during implementation.
The political environment must be considered to appreciate the ideology of the government to study the education-politics mix, especially the role of politics on education and education on the socio-political process.
The economic and demographic factors are very important to policy evolution.
The economy dictates the strength of any nation.
Education policy without economic backing, especially funding may fail.
Similarly the population of the country, its structure, and size and growth overtime may affect the implementation of policy.
Hence these two factors should be seriously considered during policy analysis.
The size of financial allocation to education is largely determined by the country(cid:8217)s wealth as well as its population.
b) Education Sector Factors Before coming up with new policies and plans for education, we should be able to identify, understand and analyse the major factors that drive education development as we have enumerated above.
The issue of access is important.
It deals with how far a nation is able to provide education opportunities for the school going age children and adults.
Is the supply of education measuring up to demanded places?
What is the pattern across the land?
What are the factors that guide access to education in a country?
All these questions and many more should be answered to assist policy evolution.
The issue of equity is related to the issue of access.
How far is the government been able to meet legitimate demand and deny supply should be understood?
The extent of supply of education to all, irrespective of sex, age, religion, location of origin is very critical to policy analysis.
48 The structure of education, from the lowest to the highest level of education, the duration of schooling, the resources requirements are very important during policy analysis.
The efficiency of the system, both internally and externally is very important too.
We should know the extent which the school system is able to maximize the use of resources to reduce wastage and also in meeting the aims and objectives of which it was set up.
This will guide policy analysts to identify the areas of urgent need.
Lastly, the existing management structure and institutional arrangements in education sector should be identified and analysed.
We should understand how the existing structure can influence decision making.
The distribution of power should be analysed, so as to eliminate conflicts during policy implementation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List the six steps identified by Kaufman as the procedure for policy- making process.
2.
Outline the eight processes of policy evolution highlighted in the policy evolution framework.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has shown to us that policies are formulated to guide the operation of any system, including education.
Policy-making involves people for technical and political contribution.
Policies, as written or unwritten statements vary in their scope, which include their level of complexity, decision environment, number of options and decision criteria.
Policy making undergoes several procedures before a policy can emerge.
These procedures start with problem identification and analysis, and end with policy implementation and evaluation, which can reveal areas of weakness for possible policy re-design.
We can also conclude that certain factors are very critical to policy evolution, they should be identified, understood and analysed to guide policy formulation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the meaning of policy, programme, plan and project.
You have been able to identify the thin line among them.
You have studied the scope of policy and how it can guide the policy makers and implementers.
You have also learnt the procedure for policy-making.
You 49have equally studied how policy evolution framework can be used to explain the policy-making process.
Lastly, you learnt the factors that should be considered and understood during policy-making process so as to remove suspicion and conflict during policy implementation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline six factors that can influence policy evolution in your country.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemi, J. K. (1995) (cid:8220)Stages in the planning process in Peretomode, V. F. (ed) Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Publishers, 145 (cid:8211) 156.
Babalola, J.B (2003) (cid:8220)Educational policy analysis and an examination of Nigerian educational policies(cid:8221) in Babalola, J.B. (ed) Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Dept.
of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, 39-73.
Carley, N. (1980) Rational techniques in policy analysis, London: Heinemann Educational Books.
Hadddad, W. D (1994) The dynamics of education policymaking.
Washington D. C: The World Bank.
Hornsby, A.S. (2000) Oxford Advanced Learner(cid:8217)s Dictionary of Current English, New York: oxford University Press.
Kaufman, R.A. (1972) Educational systems planning.
London: Prentice-Hall Inc. Webster(cid:8217)s New World Dictionary (1974) New York: William Collins-World Publishing Co. (2nd edition).
50  UNIT 4 STAGES OF POLICY PLANNING AND RESOURCES REQUIRED IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Stages in Educational Policy Planning in Nigeria 3.1.1 Policy formulation Stage 3.1.2 Plan Preparation Stage 3.1.3 The Co-ordination Stage 3.1.4 The Implementation Stage 3.1.5 Evaluation Stage 3.2 Planning as a Continuous Process 3.2.1 Internal Factors 3.2.2 External Factors 3.3 Resource Required for Policy Planning 3.4 Education Policy Making 3.5 Framework for Policy Evolution in Education 3.5.1 Policy Framework 513.5.2.
Factors of Policy Emergence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Policy planning process passes through some stages before a final plan can be ready for implementation.
In a democratic system, the process is thorough.
You will study these stages in this unit and also learn why planning is a continuous process.
You will also study in detail the required resources for policy planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the stages involved in the policy planning process • Explain the identified stages • Explain why planning is a continuous process • Outline the resources required for policy planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Stages in Policy Planning Process in Nigeria.
There are five major stages in the planning process in Nigeria.
They are: i.
Policy Formulation Stage ii.
Plan Preparation Stage iii.
Plan Co-ordination Stage iv.
Plan Implementation Stage v. Plan Evaluation Stage.
The stages can sometimes be broken into more stages, but for your understanding, we will adopt the five-stage option.
3.1.1 Policy Formulation Stage This is the first stage in the planning process.
This is a stage where the background activities and problems concerning policy are made available to the government in regard to the individual ministries, departments, parastatals in the states or at the national level.
Each ministry or parastatal 52 determines its policy objectives.
In doing this, the ministry or parastatal critically considers the resources at its disposal and the overall interests and aspirations of the society.
At this stage, the programme(s) for positive action for the realization of the policy objectives are also highlighted by each of the ministry and parastatal.
Ideally, the programme(s) highlighted are guided by the manifestoes or the ideology of the ruling political party.
The policy to be formulated may also be initiated by the National Economic Council.
Policy formulation is mainly political, especially at the macro level.
For example, the Universal Basic Education (UBE) is a policy initiative of government, with the main objective of providing access to basic education by all.
This policy, with various programmes of action was formulated at this stage of the planning process.
3.1.2 The Plan Preparation Stage This is a crucial and a technical stage.
Because of the technicality, highly specialized skills and expertise are required for the effective translation of the general goals and objectives of the policy into reality.
This is the stage where technocrats and policy analysts are involved.
The government functionaries and bureaucrats are also involved.
Musazi (1980), Adesina (982) and Akangbou (1982) summed up the functions at this stage as the involvement of the cost-benefit analysis, manpower analysis, social demand analysis of the policy initiative and other constructs that are employed to device alternative courses of action in order to arrive at a desired future state.
This is the stage where the visions, outlined goals are matched with the resources available or to be made available, which are always scare.
This is a stage to analyse whether such policy plan will be profitable, whether there will be enough teachers and other personnel at the right quantity and quality to implement such policy plan, and if not, what should therefore be done.
It is a stage when the social acceptability of such policy plan should be determined.
Will the plan be acceptable by the public?
It is very important to answer this question through analysis at this stage.
3.1.3 The Co-ordination Stage This is a stage whereby a central coordinating body coordinates the various policy plans, submitted by various ministries and parastatals.
In Nigeria, the Ministry or Department of Economic Development, sometimes called Economic Planning is responsible at the state level, while Ministry or Department of National Planning is responsible for coordination at the 53Federal level.
The essence of central coordination is to ensure efficiency and consistency in the formulation of development programmes.
The coordinating unit goes through the submitted draft plans by the ministries/departments, reconciling them with the broad state or national planning goals and objectives, as well as the expected resources or income.
Money is important in the implementation of any plan; therefore the coordinating unit amends, reviews or even reverses the draft plans submitted by some ministries/departments depending on the expected revenue or income.
The national priorities; the laid down rules and regulations by the government or decision makers serve as guide at this stage.
This is to ensure that no ministry or department is short-changed.
After the drafts or proposals have been coordinated, they are thereafter forward to the Economic Planning Committee.
The committee is made up of representatives of all the ministries and parastatals; and presided over by the commissioner or minister of the coordinating unit at the state and federal levels respectively.
The committee undertakes a final study of the co- coordinated draft plan and makes final submission to the State Executive Council or the National Executive Council for ratification and submission to the Legislature for approval, where necessary.
3.1.4 Plan Implementation Stage This is the stage where approved policies and plans are executed.
It is the action stage of the planning process.
It is the stage where the resources are mobilized for action.
Implementation stage is very difficult because of errors in estimation, projection as well as the instability in the prices of facilities and equipment.
For example, implementation of a policy plan in education may require building of additional classrooms.
You should know that the variation in the prices of cement, iron sheets etc and even workmanship could destabilize policy implementation.
This is the stage when managerial competences and skills are challenged.
This is the stage when original policy intentions can be muddled up if great care is not taken.
It is the stage where the ability to manage resources, which are usually limited comes to play.
This is when unnecessary politicization of programme and plan implementation should be avoided.
When the intended beneficiaries of executed plans should not be denied contribution and participation to the success of implementation where they can.
Politicization of plan implementation can be inimical to development.
In Nigeria, many important policy plans have failed during implementation due to: - Inadequate planning 54 - Under-funding - Politicization - Lack of continuity in government.
This stage therefore requires dedication on the part of the ruling class, that is the government; adequate data and information for effective monitoring; qualified personnel; adequate funding; competent planners and administrators; and adequate guiding rules and regulations.
The department or ministry responsible for the executing of any plan, project and programme should constantly review such plan, project and programme and compile progress report for the government.
3.1.5 The Evaluation Stage Evaluation of the plan being executed constitutes the final stage of the planning process.
This is a stage at which the achievement or otherwise of the plan is constantly reviewed and revalued to determine compliance to plan specification and the degree of success in the implementation of the plan in meeting the overall policy objectives.
It is at this stage that the shortcomings, inadequacies and the reasons for them are identified and analysed.
This is the stage of policy feedback from the people the plan being implemented is meant for.
The result of evaluation of implementation serves as background or input into the formulation of another policy plan; it could inform possible re-design of the plan.
It could also lead to partial review of plan, plan revision or total reversal of policy plan.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Outline the stages in the policy planning process.
2.
Why is the implementation stage of policy planning difficult in Nigeria?
3.2 Planning as a Continuous Process Planning is an ongoing process.
A plan evolves much as the organization evolves, building upon what is known, while providing a mechanism for incorporating what is unknown now but may be known later (Tuttle and Hopkins, 1978).
A plan shows the overall direction which includes goals, but not necessarily the step-by-step road map to be utilized in reaching the final destination.
It is believed that internal and external factors will continuously impact on plans and hence bring change to the plan of any organization or the 55organization planning process.
Therefore, continuous planning is induced by the following factors: a.
Internal Factors i.
Change in the operational methods; ii.
Change in organizational objectives; iii.
Change in the inputs of production; iv.
Change in output quality.
b.
External Factors i.
Change in societal goals and objectives; ii.
Information technology; iii.
Growing awareness; iv.
International comparison and competition.
3.2.1 Internal Factors i.
It is believed that the operational method of production in any organization is very important to its policy directions.
Because of operational changes overtime, there is need for policy planning change too.
If an organization is changing from manual way to technological way of doing things, there is necessity for policy revision.
For example, if the Nigerian schools want to move from (cid:8220)chalk and board(cid:8221) medium of teaching to the (cid:8220)technology medium(cid:8221), there is need for policy planning adjustment.
ii.
Change in operational objectives can induce continuous planning.
When the vision, mission, goals and aspirations of any nation or organization change, there will be the need to evolve new policies and plans overtime.
Any human organization is dynamic, so also is the vision, mission, goal and aspiration.
An organization(cid:8217)s goal may be to expand its asset.
The school may aspire to increase its enrolment.
Definitely, there must be change in its policy plan to cope with the increased enrolment.
iii.
Because of the ever changing inputs in the production line of organization, there is also the necessity to alter policy plans.
Once upon a time, the Grade II Teacher(cid:8217)s Certificate was the minimum teaching requirement in the Nigerian school system, but in order to increase the quality of teaching in the system, the minimum teaching qualification 56 was changed to Nigerian Certificate in Education (NCE).
It could change tomorrow.
Hence planning becomes a continuous process.
3.2.1 External Factors i.
The change in overall goals of the society, that is, the national goals will continue to induce change in the planning process.
Today the national expectations from education are enormous and quite different from what they were forty years ago.
The main expectations in the pre- independence era were basically to make citizens read and write.
But today the national expectations from education transcend mere reading and writing to acquisition of scientific and technological knowledge, skills and innovation that can turn this nation around.
Therefore, there is also the necessity for innovation in policy planning to meet the dynamics of time.
ii.
The growing awareness of citizens and even communities will continuously impact on the ways society is managed; awareness will trigger agitation, demand, and protest.
Such agitation and demands may cut across all sectors of a nation, including education.
These demands, agitations and protests always serve as the basic input in the policy formation process.
It is them that are aggregated, analysed and interpreted for future policy planning.
Today people talk of equality of access to educational opportunities more than twenty years ago.
People appreciate the value of education more than the yester-years.
Because of the changing awareness, there is necessity for changing policy planning process from time to time.
iii.
International competition and comparison also induce continuous policy planning.
The world is now a global village, where no nation wants to be left behind.
Countries try to copy good and progressive practices from other nations in order to cope with the competing world.
Because of these reasons, policies keep changing and planning is on a continuum.
In addition, there are so many international bodies and agencies that influence the policy planning process in member nations.
For example, the UBE is a product of the United Nations coordinated Conference on (cid:8220)Education for All(cid:8221) held at Jomtien.
The conference agreed that nations should embark on basic education that will give access to all children of school age, adults and special people.
That conference gave birth to various educational policies, programmes, and plans in member nations, including Nigeria.
It altered existing policy plans and made the government to revise some policies.
573.3 Resources Required for Planning There are various resources required for effective planning functions.
They are classified differently by different people.
Dunham and Price (1973:26) used the (cid:8220)four I(cid:8217)s: information, interest, involvement and initiative(cid:8221) as their own grouping of resources required for planning purposes.
Hanson (1968:61) classified the resources as (cid:8220)money, manpower, and data(cid:8221).
He believed that planning is a time-consuming and expensive undertaking.
For our discussion, the following resources are very crucial for planning functions.
They are: 1.
Goals and Objectives 2.
Data and Information 3.
Funding 4.
Qualified Manpower 1.
Goals and Objectives as Planning Resources In any planning venture, the desired result or destination of such planning journey would serve as a critical guide or road map for the smoothness of such journey.
Without the road map to a destination, such (cid:8220)planning traveller(cid:8221) may get lost or miss his or her way or spend longer time perambulating about.
Therefore defined goals and objectives that will indicate the overall purpose of such planning exercise are crucial ingredients for effective planning.
According to Stewart, Powers, Murphy and Crosby (19768), for us to ensure desired outcome for an educational planning process, it is imperative that the planners have a clearly defined goals and objectives regarding the aspect of education they are planning for.
2.
Data and Information You should know by now that adequate and accurate facts, figures and relevant information are the major ingredients for planning activities.
Such data and information required are qualitative and quantitative in nature.
They cover all areas and aspects of education; from students to teachers, movable and immovable facilities and equipment, income and expenditure and so on.
It also includes the vision, mission, goals and objectives of education, the structure of education, and the curricula of the school system and so on.
Planning requires the collection, collation, analysis, interpretation of data and information to ensure policy formulation and decision making.
3.
Funding 58 The planning process requires adequate and regular funding so as to boost the usefulness of the emerging plan.
Funds are required to accomplish and accommodate the directives and guidelines that emanate from the authority.
According to Stewart, et.al (1978), financial backing is required for time, which they regarded as a vital resource.
They believed that there is (cid:8220)time for reading(cid:8221), (cid:8220)time for thinking(cid:8221), (cid:8220)time for planning(cid:8221), and (cid:8220)time for dreaming(cid:8221).
To them: (cid:8230)there can be no argument that planning is a time-consuming process, and that money spent for time to travel and think is money well spent.
P.132 Unfortunately, time, being intangible resource is not allocated adequate funds, especially in the planning process.
Money is required to pay relevant consultants during the planning process.
We also require adequate funding of the planning facilities, equipment and support services.
We need computers, both hard and soft wares for data processing for generation of information.
4.
Qualified Manpower Educational planning is a relatively new field in Nigeria.
Educational planners are required in the educational industries and parastatals in right quantity and quality.
Planning is a technical area that requires specialized skills and expertise.
Planning involves quantification, programming, simulation and analysis.
Relevant manpower in several inter-related fields are required in the planning process.
A planner should be current, brilliant and focus.
He or she should be able to give meaning to other planning resources.
Unfortunately, most of the education ministries(cid:8217) and parastatals(cid:8217) planning divisions or directorates are manned by un-trained or partially- trained officers.
If other resources are available in the right quantity and the personnel resource is inadequate, the plans emanating from such set-up may not be able to stand the test of time.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Outline the internal and external factors that may induce continuous planning.
2.
Highlight the critical resources required in the planning functions.
4.0 CONCLUSION 59This unit has revealed to us that there are certain stages to follow in the policy planning process.
The stages have shown that policy has to be formulated, coordinated and prepared before a final approved plan can emerge for implementation.
Implementation of plans is usually difficult and should always be evaluated.
We can also conclude that certain internal and external factors always induce changes in the policy planning process, hence making planning a continuous process.
Finally, certain resources such as goals, manpower, funding, and data and information are very crucial for effective educational planning.
5.0 SUMMARY In this study, you have learnt the five stages in the planning process, which are: the plan formulation, the plan co-ordination, the plan preparation, the plan implementation, and the plan evaluation.
You have also learned that factors that make planning a continuous process.
The factors are grouped as internal and external factors.
Finally, you have equally studied the resources required to perform planning functions.
They are listed as goals and objectives, data and information, qualified manpower and funding.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Highlight the five stages in the planning process and explain the reasons for evaluating the plan execution.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemi, J. K. (1995) (cid:8220)Stages in the planning process, in Peretomode, V. F. (ed) Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Publishers, 145 (cid:8211) 155.
Aghenta, J.A.
(1987) (cid:8220)Educational planning in Nigeria: Issues, problems and strategies(cid:8221), The Planner, 1, 4.
Adesina, S. (1982) Planning and development in Nigeria, Ibadan: Boards Publications Ltd. Akangbou, S.D.
(1982) Qualitative and quantitative aspects of educational planning, Monograph, Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
60  Dunham, D.B., and Price, D.E.
(1973) A language for planning and hierarchy of terms.
Salem: Oregon Department of Education.
Hanson, K. (1968) (cid:8220)Planning change(cid:8221) in Morphet, E.L., and Jesser, D.L.
(eds) Cooperative Planning for Education.
Denver, Colo: Conference of State Representative.
Musazzi, J.O.S.
(1982) The theory and practice of educational administration.
London: Macmillan Pubs.
Stewart, M.S.
; Powers, B.C.
; Murphy, P.D., and Crosby, R.K. (1978) (cid:8220)Using resources to support planning functions(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) idem.
Virginia: the American Vocational Association Inc. 129-151.
Tuttle, F.T.
and Hopkins, C.O.
(1978) (cid:8220)Implementation of planning programme(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) idem.
Virginia: the American Vocational Association Inc. 203-210.
UNIT 5 ISSUES IN EDUCATIONAL POLICY PLANNING AND PLAN IMPLEMENTATION PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Major Issues in Educational Planning and Plan Implementation Process 3.1.1 Issues Relating to Aims and Policy Planning 3.1.2 Issues Relating to Planning Coordination 3.1.3 Issues Relating to Monitoring and Evaluation 3.1.4 Issues Relating to Participation 3.1.5 Issues Relating to Data and Information 3.1.6 Issues Relating to Dynamic Nature of Education 3.1.7 Issues Relating to Relevance 3.1.8 Issues Relating to Educational Wastage 3.2 Coordination and Cooperation in the Educational Planning Process 3.3 Issue of Structuring in the Educational Planning Process 3.4 Criteria for Evaluating the Educational Planning Structures 4.0 Conclusion 615.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are various issues, which continue to agitate the mind of educational planners in the planning process.
The issues emanate from the series of planning elements and problems associated with planning especially in a developing nation like Nigeria.
These issues, which will be discussed in this unit, should be resolved before we can establish alternative structures that deal with planning.
The issues are related to planning coordination, aims and policy planning, monitoring and evaluation, relevance and so on.
You will also study the place of coordination and cooperation in plan design.
The issue of structuring in educational planning process will be learnt.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the major issues in educational planning implementation • Explain the issues as they relate to planning and plan implementation • Outline the usefulness of coordination and cooperation in the educational planning process • Explain the issues of structuring in the planning process • Highlight the dimension for evaluating the planning structure 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Major Issues in Educational Planning and Plan Implementation Process There are several variables impacting on the educational planning structure.
From these variables are generated issues, which keep bothering the planners and which should be seriously addressed so as to establish viable planning structures.
They are discussed below under each related variable.
3.1.1 Issues Relating to Aims and Policy Planning There are issues relating to the level and mechanism of setting aims and policy development.
The issues are whether aims and objectives of planning are set by the central government, state government or local government.
This always results to conflict in Nigeria.
Whether the lower level(s) of 62 government has enough mechanism to develop and coordinate policy planning process.
How can we identify appropriate mechanism?
Another issue is the ability to reconcile the aims, objectives, aspirations and policies across the levels of government.
This is very important in a federal system of government as we have in Nigeria.
During the second republic, the Federal Government controlled by the National Party of Nigeria (NPN) ran what it called (cid:8220)Qualitative Education(cid:8221), while the Unity Party of Nigeria (UPN) ran the (cid:8220)Free and Compulsory Education at All Levels(cid:8221) in the states it governed.
Several times, there were conflicts between the two parties.
3.1.2 Issues Relating to Planning Coordination Many issues relate to planning coordination.
They include: ability of a simple planning structure to handle education planning at all levels, handle all types of education and in all tiers of government.
And at the same time meet the aspirations of everybody successfully.
Another issue relating to coordination is the choice of strategy and technique for effective coordination and the mechanisms to develop for efficiency.
The strategy that can integrate the private and public education process is an issue.
The issue also cover the effective resources allocation and utilization across the levels and types of education so as to meet the priority areas; and ability to effectively rationalize the administrative costs.
We also have the issue of programme overlaps and duplications in our educational system.
How do we invent necessary planning mechanisms to cope with such situation?
There is also the issue of duplication of inter-agencies in the planning structure.
Which of them do we deal with in the planning process and what mechanisms do we adopt.
3.1.2 Issues Relating to Monitoring and Evaluation The mechanisms and capabilities for monitoring and evaluation of plan implementation for better service delivery are to be identified.
What should be the yardsticks for monitoring and evaluation and who should identify the yardsticks are questions to be answered.
There are issues of required mechanisms for sustaining monitoring and evaluation of plan implementation, as well as the ability to relate monitoring and evaluation to resource allocation and utilization.
3.1.4 Issues Relating to Participation The issues that relate to participation cover the ability of the system to encourage stakeholders participate in the planning activities and process.
Whether the system allows the students to be involved in the planning 63process of their education and in the formulation of policies and plan design, and even in the implementation activities, whether to give advocacy planning effective role in the planning process?
There is also the issue of creating modalities and mechanisms for the evolution of planning structure through participation from parents, teachers and students.
How do we involve them, to what extent and what do we provide for them to make their contribution meaningful.
3.1.5 Issues Relating to Data and Information The issues to be raised include: what are the sources of information required for planning?
What type of data and information are required?
How can we develop the data and information generation mechanisms?
The methods of data storage, retrieval and processing are issues bothering planners.
The usability of data, which bothers on validity and reliability, is a serious issue in planning activities.
The relevance of data and reliability of data sources give concern to educational planner.
What is the ability of government(cid:8217)s departments and inter-agencies in data use, and data and information exchange and sharing?
Are there enough mechanisms for data utilization during policy formulation and plan implementation?
3.1.6 Issues Relating to Dynamic Nature of Education Because of the dynamic nature of education and educational system, their needs do change overtime.
The concern is whether we have the ability to mobilize the resources to meet these changing needs; what quantity that can actually lead to efficiency.
How should we measure actual efficiency in the system?
What mechanisms should we put in place to continuously utilize the outputs from the system?
How should we effectively structure the planning process in the education system to ensure effective resource allocation and utilization?
The questions raised must be thoroughly answered before we can sustain the nation(cid:8217)s educational system for national development.
3.1.7 The Issue of Relevance Today, all stakeholders are worried about the quality and relevance of education in the country.
The issues bothering educational planners are what could be wrong with the nation(cid:8217)s educational system; which education do we plan that can be relevant to changing needs of the nation; how can we plan the structure of such relevant education?
Can educational planning, manpower planning and national planning be integrated?
And what mechanisms should we put in place to ensure and sustain relevance in the 64 educational system?
How should the education planning ensure plan implementation that will engender relevance?
3.1.8 Issues Relating to Educational Wastage There is high wastage in education, either due to inefficiency in the use of resources or absence of internal control in the educational system.
The issues to ponder on in the planning process include what constitute wastage in education; can wastage in the educational system be measured in the same way as it is done in other profit-oriented sector?
Who should measure wastage in the planning process and even at the implementation stage, and at what point should wastage be measured?
Another issue is how can wastage be actually reduced or eliminated in education?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Highlight the major variables that elicit serious issues in the educational planning and plan implementation activities.
2.
Outline the issues that are related to data and information in the planning process.
3.2 Co-ordination and Cooperation in the Educational Planning Process The effort and ability of the various individuals and inter-agencies responsible for education in general and educational planning in particular are very important for the success of planning activities.
When there is unity of purpose, planning and implementation become effective.
We have earlier raised some issues relating to coordination.
Education management is carried out by various government departments and agencies.
Sometimes, there appear to be duplications of agencies, functions, which bring confusion and doubt in accepting authority and sometime leading to doubting the reliability of information.
However, it is believed that effective coordination of the functions of the inter-agencies in particular, and the other related bodies; as well as the cooperation among them, will result in the following: 1.
Effective Utilization of Limited Resources:- coordination and cooperation in educational planning will ensure judicious and effective allocation and utilization among the several departments and agencies responsible for the implementation of education plans.
For example, although there is a commission responsible for the basic education policy 65implementation in Nigeria, there are also several other departments and agencies responsible for the implementation of various programmes, plans and projects embedded in the policy.
The State Universal Basic Education Boards (SUBEB), the Local Education Department and several other agencies are relevant.
For instance the UBEC releases 50% of funds, while the state government releases 50% of the counterpart funding of the UBE in a state.
The Inspectorate Division monitors the resource utilization in conjunction with other relevant bodies.
To achieve any success in the planning and plan implementation, there should be purposeful coordination and cooperation.
2.
Continuity in Improving Instructional Programmes: - Coordination and cooperation in educational planning is expected to provide improvement in the instructional programmes and plans on a continuous basis.
This is very important during plan implementation, because several instructional programmes in the sciences, technical, humanities and supporting instructional programmes are required for any education policy implementation.
For example in the UBE policy, there should be right curriculum planning, texts selection and publication, specification of laboratories and workshop, libraries and so on.
All these should be well planned, and purposeful coordination and cooperation are expected from the tiers of government, agencies and planners to ensure effectiveness.
3.
Adaptation of Education to the National Economy: - Coordination and cooperation in planning education is necessary to adapt education policy plan implementation to the dynamics of the national economy.
Effective coordination and cooperation are essential in a plural country like Nigeria to be realistic when education is being planned so as to always attune the education policy resource demand to the changes in the economic indices.
There is no need implementing free education by different governments within a country if the dictate of the national economy cannot support such.
Politicization of education plan implementation can be minimized when there is effective coordination and cooperation among tiers of government and their several agencies, especially during the planning process.
3.3 Issues of Structuring in the Educational Planning Process Education policies, programmes and plans usually cut across tiers of government, public and private institutions and all levels of education.
Sometimes there are gaps and overlaps of policies and programmes between federal and state governments.
Any plan should therefore chart the course that would ensure a more effective and efficient allocation of available 66 resources (Malinski, Martin and Lehrmann, 1978).
This is because if the planning process is not well structured, the implementation could have a serious implication for individuals, institutions, states and their agencies, each conceivably with its own programme, plan, agenda and even constituency.
The following factors should be considered when selecting the total planning structure.
a) Inter-agency relationships; b) Local planning structure; c) Regional planning structure and functions; d) Involvement of personnel to be effected.
It should be noted that the relationship among the tiers of government, especially the central government (Federal in Nigeria), the federating units (states) and the local units (Local Government Councils) are very fundamental to education planning structure.
Thus, there are two major models for structuring educational planning.
They are: i.
Centralized Authority Model, and ii.
Decentralized Authority Model.
There are variations in the operations of the two, which are mainly dictated by the various rules and regulations guiding education planning and management at the different tiers of government.
i.
The centralized authority model concentrates power and authority at the federal level as regard education planning.
The states(cid:8217) education plans are derived from the federal education plans in most cases.
In other words, states(cid:8217) education policies and plans are subject to the approval of the federal authority.
The same practice exists between the states and the local government in Nigeria in many instances.
ii.
The decentralized authority model concentrates education planning power and authority at the federating units and local units.
In Nigeria, education is on the concurrent list as contained in the Constitution of the Federal Republic.
This gives authority to legislate on education by both the federal and state governments.
This can go for the third model, named (cid:8220)Concurrent Authority Model(cid:8221).
3.4 Criteria for Evaluating the Educational Planning Structure 67 The design of the planning structure, which is to involve various groups and interests in the decision-making process, is a major factor in any planning organization, especially educational organization.
Malinski, et.
al, (1978) identified the following criteria as the checklists to evaluate the planning structures.
1.
General Provision for Planning; 2.
Coordination and Comprehensiveness to Provide; 3.
Goals and Policy Formulation and Monitoring; 4.
Participation; 5.
Research, Data and Information; and 6.
Changing Nature of System.
1.
Planning structure should incorporate general provisions for planning constituents in all the areas; planning for the physically challenged, disadvantaged and groups with special needs; planning for all manpower services, training etc; and planning for resources allocation.
2.
Planning structure should incorporate coordination and comprehensiveness to provide for: coordination of all education functions, activities and programmes, educational planning and the national economic development.
3.
The goals, policy formulation; monitoring, and evaluation that provide for: needs identification that should both be short and long term, development of goals and policies for both short and long term; and the continuous monitoring and evaluation of resource allocation, utilization and plan implementation.
4.
The participation in the education planning should provide for involvement of people and groups from all the political constituents; involvement of the broad interest groups across a state or nation, both majority and minority groups, sex and location; and involvement of planning expertise at all levels and others that are involved in the planning process.
5.
Research, data, and information should provide for more usable data and information; timely, accurate, and consistent projections; and making planning data and information available to agencies and individuals that may need them for research purposes.
6.
The changing nature of the system should provide flexibility for adaptation to changes in the educational system, which includes planning and decision making structures; funding patterns; external factors impact and so on.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 68  1.
Outline the impact of effective coordination and cooperation on the planning process.
2.
Distinguish between the centralized model and decentralized authority model of planning structure in education.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has revealed to us that there are several variables that influence the educational planning structure.
On each variable, several issues do arise that must be critically studied and analysed to give meaning to the planning process and the planning structure.
They include issues relating to educational aims, planning coordination, monitoring and evaluation, participation, nature and change in education, educational wastage, and data and information.
The unit also revealed that effective coordination and cooperation in the educational planning process will enhance and ensure effective resource allocation and utilization; continuity of programmes, and adaptation of education to national economy.
We can also conclude from this unit that certain criteria determine the planning structure of any geo- political entity.
Such structure can be centralized or decentralized or concurrent.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the major issues in educational planning.
The issues include those that are related to planning coordination; aims and policy planning; monitoring and evaluation; participation; data and information; nature of education, relevance and wastage.
You also learnt that coordination and cooperation are essential in shaping the educational planning process.
You learnt that inter-agency relationships, local planning structure, regional planning structure, and involvement of persons to be affected are essential factors to be considered when selecting the total planning structure.
You learnt that the planning structure can follow two models, which are: centralized and decentralized authority models.
Finally, you studied the criteria necessary for evaluating the educational planning structures.
6.0 TUTORED-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Briefly explain the major planning issues relating to eight (8) education areas.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 69 Aghenta, J.
A (1993) Principles and practice of educational planning: Focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: NSEP.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) National policy on education.
Lagos: Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Nwadiani, M. (1995) (cid:8220)Issues and problems in educational planning and implementation in Nigerian(cid:8221) in Peretomode, V.F, (ed), Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Education Publishers.
Malinski, J.F., Martin, A.M., and Lehrmann, E. (1978) (cid:8220)Comprehensive planning at the national, state and local levels(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education.
Virginia.
The American Vocational Association Inc. 67-95.
70  MODULE 2 PLANNING AND DESIGNING OF PLAN IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES Unit 1 Education Policy Development Analysis Unit 2 Strategies for Policy Plan Implementation Unit 3 Data and Information in the Designing and Evaluation of Planning Strategies Unit 4 Preparing Educational Plans for Implementation Unit 5 Allocation of Resources for Policy Planning and Implementation UNIT 1 EDUCATION POLICY DEVELOPMENT ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 System Approach to Policy Development in Education 3.1.1.
Policy Making Inputs 3.1.2.
Policy Making Process 3.1.3.
Policy Making Outputs 3.1.4.
The feedback Phase 3.2.
Criteria for Educational Policy Analysis 3.2.1.
The Level of Decision-Making 3.2.2.
The Involved Experts 3.2.3.
The Training Involved 3.2.4.
Nature and Types of \involved Policies 3.2.5.
The Involved Authority in Policy Making 3.2.6.
The Sources of Policy Plan 3.3.
Policy Analysis and Educational Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 71 1.0 INTRODUCTION Policy analysis in education is a relatively new area.
However, it has become an integral part of the institutional tool that is instrumental in the determination and legitimizing policy choices.
Policy planning analysis in education is a socio-scientific research conducted in order to come up with rational policy choices.
There are identified criteria for policy analysis, which a policy analyst should follow before policy plans can emerge.
In this unit, you will learn the system(cid:8217)s approach to policy analysis in education; the criteria for analysis of educational policy plans; and the production of policy plans.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give an overview of policy analysis • apply the system(cid:8217)s approach to policy planning analysis • identify the criteria used for the analysis of educational policies • explain the identified criteria for the analysis of educational policies • explain the production of plans for action in education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 System(cid:8217)s Approach to Educational Policy Analysis A system can be defined as a component or entity, made up of inter-related parts functioning together for a common goal or purpose.
A policy or policy development is a product of the political system.
Educational policies also emanate from the political system.
Educational policies are made through the framework of the political system; hence it is related to the structure and components of any system.
In addition, policy-making is a socio-political process, and as product of a social system, we can conveniently study the educational policy process, using a system(cid:8217)s framework.
The system(cid:8217)s framework is easily explained by adopting the INPUT- PROCESS- OUTPUT model.
This will be explained in detail below.
3.1.1.
Policy Making Inputs 72  Inputs of any system are the raw materials needed to keep the system functioning.
Unlike the other systems, the policy making inputs are somewhat abstract, that is, they are not in concrete term.
They come in as public demands and public support.
The public demands could come in form of: - Agitations - Protests - Petitions - Militancy - Demonstrations etc.
These are done to draw the attention of government or authority to past neglect, bad policies, need for amenities etc.
The public support may also come in form of: - Writings - Physical expression - Advertisement etc.
These could be done to encourage the authority or government to come up with a better policy.
All these could originate from individuals, groups, organizations through formal or informal means.
The role of the mass media in the articulation of people(cid:8217)s interests, views, opinions, support, anger, and petition can not be under-played in sensitizing the government or its agencies.
For example, the series of complaints regarding the quality of JAMB University Matriculation Examination (UME) gave birth to the Post University Matriculation Examination (PUME) being conducted by the universities.
Already there are complaints against PUME by the society.
Don(cid:8217)t be surprised if the PUME is again reverse by another policy.
3.1.2 Policy Making Process In the system(cid:8217)s analysis framework and the Input-Process-Output Model, the processing of the inputs is important.
Under the system(cid:8217)s approach, the inputs are articulated, collated, amplified and aggregated by the authority.
The authority could be the political leaders, political parties and government agencies.
It could be the management of any institution or organization.
The inputs (demands, supports) are sorted out, using the criteria of reliability of 73their sources; importance of the inputs; relevance of such inputs to the overall interests and aspirations of the society.
This phase involves the analysis of the substances of the demands and agitation.
It could also involve organizing meetings that could include several groups and government establishments.
For instance, the agitation for access to secondary education by a community may involve the government meeting with the leadership of such community.
It may even cause special committee(s) to be set up by the government to find alternative solution.
It may involve the education ministry and the legislature to set agenda for rapprochement.
The essence of such meetings is to reach conclusion(s) as to what actions the political leadership (government) would take, such that will be in the best interest of people and the society at large, as well as to calm down agitated nerves.
3.1.3 The Policy Making Output Output phase is the third of the system framework in the policy development process.
The political leadership or organizational leadership could take one of the following options after the inputs have been articulated, collated, analysed and carefully sorted out.
They are: a.
Make deliberate policy to address the cause of agitation b.
Follow precedent decision(s) in similar circumstances c. Impose its will on the people, that is, ignore such demands and agitations.
This phase shows the ability of leaders to lead effectively.
It is also a phase that manifests the philosophy and ideology of the political leadership.
A leadership with social welfares will not ignore easily agitations concerning education for the masses.
At this phase, government takes decisions, which will involve passing through the legislative procedure for legal backing.
At this phase, approved policies are communicated to the public through government gazette and other publications.
Subsequently the policy output is implemented for the benefit of the public.
3.1.4 The Feedback Phase In the input-process-output framework explanation of any system, there is the often the imperceptible phase known as the feedback.
In the policy development process, the doors of public reactions, critiques, criticisms should be kept opened for policy improvement.
The public may react to the inadequacies of the implementation of the policy plans.
Such reactions could 74 be again articulated to serve as input into a new policy.
The reactions may also serve as source of modification of the existing one.
By this, the system(cid:8217)s cycle is maintained.
Our explanation above is diagrammatically explained in figure 1.
Policy Input Policy Process policy output - Demands - Amplification - Legalization - Agitations - Aggregation - Legislation - Support - Analysis - Sanctions - Protests - Synthesis - Policy guidelines - Petitions etc - Examination - Releases to the public From & - Policy enactment - Policy - Meetings - individuals implementation - groups - public Policy Feedback Line Figure 1: System(cid:8217)s Model of Policy Development Process.
Source: Adapted from Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981) Government and Education.
Mimeograph, Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
The basic assumption of the system(cid:8217)s approach in the explanation of policy development is that policies often originate from the people through their interests and concerns.
This may not be true in all situations, as many policies also originate from the political leadership as a result of its philosophy, ideology and party manifestoes.
Some political leaders are naturally kind and hence come out with various welfares and progressive policies without being prodded by the public.
Sometimes, educational policies come from the authority as courses of action expedient to satisfy the needs, issues, and problems of the education of the society.
According to Abernethy and Coombs (1960), education policies evolve to satisfy two major objectives, which are to: 75a.
Meet the demands of individuals and groups for their development; and b.
Meet the needs of the society or the political system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Highlight the inputs in the policy development process in the system(cid:8217)s approach framework.
2.
Outline the processes of policy development in the system(cid:8217)s approach framework.
3.2 Criteria for Education Policy Analysis There are certain criteria used in the analysis of educational policies.
Ornstein and Miller (1976) cited by Babalola (2003) listed these criteria as follows.
1.
Level of Decision-Making 2.
Experts and Expertise Involved 3.
Training Involved 4.
Type of Policy Involved 5.
Authority Involved in Policy-Making 6.
Sources of Policy.
3.2.1 Level of Decision-Making In formulating educational policies, the level of policies which are to be addressed should be identified and well defined.
Is the policy meant for government level or institutional level?
If it is at the institutional level, is it meant to address the primary education, secondary education, basic education, higher education?
If it is at the governmental level, you need to know if it is meant to address the education ministries, departments or agencies.
An educational policy analysis should be guided by the level of decision-making.
This would enable him or her to set credible and attainable policy goals.
In Nigeria, policies vary by level of decision-making.
Policies meant to address teachers(cid:8217) punctuality at the primary school level cannot be applied to the university level.
This is because each decision level has its own uniqueness and characteristics.
At the primary school level, teachers are expected to be in school by 7.45 a.m to organize morning assembly.
At the university level, teachers enjoy some freedom.
No assembly, no definite resumption nor closing time.
3.2.2 Experts and Expertise Involved 76 Education policy analyst should be able to identify the type of experts and expertise that will be required in the implementation process.
The number over time should be projected.
These experts cover the technical and managerial aspects.
This aspect of policy analysis is very crucial if policy implementation must be effective.
The experts must be able to monitor and evaluate the plan implementation process.
It will be a huge waste for beautifully conceived policies without experts to implement them.
This is one of the problems why many well drafted policies have failed in Nigeria.
For example, the Nigeria Education Policy advocates for Technical and Vocational Education.
A move round the schools shows gross inadequacy of teachers in these areas.
In many situations, science teachers are assigned to teach technical education subjects.
The implementation of the physical aspects of the education policy plan is very important.
Experts to handle the constructions should be part of the policy formulation process.
A builder should build classrooms and not an unqualified contractor.
3.2.3 Training Involved The quality, type and level of training expected from personnel to handle the policy plan implementation should be outlined during policy analysis.
How much low level manpower is expected?
How many middle level manpower and high level manpower are expected?
In the school system, this criterion is very essential for policy formulation and implementation; hence it is considered a serious factor during policy analysis.
We have different levels ant types of education.
We have the pre-primary, primary, secondary, and tertiary (colleges, polytechnics and universities), each with its own teaching and non-teaching personnel that require varying levels of training.
At the primary level, Grade II/NCE teacher training experiences are required.
At the secondary school level, NCE/Degree level training experiences are required.
At the tertiary level, the training required by the personnel varies among the Colleges of Education personnel, Polytechnic personnel and the University personnel.
At the same time, the training required varies between academic and non-academic staff.
It also varies among the teachers as well as the non-academic staff.
For example, the training required from a faculty typist is quite different from a faculty clerk.
The training required from ICT operator is quite different from that of an account clerk in the bursary or a librarian.
All these should be well considered during policy analysis.
3.2.4 Nature and Types of Involved Policies The objectives of policies vary.
They vary according to the issues or problems being addressed.
There are problem solving policies; there are reform and innovation policies; there are policies that serve as rules and 77guidelines; there are policies for execution of existing policy plans; and there are policies to correct existing practices in education.
The policy analysis should be able to identify and understand the type of policy involved in a policy process or required to start a policy-making process.
The drug that can only prevent may not be able to cure an ailment.
We should understand the essence of any policy enactment.
A policy of free and compulsory education may not at the same time provide for qualitative education.
The policy type will define the scope of policy preparation.
The policy of school plant renovation and repair will not be the same as policy of education access improvement through the establishment of new schools.
3.2.4 Authority Involved in Policy-Making The authority that is responsible for policy making should be identified.
The unit and the line of authority within, between and among the policy makers should be identified.
Similarly, the degree of responsibility and power in the policy-making process, as well as in the policy plan implementation procedure should be identified.
Analysis should cover the possible areas of overlap, duplication and conflict of roles in the policy-making process.
For example, policy analysis should identify the possible area of conflicts among the Federal Ministry of Education, the National Universities Commission and the University Councils in the process of formulating policies concerning the university administration in Nigeria.
We can not do without conflict in human organizations; however, we should try to minimize conflicts, this we can do through policy analysis, which should precede any policy-making process.
3.2.6 Sources of Policy Plan Babalola (2003) classified the sources of policy as: implied, originated, appealed, and externally imposed.
a.
Implied policy source can be considered to be a non-formal source.
This is because there are no defined rules and written guidelines about any issue.
It is generated through people(cid:8217)s feelings, instincts and natural practices.
b.
Originated policy source is generated from highest echelon of an organization or a polity.
It comes from the top, without the contribution of the subordinates.
Many educational policies are product of this 78 source.
The political leaders formulate policies with little or no contribution from other stakeholders.
c. Appealed policy source, as the name sounds, policies came through appeals and pleadings, which often come from people at the (cid:8216)down(cid:8217) end to the people at the (cid:8216)upper(cid:8217) end.
Sometimes it could be in form of protest, agitation and petitions from the masses to change their situation or to ask for a better condition or to change an uncomfortable practices imposed on them.
When school fees are considered too high and unaffordable to the masses, appeal can be made by the poor parents to alter such fee paying policy to a free education policy.
d. Externally imposed policy source is usually generated from other countries.
It is done through total importation or imposed by some international bodies and agencies.
In the education system, policies can be imposed by the United Nations agencies like UNESCO and the UNICEF on member nations, especially the developing nations to better their education practices.
Policy analysis is guided by the evidence of the sources of the existing policies or a new policy to be formulated.
3.3 Policy Analysis and Education Development Policy analysis is considered to be socio-scientific research.
The essence of conducting it prior to the policy-making process is to ensure rationality in the process and even in the implementation of the evolved policy.
Policy analysis relies much on objective evidence.
Because policy analysis relies on objective evidence, it is able to remove sectional interest, selfishness and other subjective considerations in the policy-making and subsequently in the implementation of policy plans.
This is very important in a plural country like Nigeria.
Policy analysis relies much on data and information, especially on the criteria discussed above and other parameters of education to suggest possible options and likely consequences to policy-makers and education development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Highlight the criteria for education policy analysis 2. Who is a policy analyst?
4.0 CONCLUSION From our discussion in this unit, we can conclude that policy analysis is essential in ensuring rationality in the process of policy-making and policy 79plan implementation.
System(cid:8217)s framework of input-process-output can be used to explain the process of policy-making in education, because education itself is a system.
To conduct rational policy analysis, there are six criteria that should be examined.
They include the decision-making level, experts required, personnel training required, type of policy involved and so on.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the place of the system(cid:8217)s approach in educational policy development; the process, which is the transformation of the inputs in the policy development process; and the output from the process, which is the final policy plan.
You also learnt about the feedback line of the system(cid:8217)s framework.
You equally studied the criteria for policy analysis, which are level of decision, experts and expertise involved, training involved, policy type involved, authority involved and sources of policy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List the criteria required for education policy analysis.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Babalola, J.B (2003) (cid:8220)Educational policy analysis and an examination of Nigerian educational policies(cid:8221) in Babalola, J.B. (ed) Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Dept.
of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, 39-75 Abernethy, D.B.
and Coombs, T. (1960) (cid:8220)Education and politics in developing countries(cid:8221), Harvard Education Review, 33 (3) Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981) Government and education.
Mimeograph.
Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
80  UNIT 2 STRATEGIES FOR POLICY PLAN IMPLEMENTATION IN EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Pilot Study Implementation 3.2 Scheduling Movement of Resources 3.3 Mobilization and Public Enlightenment 3.3.1 Who should be mobilized?
3.3.2 Strategies of Mobilization 3.3.3 Scheduling Resources Movement 3.4 Manpower Recruitment 3.5 Enabling Law 3.6 Setting Minimum Standard 3.7 Data Collection and Analysis 3.8 Planning for Facilities and Equipment 3.9 Monitoring and Evaluation 3.10 Funding 3.11 Introducing Motivational Packages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Implementation as you should know by now is the most crucial stage of the planning process.
It is the stage strategies required to translate the laudable 81government policies, programmes and plans into reality so as to realize the goals of such policy plans are identified.
The ability to choose and utilize appropriate strategies will go a long way to achieve implementation success.
The choice of faulty strategy during policy implementation may spell doom for such policy and the implementer.
In this unit, you will learn the basic strategies for education policy implementation.
The list is inexhaustible.
It depends on the nature and complexity of the policy to be implemented.
It could also depend on the level of education, the tier of government and whether the implementation is at the institutional on governmental level.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - identify the implementation strategies in education - explain the identified implementation strategies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pilot Study Implementation After a policy has been formulated and various plans for its implementation have been designed, it is better to conduct a pilot study to evaluate the feasibility of implementing the plans.
If the feasibility is positive, the next strategy is to proceed on pilot implementation.
This is to enable the implementer to execute the plan at a small or manageable level.
The essence of this is to show the area of strength and weakness so as to amend the plan before full implementation on a large scale.
For example, government may plan to introduce tuition fee to the university as part of the designed plans of cost recovery policy.
It will be better for such fee to be first introduced to the new students in order to assess the reactions of the larger student body.
Such reactions may guide government to amend the policy plan.
3.2 Scheduling Movement of Resources Many educational policies involve massive construction of buildings, especially new classrooms, laboratories and workshops, and expansion of old ones as well as recruitment and training of personnel.
As such an effective schedule for moving physical objects, people and funds should be drawn up.
The schedule must be made clear and pay attention to details so as to give direction to people of what to do, how to do it and when to do it.
The possible location of the physical resources, their contents and availability must be assured.
The financial resources should be earmarked and 82 appropriated to reduce delay in implementation.
Also the persons and the power necessary to put plans into action must be directly committed to the course of action; he or she should not be saddled with other responsibilities that will distract his or her commitment.
The technical know-how necessary to guide the policy plan implementation must be identified and also the administrative system that will direct the policy implementation must be clearly structured and be in place.
3.3 Mobilization and Public Enlightenment According to Haddad (1994), for a policy planning process to be effectively actualized, the need to mobilize political support must be recognized as necessary for every aspect of policy implementation.
Mobilization support for any educational policy plan is very important; as such a serious effort should be involved to publicize and advertise the purpose of the policy plan of total acceptance by the public who are the major beneficiaries.
This is very important in plural nations like Nigeria with diverse culture, values, spatial distribution and so many other diversities.
Mobilization ensures value orientation.
It will intimate the public with the short-term and long-term benefits such policy plan that will be implemented will provide for the individuals and the nation.
It is to energize the interest of the previously uninformed in regard of the policy to be implemented.
3.3.1 Who should be mobilized?
The mobilization of political support is essential because of the need to assure that both the providers and consumers of a new educational policy plan accept it with enthusiasm.
Haddad (1994) advised that plans must be developed to assure that students and their families are aware of the goals and aspirations of a new educational plan.
The communities should learn about the benefits for the collective interest.
The teacher, educational managers and their representatives, which could be their unions, should be persuaded to embrace the new policy plan for the general interests of all.
The labour (the teachers and managers) should be persuaded because new policy may bring with it several innovations and job redefinition.
For example, if the state government decides to implement a policy that makes ICT compulsory in all government educational institutions.
This implies that the entire typist and other workers that were trained with the manual type-writers and have been working with same may not find it easy to adjust and may cause resentment.
This is because; they may need to re-enroll in computer schools for training.
Therefore, workers 83must adapt to the changes or be isolated.
Workers should be duly mobilized to avoid industrial disharmony.
Furthermore, political mobilization is required to assure that materials and equipment for classroom construction are provided as at when needed.
Necessary institutional administrative adjustments should be carried out.
3.3.2 Strategies of Mobilisation There are various strategies of mobilizing support for the implementation of new policy plans.
They include: 1.
Using the people: - Involving the people and various groups that are the likely beneficiaries of a new policy initiative or affected by the new policy initiative in the planning process could serve as a strategy for mobilizing political support.
This should include the parents and communities; teachers and administrators that will operationalise the policy plan.
The employers of labour that will make use of the final products of the educational system should also be mobilized.
2.
The community leaders, religious leaders, political leaders, traditional rulers, traditional institutions, the PTA are also important people to mobilize so that they can easily assist in mobilizing the people around them.
This is because they are highly respected in their respective domains.
3.
The mobilization should also involve those who will play some roles or supporting roles in the process of providing certain necessities and services.
This group includes the builders, the technicians, the artisans, etc.
4.
The mass media is the greatest means of reaching the far and near during mobilization and public enlightenment.
The mass media should be an integral part of the mobilization strategy.
The print and the electronic media are very important.
The traditional media, especially the town criers are efficient in the rural communities, where access to both print and electronic media is low.
The print media include the newspapers and magazines.
The electronic media include the radio, television and even computer.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 84 1.
List four individuals or groups that should be mobilized during implementation?
2.
List three strategies for mobilizing people during implementation?
3.4 Manpower Recruitment Staffing is a serious strategy of implementing any policy plan.
in staffing, the qualifications of the personnel and the training requirements for them to achieve optimum performance should be considered.
There should be a clear description of expectations and the actual performance expected from each of the listed tasks.
Teachers are at the centre of educational policy implementation.
According to Obanya (2000), many laudable educational policy programmes failed in the past because teaching manpower was not duly considered as a crucial factor.
Therefore, in the planning of the implementation strategies, the place of a teacher as a major strategy of successful implementation should be carefully considered.
The strategies here should include intensification and upgrading of the level of general and professional education that teachers are to receive.
Teachers(cid:8217) associations at all levels are to be mobilized.
All teachers(cid:8217) training institutions at all levels should be encouraged in the area of changing methods and skills of teaching curriculum and innovation.
According to the Implementation Guidelines for the Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme, teachers are to fully participate in the general decision making process in the policy implementation.
Possible shortage of teaching and non-teaching personnel should be addressed through various innovative and creative approaches.
The general and technical knowledge required to guide the policy implementation must be mastered by those to be responsible for the implementation process.
3.5 Enabling Law Enabling law guiding the implementation process is a serious strategy that can protect the course of successful implementation.
Enabling law is to plug all legal loopholes to improve enforcement and sanction regime.
Law is an ass and no respecter of anybody or group or even government in the policy implementation process.
A government can be challenged if it defaults in the implementation process if there is an enabling law.
In the same way, other persons, such as contractors, teachers, and even parents and community can be challenged under the enabling law if they default.
For example, if there is a policy of building a school in every community, without an enabling law, such as granting government power to acquire any community land as it deems appropriate for such project, some communities 85may refuse to release their land, and may even result to litigation.
If government intends to implement the policy of compulsory education to all children of school age, there must be an enabling law to compel parents to abide by the policy plan.
If not, nobody can prosecute any parent who decides to take his or her children to farm or market.
There should be an enabling law to guide all educational policy operations to ensure compliance.
Most educational policy implementation actions are not backed by law.
Where there are enabling laws, there could be need to occasionally amend such laws to suit the dynamic nature of the society and education itself.
3.6 Setting Minimum Standard.
To implement any education policy plan, we should aim at quality.
Quality assurance is a factor of the standard set by whoever is the author or owner of policy plan.
Education policies may concern examinations; curriculum development and delivery; teaching and teachers; instructional materials and so on.
In all these and at all levels, standards must be maintained.
A strategy to ensure standard during policy plan implementation is the (cid:8220)setting of standard(cid:8221).
In Nigeria, minimum standard setting has become a practice at all levels of education.
Minimum learning standards for certain ages and levels of education can be set to guide policy implementers.
Such minimum standards should be officially compiled and made available to all the stakeholders of education.
The document should be circulated to schools, principals, teachers, parents, inspectors, monitoring officers, civil society organizations.
Doing this will enable all stakeholders to be part of the monitoring process during policy implementation.
They should be able to also evaluate the success or otherwise of such policies.
Government and other policymakers should always establish a set of minimum standards for the school plant planning.
For example, there should be minimum standards for the school infrastructure (buildings, classrooms, laboratories, workshop etc) and other indices for measuring the quality of the implementation process of any policy plan.
Such indices should include the size of classrooms, teacher-pupil ratio etc.
In addition the content standards of the school curriculum at all levels should be determined.
3.7 Data Collection and Analysis Implementing the education sector(cid:8217)s minimum standard is largely based on accurate data.
Hence the collection and analysis of data become strategic to policy formulation process and plan implementation.
Absence of reliable data inhibits capacity building effort during implementation process.
In Nigeria, policies have been implemented without due regard to the accuracy 86 of the available data.
This has wrongly guided the policy planners in adopting right planning and implementation strategies.
Data problems could come from poor census base; lapses in the published statistical documents of many government agencies; weak technical capacity of collecting and analyzing data; low awareness about the relevance of accurate data to proper planning and national development; and non-agreement on statistical figures by various government sources.
You may find that the figures of primary school enrolment in Nigeria differ among the Federal Ministry of Education, States(cid:8217) Ministry of Education, the Local Education Department and even the schools records.
Because of the strategic position of data analysis to the success of planning and plan implementation, there should be increase in capacity building towards data generation, collection and analysis.
3.8 Planning for Facilities and Equipment For effective implementation of education policy plan, the state of readiness of facilities and equipment is very crucial.
Facility planning becomes a critical strategy of plan implementation.
Facility planning in education can be described as a process of preparing a set of decisions about educational facilities in such a way that the goals and purpose of articulating instructional mechanism will be sufficiently realized, especially in the implementation process.
Educational facility planning is considered to be a crucial implementation strategy because of the following: - It ensures judicious use of the scarce resources meant for facilities and equipment for policy implementation.
- It ensures adequate predictions, projections and forecasting of the required facilities and equipment for the plan implementation.
- It guides against wastage in facility preparation and utilization.
- It ensures alternative choices in the establishment of priorities.
During implementation, data on various aspects of the educational system, such as enrolment, teachers, non-teachers, geographical distribution of population, finance and cost etc are continuously required by planner to guide the projection of facilities and equipment requirements of the implementation process.
Facility planning is a serious aspect of educational planning, which requires well-trained professionals to successfully operationalise.
Many educational policy plans crashed during implementation because the facilities were not well planned by the government.
We have seen situation when students promised free education did not get seats and desk; no adequate classrooms to accommodate the projected enrolment; no books to go round and so on.
87 Therefore facility planning should be both a planning strategy during the planning process as well as an implementation strategy to sustain the policy implementation.
3.9 Monitoring and Evaluation Monitoring is the process of keeping watch or track of an action or a process or a project or object during the operational period of an implementation process.
On the other hand, evaluation is the process of placing a value on a project or event.
It can also imply the determination of the value of an object or an event etc.
Monitoring and evaluation are interwoven as they play complementary roles in ensuring quality assurance of implemented plans and programmes.
According to Obanya (2000), quality assurance is a must in the design and implementation process of any programme; and he believes that monitoring and evaluation should be a built-in everyday activity, which should be carried out in a highly professional manner.
As such the officers and the ministries, departments and agencies responsible should be well equipped and motivated.
The units should in addition be well funded.
In-school supervisors (head teachers, senior teachers) should also be part of school monitoring and evaluation mechanism to ensure effective policy implementation.
Monitoring is mainly concerned with whether a project, programme, plan, policy is implemented in a manner that is consistent with its design and goals.
Monitoring enables the policy implementer to determine if the inputs are delivered promptly and the quality envisage by the plan.
On the other hand, evaluation secures the basis for passing judgment on the performance of the implemented plan at the end of a period, and to provide timely feedback to the stakeholders for possible review, improvement or total reversal of either the plan being implemented or the implementation process.
Monitoring and evaluation of the implementation process should be well encompassing.
They should cover the facilities; teachers and teaching; the school leadership; funding-allocation and utilization; students-their performance and activities, and so on.
Government should establish the minimum qualification for monitoring officers and also develop a common monitoring and evaluation format and instruments for monitoring and evaluation across the nation.
Government should also develop and implement an in-service training programme for school leaders and other monitoring officers to ensure success of policy implementation.
88 3.10 Funding Funding is too strategic to plan implementation to be neglected.
Because of this, enough funds must be mobilized for the success of policy implementation.
The use of allocated fund should be rationally prioritized to go round all the strategic areas and aspects of policy implementation.
As money is ear-marked to put up a first class facilities and equipment during implementation, teachers who will use the facilities should be adequately motivated and rewarded.
Students(cid:8217) services should also be prioritized.
There should be rational distribution of funds across the educational levels and types of education that are involved in the plan implementation.
Everything should be done to eliminate internal and external waste and misappropriation of fund assigned for plan implementation purposes.
There should also be periodic increase in the allocation of funds to education policy implementation, especially to bring innovation to the implementation process.
Government should increase spending on education in general.
Government should aspire to meet the 26% of GDP allocation for the implementation of education policies as advised by UNESCO.
Government agencies should develop and adopt funding mechanisms that are transparent to enhance accountability.
The private suppliers of funds should be encouraged through transparency and accountability.
Education Tax Fund (ETF) should be made to be an enabler of private investment in education policy implementation.
There should be an integrated student loan programme to enable private investment in fees at the higher level of education.
Funding is a critical strategy of implementing any policy, whether in private or public educational institutions.
3.11 Introducing Motivational Packages For the success of education policy implementation, the personnel to be involved at both the formation stage and the implementation proper stage should be well remunerated and motivated.
Attractive incentives should be packaged for the would-be participants in the implemented policy.
Education is a unique social sector with diverse participants in its operation.
They include the teachers, students, inspectors and parents.
They should all be motivated to ensure cooperation, commitment and support for the policy implementation.
As said earlier, a magnificent school structure with disgruntled teachers and unhappy students can not be utilized to achieve its purpose.
Teachers must be made happy through the introduction of various motivating incentives.
For example, in an attempt to encourage pupils to embrace the UBE programme implementation, government has introduced 89free rich mid-day meal to attract children, especially the ones from poor and peasant homes.
Teachers(cid:8217) salary and allowances should be constantly reviewed to attract brilliant persons to the teaching profession.
The present way of treating teachers as second class citizens in the workers(cid:8217) reward system in Nigeria is a bad strategy that will not help the policy implementation process in the educational system.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 1.
Why is monitoring and evaluation regarded as policy plan implementation strategies?
2.
Explain the place of facility planning in the policy implementation strategies?
4.0 CONCLUSION We have learnt the importance of implementation in the planning process, because any policy plan not implemented is as useless as the papers on which it is designed.
Hence, plan implementation has become so strategic to educational development; however, it is a difficult stage.
Many strategies have been identified to be involved in the smooth and successful implementation of policy plans.
The strategies are to be well scrutinized, streamlined and faithfully applied to ensure successful plan implementation.
Failure to develop and adopt these strategies could inhibit the implementation process.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the unique position of policy implementation in the planning and policy making process.
You have learnt the various strategies that must be considered, developed and adopted in the policy implementation process.
We have studied the following implementation strategies.
They are: the enabling law, policy study, mobilization and public enlightenment, scheduling resources movement, manpower recruitment, setting minimum standards, data collection and analysis, monitoring and evaluation, planning for facilities and equipment, funding and packaging motivational incentives for the participants.
It is believed if these are wisely applied, there would be success of education policy implementation.
90  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List five major policy implementation strategies in the education system.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS.
Adeniji, I.A (2003) (cid:8220)Towards effective implementation of universal basic education in Nigeria(cid:8221) in Babalola, J.B. and Adedeji, S.O.
(eds) Contemporary Issues in Educational Management: A Book of Honour, Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
Hadddad, W. D (1994) The dynamics of education policymaking.
Washington D. C: The World Bank.
Obanya (2000) (cid:8220)Federal Republic of Nigeria implementation guidelines for the universal basic education programme(cid:8221) in Aghenta, J.A and Awanbor, D (eds) Academy Congress publication.
Benin City: The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Stewart, M.S.
; Powers, B.C.
; Murphy, P.D and Crosby, R.K (1978) (cid:8220)Using resources to support planning functions(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education.
Virginia: The American Vocational Association, Inc., 129-151 91UNIT 3 DATA AND INFORMATION IN THE DESIGNING AND EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Data and Information Defined 3.2 Importance of Data and Information in Designing and evaluating planning strategies.
3.3 Type of Data and Information Required in Designing and Evaluating Implementation Strategies 3.3.1 Qualitative Data and Information 3.3.2 Quantitative System-Wise Data and Information 3.3.3 Quantitative School-Wise Data and Information 3.4 Collection of Required Data and Information 3.4.1 Sources 3.4.2 Methods 3.4.3 Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational planning is a course of action meant for a future activity.
At each stage and level of the planning process, the educational planner requires information to guide his or her decisions and judgment.
Educational plans can only be designed and well implemented if necessary information on the educational system is available and reliable.
There are various strategies of implementation of data.
It is only the availability, processing and interpretation of data and information concerning them that can ensure effective design and evaluation of the identified strategies for purposeful plan implementation.
In this unit, you will learn the types of data required by planner in designing and evaluating implementation strategies; the usefulness of data and information to planning in general and designing and evaluation of planning strategies in particular; sources of collection; and the problems associated 92 with data and information gathering, especially in the developing nations like Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: § Define data and information § Explain the importance of data and information in designing and evaluating of implementation strategies § Identify the types of data and information required § Describe the collection procedure of the required data and information § Explain the problems associated with data collection and information retrieval for planning in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Data and Information Defined These two statistical terms are generally used interchangeably.
Data can be defined as raw facts in isolation, which, when placed in a meaningful context through processing mechanism, give meaning through deductions and inferences.
On the other hand, information is the aggregation of processing data to provide knowledge and understanding.
According to Burch and Strater (1974:70), data are raw unevaluated messages, while information is the increase in knowledge obtained by the recipient by them.
The process of producing information depends on the ability and competency of the decision-maker or planner or researcher to meaningfully relate to and translate isolated data into alternatives.
By implication, data give rise to information.
3.2 Importance of Data and Information in Designing and Evaluating Planning Strategies Data and information are desirable components of educational planning and plan implementation strategies.
Information is increasingly recognized and accepted as a valued factor for effective decision making.
No planner can decide accurately the resources required for plan implementation as well as strategies to adopt if he or she does not have the available data and information on the existing situation and implementation strategies.
Before an admission policy plan can be effectively implemented, there will be the 93need to have data and information on how many applications, how many children of school age population; and data on the implementation strategies such as teaching and instructional delivery, accommodation, mobilization, funding and so on.
Without these, the plan implementation is destined for failure.
Specifically, data and information are neede to do the following ; 1.
Ensure efficient policy formulation process when necessary and relevant data and information are available during the planning stage.
The output from such design can be faultless.
A faultless plan can be easily implemented.
2.
Implementation is made easier when relevant data and information concerning the strategies of implementation are available and utilized.
Data analysis will reveal if the plan to be implemented is desirable, affordable and above all feasible.
Data analysis, which is usually done prior to implementation in form of pilot study may show that though the plan is desirable, but may not be affordable.
For example, data analysis may reveal that most Nigerians desire university education.
A further analysis of the economic situation may not support the implementation strategy of university education expansion.
Another example, a government may want to locate a school in a particular community, having relied on data analysis that supports desirability and affordability, but the government could be constrained by the information that such community could not pass the feasibility test.
The feasibility issue may arise based on the information about insecurity, terrain and so on.
Hence, data and information are very crucial to plan implementation strategies.
3.
Data and information are needed for assessing the performance of the procedure and strategies of implementation.
This is done by assessing the adequacy of inputs into the implementation process.
Data analysis by the policy makers and implementing agencies or institutions will ensure constant review of the implementation stages.
Constant assessment could also lead to the review of the implementation strategies.
Non performing strategies may be changed for more innovative ones.
4.
Analysis of data and information on implementation strategies suggest innovative guidelines for effective plan implementation.
This 94 could cover the technical, financial and managerial aspects of implementation.
Data analysis could suggest the location for effective technical and skilful sources of implementation personnel that will bring about result-oriented implementation.
5.
Monitoring and evaluation are meant to ensure accountability of the education leadership in the handling of resources allocated for plan implementation.
Resource allocation and utilization are important strategies in policy plan implementation; as such they must be judiciously done.
Effective monitoring and evaluation can only be done when reliable data and information are available for regular analysis.
Data analysis will also reveal during monitoring, if implementation is carried out to specification of the plan design.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Distinguish between data and information.
2.
Highlight five (5) areas of usefulness of data and information in designing and evaluation of implementation strategies.
3.3 Type of Data and Information Required in Designing and Evaluating Implementation Strategies Plan implementation strategies design and evaluation as you have learnt require accurate and adequate data and information for implementation effectiveness and occasional review.
There are various types of such data in the educational system.
According to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank (1992), such data for monitoring policy plan implementation strategies are classified into: 1.
Qualitative school and classroom-wise data 2.
Quantitative system-wise data 3.
Quantitative school-wise data Our discussion will follow these three categorizations.
3.3.1 Qualitative Data and Information Qualitative data and information in the educational system are not readily quantifiable.
They are data and information that are important and to be seriously considered by educational planners, monitoring and evaluation officers as well as policy implementers.
Such data could determine the choice of implementation strategies; and could influence the performance of 95implementation strategies.
They are supposed to be constantly monitored, collected, analysed and interpreted for actions during plan implementation.
They include: the contents of the policy being implemented; the contents of education, the curricula contents and so on.
According to IBRD/World Bank (1992) the list is long.
They include data and information on the following: 1.
Amount of class time spent on instruction 2.
Type and amount of homework assigned by grade 3.
Average time spent using different instructional technologies in class 4.
Amount of teacher time spent in preparation for class 5.
Substance and regularity of classroom supervision by head teachers and inspectors 6.
Provisions made for remediation 7.
Provision made for acceleration 8.
Provision made for class coverage during teacher absence 9.
Teachers with other jobs 10.
Standard of living of teachers and non-teachers 11.
School and community relationships 12.
Parental participation and involvement 13.
School climate; a function of discipline, head teacher-teacher relations, teacher-student relations etc IBRD/World Bank (1992:41) The above listed data and information may not be required for just one purpose of designing and evaluation process of the implementation strategies.
A planner or whosoever is responsible for designing and evaluation or even planning the implementation strategies should work only with the relevant qualitative data and information.
3.3.2 Quantitative System-Wise Data and Information Quantitative data are the measurable facts that can be transcribed into figures for analysis.
Such data cover both the educational and other related sectors for the purpose of educational planning and plan implementation.
The system-wise data are peculiar to the system as an entity.
System-wise data include: 1.
Types of education to be provided: Is it formal, non-formal, technical, vocational, liberal, or integrated?
You need data to answer these questions.
96 2.
Levels of Education: you may need data on the number of primary, secondary, Colleges of Education, monotechnics, polytechnics, universities.
3.
School ownership: you may want to know the number of school owned by government (Federal, State, and Local), private schools, assisted and non-assisted schools.
4.
Data on Institutions: data is required on the spread of school location, enrolment (by sex), special students, and school size.
5.
Data on Personnel: we need data on teaching and non-teaching staff.
Information is required concerning the number on roll, age distribution, sex distribution, qualifications, experience, specialization, entry and exit dates and so on.
6.
Data on Quality Control: we require data on personnel in the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation strategies in education.
How many inspectors?
How many inspectors by specialization?
What is the ratio of inspector to school?
7.
Data on Students: This is very essential because students are the centre of the education system.
The policies, programmes, projects and plans to be implemented in the school system should revolve round them.
Therefore, we require data on the number of students, student-classroom ratio, student-teacher ratio, etc.
8.
Data on School: This should cover the location, facilities and equipment, such as number of classrooms (functional and non-functional), other buildings, laboratories and workshops.
9.
Data on Finance: This should cover the total sum estimated, allocated and utilized overtime.
It should include income and expenditure.
10.
Population Data: Demographic data is required for planning and plan implementation, as well as evaluating the planning strategies in all sectors of the economy, including education.
The total population, which is often got from census figures, is very important.
Population data can also be estimated, or obtained from sample survey and vital registration.
You may also need data on population structure, geographical distribution, sex and so on.
Other necessary quantitative system-wise data that may be required according to IBRD/World Bank (1992) are: a.
Per pupil cost of resources b.
Output of teacher training institutions and other institutions c. Number of teachers at different levels of the salary and allowance schedules d. Birth rate by region or state.
973.3.3 Quantitative School-Wise Data Planners and policy plan implementers may also require certain data and information that are peculiar to the schools in the process of implementation.
Such data may be required to plan the implementation strategies or for monitoring and evaluating such strategies during implementation.
The data and information can be quantified to give direction to plan implementers.
The data required in this category include the following: 1.
The number of days that school was opened last academic session 2.
The average of length of the school day last academic session 3.
Enrolment by age, grade, gender 4.
Teacher turnover rate 5.
Average teaching load per week 6.
Average daily student attendance by gender and grade 7.
Average teacher attendance by gender and grade level taught 8.
Number of textbooks per class 9.
Number of classrooms with chalkboards and chalk 10.
Number of exercise books and pencils available 11.
Number of visits by school inspectors 12.
Number of students who dropped out of school during the course of the session by age, grade, and gender 13.
Number of students promoted to the next higher grade by age, grade, and gender 14.
Resources provided by the community in the past academic session 15.
National and regional examination results by grade and subjects; age and gender (IBRD/World Bank, 1993).
The school-based quantitative data are very important in the implementation of the free and compulsory primary and basic education programme.
The data will ensure effective planning and evaluation of implementation strategies.
It will also ensure effective monitoring of the implementation strategies, and judicious and efficient use of resources.
3.4 Collection of the Required Data and Information 3.4.1 Sources Required data and information for planning and evaluation of implementation strategies in the education system can be obtained from several sources.
The sources include: 98 1.
Records of the National Population Commission.
From there, you can collect demographic data, including census figures, population structure, and population distribution.
2.
Records of the Ministry of Education and Education Agencies (NUC, NCCE, NBTE, NERDC, SUBEC, UBEC etc).
Data on education personnel, enrolment, funding as regard general educational administration and policy implementation can be obtained from these sources.
The sources cover all levels and types of education.
3.
Records of related government ministries, parastatals and agencies, such as Ministries of Finance, Labour, youth and social development, Federal Office of Statistics, National Manpower Board, etc.
4.
Documents of some international bodies and agencies.
They include the World Bank, UNESCO, UNICEF, etc.
We require data for international comparison we may need data to ensure compliance with international standards in the process of planning and evaluation of implementation strategies of education policy plans.
5.
School records.
There are so many vital records in the schools where on-the-spot data can be collected for planning, monitoring and evaluation of implementation strategies.
Data can be collected from admission register, attendance register, school ledger and account books, inventory book, salary voucher etc.
3.4.2 Methods We are not going to discuss in detail in this section the methods of data and information required for planning and evaluation of implementation strategies.
We will briefly list them.
In this age, data and information can be collected manually and electronically.
Data are frequently obtained either by direct visit of the enumerator to the sources of information or by mailing to the respondents a list of questions, called questionnaire or checklist, which they will have to answer at their convenience.
Information can be obtained by registration.
This means that vital information is reported regularly to the proper authorities that require and use such information.
For example, the school head teachers and administrators are expected to forward certain information concerning their institutions to the Board, Ministry or Agency managing or supervising such institutions for planning purposes.
993.4.3 Problems Data collection is highly constrained in Nigeria and many other developing countries.
The major problems confronting educational planners and researchers include: 1.
Absence of data bank.
This should have been a central pool where data on various aspects of the nation, including education could be easily retrieved.
2.
Absence of reliable population base.
This is as result of the un-reliable census figures that are relied on in the country.
Several times, we have tried to obtain count of the actual people in the country, but to no avail.
A lot of falsehood is reported during the exercise.
3.
Many official records are still marked (cid:8220)secret(cid:8221).
This makes it difficult to obtain certain information during policy planning and implementation; and monitoring and evaluation.
4.
The ignorance of respondents as regard the essence of data and information being collected make them give false responses that could mislead the judgment of planners and policy-makers.
5.
Although there are serious efforts by government and other agencies on the development of Information and Computer Technology (ICT) towards information management system (MIS) in the country, much still needs to be done.
The MIS is still poor.
The facilities are inadequate, there is no regular power supply and the knowledge of many managers of education is still shallow about MIS.
Hence, data and information storing, processing and retrieval are low.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What are three categories of data and information required for planning and evaluation of implementation strategies?
2.
Outline the major sources of collecting such data and information.
4.0 CONCLUSION Data and information are essential components of educational planning.
They are processed to give meaning and direction to policy planning.
They are very useful assets in decision making.
They guide the planners in making accurate projection and forecast of choices.
Planning, monitoring and evaluation of implementation strategies are made easier when there are adequate and reliable data and information to give meaningful interpretation of the existing situation.
Several sources are available for the collection of 100 educational data and information in a country; however, it is still difficult to obtain accurate and reliable data in Nigeria because of some constraints.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the definitions of data and information.
From their definitions, you can distinguish between them.
The importance of data and information in the planning, monitoring and evaluation of implementation strategies have been exposed.
They include ensuring efficient policy making process; ensuring easy implementation of policy plans; ensuring accountability in the implementation process; ensuring effective and sustainable policy impact assessment and so on.
You also studied the categories of the required data and information by planners and policy plan implementers; which are: qualitative data and information; quantitative system-wise and school-wise data and information.
You equally learnt about the sources through which these data and information can be collected, the problems inherent in collecting them in this country, and the methods you can use in data collection.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the system-wise quantitative data and information required for the planning and evaluation of implementation strategies in the educational system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemi, J. K. (1995) (cid:8220)Stages in the planning process(cid:8217), in Peretomode,V.F.(ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Publishers, 145 (cid:8211) 156.
Aghenta, J.
A (1993) Principles and practice of educational planning: Focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: NSEP.
Nwakwo, J. I (1981) Educational planning: Theory and methods.
Lahore/Karachi: IZHARSON IBRD/World Bank (1982) Adjusting educational policies.
Edited by Bruce Fuller and Aklilu Habie.
Washington D.C: World Bank.
101 UNIT 4 PREPARING EDUCATIONAL PLANS FOR IMPLEMENTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Preparing Educational Plans 3.1.1 Data Gathering 102  3.1.2 Breaking of Policy into Programmes and Projects 3.1.3 Costing the Draft Plan 3.2 Submitting and Defending of the Draft Plans 3.3 Evaluating the Plan Options 3.3.1 Evaluating Plan Desirability 3.3.2 Evaluating Plan Affordability 3.3.3 Evaluating Plan Feasibility 3.4 Production of Educational Plans for Action 3.4.1 Types of Plan Required 3.4.2 Distribution of Plans 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The preparation of educational plans is the responsibility of educational planners in an ideal society.
Educational plans vary in complexity, range and scope, level of application and implementation and cost of operationization.
Plan preparation involves government directory of its policy decisions.
Data analysis and interpretation is involved.
Financial implication is determined.
The prepared plan draft must be defended for approval before the authority through the evaluation of plan options.
In this unit, you will learn all these, and also the production of plan for actions 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: § Highlight the steps to take in drafting educational plans § Explain the procedure of submission and defence of the draft plans § Describe the process of evaluating the plan options § Explain the production of plans for action.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Preparing Educational Plans 103 Plan preparation is a continuous task in the educational system, and it is the responsibility of educational planners.
Educational plans are prepared for implementation at the institutional and governmental levels, as well as across three tiers of government (local, state and federal) in Nigeria.
Prepared plans can be simple, moderate, complex and strategic.
They could be for short, medium and long term duration in implementation and operation.
Educational plans can cover the operation mechanisms of the school system, such as facilities and equipment, personnel, students, funding, curriculum and so on.
Plan preparation is preceded by government directives to educational planners.
Such directives are products of the educational policy guidelines.
At any stage of the policy implementation, educational planners can be called upon by the government to produce draft plans to address certain aspects of the policy document.
The planner is usually guided by the overall objectives of the policy document, the nation(cid:8217)s economy and the needs of the society.
For example, provision of mid-day meal is an aspect of the UBE policy programme.
Government could give directive to educational planner to produce draft plans on the mode of operation, the facilities, the personnel and the cost implication of the various plan options, which should reflect in the draft plan.
Such plans, when approved are usually included in the broad national or state development plan, which could be annual, rolling, medium and long term range.
Various committees are set up at the state or national levels to consider the draft plans.
Such committees are composed of educational planners, several related experts, including technocrats and bureaucrats.
Normally, the committees are supposed to be under the leadership of the Director of Educational Planning or his or her representative.
The experts included should come from related fields.
For example, a financial experts is necessary in the area of costing of the plan implementation inputs and an engineer may be required if such plan will involve building and rehabilitation of facilities and equipment.
There are many activities involved in the plan preparation.
They are discussed below.
3.1.1 Data Gathering Much has been said concerning the relevance of data in planning in general and educational planning in particular.
Data and relevant information must be gathered and analysed by the planners during the drafting of plans.
Data 104 gathering should cover all aspects of education the plan is focusing.
However, there is no way of preparing educational plans without requiring data on physical, human and financial resources, because they are fundamental to the successful implementation of any plan.
The required data have been discussed in detail in unit 2 of this module.
3.1.2 Breaking of Policy into Programmes and Projects According to Aghenta (1993), as the data and information collection are progressing, the government policy is segmented into programmes and projects.
The essence of this effort is to make easy the projections and estimates to be involved in the draft plans.
The gathered data will however, assist the planners and the planning committee to make reliable projection and estimation.
The data and information required should be in trend form and cover some years.
This is because a single year may not adequately reveal the true picture of the education system.
The data should be well detailed and cover related areas in education.
Aghenta (1993) advised that planners should be knowledgeable of the economic indices, economic status of the country and the ability of the government to fund the prepared plan.
Data analysis ensures categorization of policies into programmes and projects, guided by the goals and aspirations of the plan and the plan period across the levels of education.
Basically, the school enrolment should be projected, as most educational plans are directly or indirectly meant for the benefits of students.
In the same way, projection should cover the teaching and non-teaching personnel and facilities to be involved in the prepared drat plan.
There are other parameters that must be considered during this exercise.
Funding of the plan is very important.
3.1.3 Costing the Draft Plan The financial implication of the draft plan should be included in the draft.
What will cost government to implement the draft plan should be made known during the plan preparation.
There is no need coming up with plan that can not be funded.
A government is like an individual.
You may have a draft plan of a house building, but the cost of erecting it may scare you.
Costing is an aspect of educational planning.
The unit cost of each item in each category of the draft plan should be known in order to arrive at the estimates of the total cost of the draft plan during implementation.
You may project to have 100,000 teachers to implement an educational plan.
The average unit cost of teacher may be #500,000.00 per annum over a period of time.
The total cost estimated for 105teachers(cid:8217) salary would be #50,000,000,000.00.
The recurrent and capital cost implication must also be reflected in the draft plan.
The planning committee should also indicate the possible sources of funding of the draft plan.
It is not good enough to lay down a plan without suggesting alternative ways through which such plan could be funded during implementation.
The authority, which is usually the government may be discouraged and do away with such draft plan.
Effective costing and suggestions of sources of funding sometimes encourage decision makers to implement plans.
3.2 Submitting and Defending of the Draft Plans As soon as the plan has been prepared and the draft plan ready, the planners will submit it to the authority that orders the plan preparation.
This, the planners do with some important explanations.
Thereafter a time is schedule for the draft plan defence by the planners.
This is the time they will explain the terminologies, key points and the intricacies that are embedded in the draft plan.
At this stage, corrections, modifications and cancellation of certain parts of the draft are done in line with the overall goals and objectives of the policy choice as well as the ability of the government to fund the plan implementation.
This is the level of matching plan with the economic reality of the country.
Several alternative draft plans could be submitted for inclusion in the Development Plan.
Aghenta (1993) advised that during the period of draft preparation, members of the educational group should interact with the relevant groups who are in charge of plan drafting for other sectors for the overall national development plan.
This is necessary to come out with defined goals for education that will be in harmony with the national development goals and aspirations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What are the roles of educational planners in drafting education plans?
2.
Why is it important to submit draft plans for defence?
3.3 Evaluating the Plan Options During the preparation of draft plan, many options and alternatives do crop up for consideration for possible adoption.
It is important for planners to evaluate each option in terms of its feasibility, desirability and affordability.
This will intimate the planners with the possible implications of the plan options during drafting.
3.3.1 Evaluating Plan Desirability 106 Here, the planners assess the possible impact of each option on the various interest groups and the general stakeholders, who may be the direct beneficiaries of the plan.
Will such plan option threaten some people and can they be encouraged?
Will the stakeholders see such plan option as desirable?
There is no need preparing plan that will not be welcomed by the society.
According to Haddad (1994), the potential implications for the political direction of a nation and its economic stability will influence the desirability and need to be articulated.
For example, introducing tuition fee into Nigerian universities may look necessary so as to augment government financial efforts at increasing the quality of university education.
But is it really desirable?
When one considers the level of poverty in the country and government philosophy of equal education opportunities, then the level of desirability can be ascertained.
Haddad (1994) advised that it is important to go through the fundamental thrusts of the proposed plan and test its compatibility with the dominant ideology and philosophy articulated in the national development plans.
This is why Nigerian government is constrained to ask students to pay school fees in order not to be seen as contradicting the Nigerian philosophy of education as provided in the National Policy on Education (FRN, 2004) and even the Constitution of the Federal Republic (FRN, 1999).
3.3.2 Evaluating Plan Affordability Analysis of affordability entails considering the costs implication in several ways; such as the monetary cost, opportunity cost and the political cost.
1.
Monetary Cost: the monetary cost in term of social and private financial involvement in the implementation of any educational plan must be evaluated.
This is important to determine whether the inherent activities in the plan can be afforded and sustained over a future period.
According to Haddad (1994), it requires the consideration of alternative plausible economic and political indicators, together with what the nation(cid:8217)s or state(cid:8217)s economy might or might not be able to afford.
The reason for this need according to Hage, Gargan and Hapnemen (1986) is that studies have revealed that educational expenditures are much more vulnerable to changes in economic circumstances and political goals than the other sectors(cid:8217) social expenditures.
In the same manner, the private consumers (parents, students) of education may be forced to share the cost of education if the government finds the cost to be too enormous to be carried alone.
In this way private cost of education may skyrocket and if care is not 107taken may deny several children education if their parents could not afford the bill.
This may distort the national education policy philosophy of equalization of education opportunities to all children of school age irrespective of their background.
It is true that if the cost of education is high, the rate of demand for education will drop, especially among the poor families.
In drafting policy plan, educational policy analysts should proffer alternative means of distributing the private contribution in order to reduce the deterrent costs for indigent families and at the same time not courting resistance from the rich families.
2.
Opportunity Costs: Opportunity cost as you know is the alternative a producer or consumer has to forgo or do away with in order to purchase a good or service or in order to achieve a set goal.
In drafting a plan, the educational policy analyst should examine if there are other activities, which might benefit the educational system, but which should be forgone so as to effectively fund the draft plan.
There should be prioritization of alternatives during planning.
3.
Political Costs: This is very important in the evaluation of policy plan options.
There are various interest groups in any political entity.
For this reason some interest groups may likely be favoured better than the others and this may mean certain political costs to the government.
The costs may be defrayed, but they should be weighed for cost effectiveness.
3.3.3 Evaluating Plan Feasibility Feasibility is the measure of adequacy of the tangible and non-tangible resources necessary to implement a plan.
It applies to the implementation of education plans.
Evaluating plan feasibility entails checking if the resources of land, man and time are available in the right quantity and quality to see to the success of the draft plan implementation.
This is very vital in the educational system.
The planner should include in the draft plan if there will be enough land to establish new schools, whether the terrain of land is good enough to accommodate young children.
In addition, the teaching and non- teaching personnel that will implement the most important aspects of the educational system must be assessed.
Their adequacy in quality and quantity, the distribution by qualification and specialization should be assessed.
In addition, their training and re-training needs should be assessed.
The cost of their wages and allowances, the cost of incentives and the cost of training and retraining should be assessed to decide whether the personnel cost will not create problem of affordability of such draft plan.
108  The issue of time is also important in feasibility assessment.
Many educational programmes frequently span over long time, much longer than planned.
As such the planner should estimate realistic time frame through careful evaluation of the implementation capabilities and experiences.
3.4 Production of Educational Plans for Action 3.4.1 Types of Plan Required An organization or government normally has a series of plan documents that make up its total plan, which are meant for operation of the educational system.
Plans can be developed around the concept that they are compliance documents for receiving funds (Parks, 1978).
In addition, statutory rules may require the development of a plan to account for the government funds for educational programmes and projects.
Specific plans may also have to be developed in order to gain additional funds within the educational system for an educational institution.
Parks (1978) concluded that the plan for achieving organizational goals and objectives probably represents the most detailed operational plan that an organization has to manage.
The time frames for plan operation by different time schedule requirements could engender the development of different types of plans.
3.4.2 Distribution of Plans After the approval of the final plan has undergone all the processing, the copies of the plan should be distributed to all the concerned ministries, departments and agencies relevant to educational plan implementation.
Thereafter the government compliance documents and plans for the aspect and level of education involved must be reproduced and distributed so as to communicate the plan action to the general public and to the department and agencies that have been identified as a part of coordinated effort to implement education policies.
Similarly, the short-term and long-tern objectives of an organization must be distributed to all the component units of the organization.
Every recipient of funds for plan implementation should have access to the priorities and direction that have been determined by the education department or agency for education plan implementation.
109 When plan is completed, the responsibility of its distribution becomes an important element for planning and administration.
Parks (1978), advised that plan should be flexible at the time it is conveyed, recognizing that such plan could have been based upon the best information existing at a certain time, especially at the time of its drafting; as other elements may come along that may call for review of the plan.
4.0 CONCLUSION Drafting of plans is a crucial exercise in plan production.
It involves various skills and technicality, as such educational planners and other experts that cut across various disciplines are involved.
Drafting of educational plans involves many steps and activities.
Draft plans can be simple, moderate and complex.
They could emerge from local, state and federal government, and they cover various types of education and cut across all levels of education.
For the efficacy of any plan, many options do come up during drafting; as such the several options should be evaluated to understand whether such plan is desirable, affordable and feasible.
In addition, certain factor determine the final plan document for implementation, and the final plan document should be well distributed to relevant departments and agencies for proper study and understanding during implementation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the drafting process of educational plans.
You have studied the activities involved in the plan preparation.
The activities include data gathering and analysis; breaking of policy into programmes and projects, an exercise that makes projection and estimation easy in the draft plans.
Other activities include costing of the draft plan; with an exercise that informs the planner about the affordability of the plan.
You have also learnt that the completed draft plan must be submitted to the necessary authority that ordered the plan preparation.
You have studied how to evaluate the plan options, which we identified as: evaluation of the plan desirability, affordability and feasibility.
Finally, you learnt the types of plan required, which are dictated by certain conditions and also the distribution of the final plans.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the activities required in drafting educational plans.
2.
Highlight the factors to be evaluated in considering policy options.
110  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Aghenta, J.
A (1993) Principles and practice of educational planning: Focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: NSEP.
Hadddad, W. D (1994) The dynamics of education policymaking.
Washington D. C: The World Bank.
Hage, J., Gargan, E., and Hannemen, R. (1986) (cid:8220)The responsive state vs. the active state(cid:8221) Unpublished Manuscript, University of Maryland.
Parks, D.L.
(1978) (cid:8220)Training personnel to plan effectively(cid:8221) in Lamar, C. L. (ed) Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education.
Virginia: The American Vocational Association, Inc., 189-221.
UNIT 5 ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES FOR POLICY PLANNING AND PLAN IMPLEMENTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Required Resources for Planning and Plan Implementation 3.2 Sources of Required Resources for Planning and Plan Implementation 3.3 Resources 3.3.1 Financial Resources 111 3.3.2 Manpower (Personnel) Resources 3.3.3 Physical Resources 3.3.4 Information Resources 3.3.5 Technical Resources 3.4 Managing Resources for Effective Plan Implementation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Resources are the most critical component of planning and plan implementation strategies.
It covers the tangible and non-tangible things, including human, materials, and other supporting items that aid the efficacy of planning and plan implementation.
Resources must be adequately utilized and monitored in order to ensure judicious use and system(cid:8217)s goals and objectives achievement.
In this unit, we will discuss for your understanding the required resources for planning and plan implementation; sources of required resources; resource allocation mechanism; and the management of the allocated resources to ensure effective plan implementation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:- - Highlight the resources required for planning and plan implementation.
- Outline the sources of the required resources.
- Explain the resources allocation mechanism for the purpose of planning and plan implementation.
- Explain the management of resources for the effective plan implementation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Required Resources for Planning and Plan Implementation Many resources are required to perform planning functions as well as plan implementation in the educational system.
Various experts have different views about the required resources for planning and implementation of 112 plans.
Dunham (1977) categorized resources as: Information, Interest, Involvement, and Initiatives as the required resources for planning functions.
Hanson (1968) classified required planning resources as: Money, manpower, and data.
Conventionally, planners and economist have grouped required resources for planning and plan implementation in all sectors, including education as: 1.
Physical resources 2.
Human resources 3.
Financial or fiscal resources.
These will be discussed in detail as we proceed in this unit.
However, social economist like Stewart, Powers, Murphy and Crosby (1978) highlighted the main required resources for planning functions and plan implementation to be: 1.
Mission statement, goals and objectives, and 2.
Administrative structure.
1.
It is generally believed that any planning function must be preceded by well defined and stated mission, goals and objectives.
They serve as the light, illuminating the path or process of planning.
They serve as the guiding inputs that will direct the planner to effectively manipulate other resources to match the purposes of planning, the expected outcomes as well as define the plan implementation strategies.
The stated goals and objectives will indicate the scope and the range of planning, and the type of planning (simple, moderate, and strategic) model to adopt.
It is imperative for the educational planners to have a clearly defined goals and objectives in regard of the educational system or the aspect of the system they are planning for in order to reach the desired outcome of an educational plan.
2.
Administrative structure is also regarded as a resource for planning functions, because it is believed that it will engender a two-way communication in the planning process.
It is the administrative structure that will enable the educational planners to maintain an exchange of ideas with their super-ordinates and sub-ordinates and also their co-workers within the organization (Stewart, et.
al 1978).
Planning efforts will fail if it does not give room for participation, if it is just a product handed down from the upper authority.
An open 113organizational structure allows cross-breed of ideas from all stakeholders.
It is by this that the planning process can be effective.
In addition to the discussed resources, Stewart, et.
al also identified information, personnel, funding and facilities as very important resources required for planning functions and plan implementation.
They will be discussed in detail later in this unit.
However, it is difficult to identify all the needed resources, because some are very intangible, but valuable.
According to Wright (1969) resource identification is an unending activity that will continue as long as there are planning functions to be carried out.
For example, time is considered to be a valuable resource in all human endeavours.
3.2 Sources of Required Resources for Planning and Plan Implementation Sources of obtaining the required resources for education in general, planning functions and plan implementation in particular can be categorized as follows: 1.
Governmental Sources 2.
Non-Governmental Sources 3.
Alternative Sources.
Governmental Sources In developing countries, such as Nigerian, government is largely responsible for providing much of the resources required for education plan implementation.
The federal government, the state governments and the local governments are each responsible statutorily to provide education at various levels of education.
1.
The federal government provides certain resources for education policy implementation at the basic education level (primary and junior secondary schools) in form of counterpart funding.
The fund is meant to provide the physical resources and personnel.
The federal government provides the resources for plan implementation in the Federal Unity Secondary Schools, Federal Technical Colleges, Monotechnics, Polytechnics, Colleges of Education and Universities.
Federal government also provides resources for plan implementation to run some specialized schools and institutions like the National Teachers Institute 114 (NTI), and in the running of the several agencies responsible for education policy development, e.g.
National Education Research and Development Commission (NERDC), as well as the agencies monitoring the different levels of education, e.g.
(NUC, NBTE, NCCE, UBEC etc) 2.
State and local governments provide much of the resources for education policy plan implementation in their respective states and local government areas.
States provide much of the resources to run the primary and secondary education.
Many of them also have state College of Education, Technical Colleges, Polytechnics and Universities.
They provide the resources for plan and policy implementation in these institutions.
The states also pay the counterpart funding in the UBE policy execution.
They also provide the resources for the planning functions in the ministry of education and the education supervisory departments in their states, such as TESCOM and SUBEB.
3.
The local governments also provide resources for education plan implementation at the primary education level.
They pay the primary schools(cid:8217) personnel salaries and allowances.
They equally contribute to the provision of some physical resources at the primary education level.
4.
Government in Nigeria is loaded with the responsibility of providing much of the educational resources because it controls the treasury of the nation.
All the direct and indirect income of the country goes into government treasury.
The natural resources of the country plus various taxations are controlled by the government, hence the much dependence on government as the major source of resources for policy planning functions and policy plan implementation in Nigeria.
Federal government also controls some special Funds for providing resources for educational policy plan implementation at all levels of education.
Such funds include the Education Tax Fund (ETF), Petroleum Training and Development Fund (PTDF) etc.
These funds have been assisting various levels of education in ensuring effective plan implementation through provision of physical resources such as buildings, libraries, laboratories, workshop etc.
Non-Governmental Sources Educational policies and plan implementation rely to certain extent on resources provided by non-governmental quarters, especially in developing countries.
These sources are located nationally and internationally.
These sources only augment the government sources as the education resources requirements are enormous.
1.
Nationally, some private organizations are seriously contributing both to the physical and financial resources to assist in various educational 115plan implementations.
Various industries (banking, manufacturing, etc) and individual philanthropists have contributed immensely in this regard.
They have donated buildings, laboratories, libraries etc for educational plan implementation.
Some Foundations have been established by private individuals and families purposely to provide resources for education policies and plan implementation.
Even academic chairs are being endowed to encourage personnel development in the tertiary institutions.
In addition, many private individuals and organizations are now investing their resources directly on education by establishing schools, colleges and universities.
This is to contribute to the policy implementation aimed at expanding access to education at all levels.
A lot of resources are being committed to private schools at all levels.
2.
Internationally, there are several sources of obtaining financial and physical assistance for policy plan implementation.
In some situations, international sources could be very competitive.
The political situation in a country and the level of wealth or poverty could be factors determining the support of many rich international communities and organizations.
The USAID, OECD, EU have been helpful in this direction.
The international agencies like UNESCO, UNICEF, UNDP, and ADB etc have equally been contributing to the provision of education resources for policy plan implementation.
There are also several Foundations that have contributed physical resources as well as financial resources for personnel development and research efforts to enhance policy implementation.
They include the Ford Foundation, Carnegie Foundation, McArthur Foundation, Rockefeller Foundation etc.
Alternative Sources Owing to the financial predicament and not too bright economic future of many developing countries, coupled with the economic instability world over, it has been severally suggested (Adeyemi, 1990; Akangbou, 1985, and Nwadiani, 2000) that educational plan implementation agencies and institutions should embark on activities and ventures that can generate funds, which can be used to augment government financial allocation to enhance their capability to effectively implement the various educational plans at their disposal.
The revenue yielding activities and ventures suggested include: 116 § Embarking on commercial agricultural venture, such as poultry, fish ponds, animal husbandry, especially where there is adequate land and expertise to monitor the activities.
§ Introduction of internal or shuttle transport venture.
This is possible at the tertiary educational level.
§ Commercializing the printing and publishing unit of the tertiary institutions.
§ Colleges and Universities can generate funds by running commercial laundry and cafeteria services.
§ Colleges and universities could go into commercial hospitality business by building conferences centre and guest houses; petrol stations and bookshops.
§ Consultancy services are veritable means of generating funds by the colleges and universities.
Industries rely largely on the expertise of these institutions as well as the products of their research efforts for patenting.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List four major resources required for planning implementation in your state.
2.
Highlight the major sources of obtaining resources for educational planning functions and plan implementation in your country.
3.3 Resources As discussed above, there are several resources to be allocated and utilized for effective planning and implementation of educational policies and plans.
Effective strategies must be adopted by planners and decision makers so as to ensure rationality and balancing in resources allocation.
In this section, we will consider the following.
1.
Financial Resources 2.
Manpower (Personnel) Resources 3.
Physical Resources 4.
Information Resources 5.
Technical Resources 3.3.1 Financial Resources 117The effectiveness of planning functions and plan implementation is a function of the adequacy of available funds and methods and capability of funds allocations.
This is because the adequacy, quality and performance of other resources depend largely on the allocated funds.
As such financial resources should be rationally allocated and judiciously utilized.
It has been observed that financial allocation to educational policy plan implementation by all tiers of government in Nigeria is inadequate, considering the school age population.
While the allocation is considered to be inadequate, there is also the problem of internal mis-allocation, mis-appropriation and outright corruption within institutions and among the agencies responsible for the management and allocation of resources to the schools and institutions at all level of education.
For example, at the federal level, the appropriated funds are given to the agencies through the Ministry of Education that serves as supervisors of the school system for direct allocation to schools and institutions.
The NUC is responsible for the allocation of funds to the Federal Universities, while the NBTE, NCCE, UBEC are responsible for the Polytechnics/Monotechnics; Colleges of Education and Primary education respectively.
The state and the local governments have their own methods of allocating funds to implement policy plans in their domains.
Whatever the methods adopted allocation of financial resources from government sources must be appropriated by the legislature.
It is important for the government, ministries of education, supervisory agencies and the institutions to always study and analyse the various laws and guidelines pertaining to financial allocation and utilization to remove corruption and to ensure efficiency.
3.3.2 Manpower (Personnel) Resources Allocation of manpower in the educational system requires careful and rational planning.
This is because it represents a very critical position in the operationalization of policy objectives and implementation of educational plans.
Education policy delivery is labour intensive.
The teachers and non- teachers should be equitably distributed to schools, irrespective of the location of school to ensure even implementation of the teaching-learning aspect of the policy plan.
There should be well defined criteria for personnel allocation to schools.
This could include school size, school type (science, technical, vocational, grammar, comprehensive); level of education and so on.
Minimum standards must be set for personnel resource allocation to schools and other educational institutions.
Qualification and subject specialization should also be used; teacher workload should be standardized as a factor to be used for teaching manpower allocation.
In addition to personnel resources, it is recommended that allocation of necessary supporting services should be allocated.
The services include school guidance and counselling, MIS, personnel development, library etc.
they are 118 required to reinforce and enhance effective utilization of available direct teaching-learning personnel resources in implementing education policy plans as well as planning functions.
The provision and allocation of teaching manpower resources and the supporting services are functions of adequate rational use of allocated funds.
3.3.3 Physical Resources Physical resources are crucial to effective planning functions and educational plan implementation.
The physical resources include the movable and immovable facilities and equipment necessary for policy plan implementation.
Like other resources, the adequacy and quality of the available physical resources for allocation to educational institutions depend largely on the amount of financial resources allocated for the procurement of the physical facilities and equipment.
A lot of money is required to construct classrooms, laboratories, workshops and other plants required for effective schooling.
Apart from building, large sum of money is also needed to purchase the non-building facilities and equipment such as books, reagents, furniture, etc.
The adequacy of the physical resources will ensure effective plan implementation.
It is imperative that educational planners and managers should observe strict rationality in allocating the available physical resources among the educational institutions so that none will be at the disadvantage.
The school enrolment, size of school, available funds for physical resources, type of school etc should guide the allocation process.
3.3.4 Information Resources We have severally discussed the importance of information in planning and plan implementation in some of the previous units in this course.
Planning functions that give rise to educational plans require data and information on the economy of the nation, employment conditions, education sector itself and other related sectors.
Data and information collection, collation, processing and retrieval are very expensive.
As such enough funds should be earmarked for the purpose of information resource storage and use.
It is when information is well stored that it can be adequately and effectively assessed for the purposes of planning and plan implementation.
3.3.5 Technical Resources 119Certain technical resources are required to facilitate and enhance the utilization of other resources effectively.
Stewart, et.al (1974) identified such resources that should be adequately allocated to include: computer terminals, direct access hardware, electronic equipment teletype, wide area telephone etc., which are particularly useful to maximize the utilization of the information resources.
Their effective allocation and utilization will smooth the planning process, and even in implementation of plan as well as in monitoring the implementation process.
3.4 Managing Resources for Effective Plan Implementation Although there are management efforts that guide the effective management of educational resources, it is still believed that human elements and characteristics are the most essential.
Manager of resources, with the best skill in resource management may fail woefully in resource allocation and utilization if he or she has a corrupt instinct.
The problem in Nigeria today is not the inadequate of well-trained resources managers, but there is lack or inadequate men and women of honour when it comes to the management of public resources.
However, resources allocated for educational policy implementation can be effectively managed by keeping adequate accounting records and adopting modern electronic gadgets in resources verification and monitoring.
There should be effective monitoring teams to monitor the various aspects of resources allocation and utilization.
In addition, planners and administrators should update their knowledge through training and re-training to keep in tune with modern techniques for resources management and fraud detection.
These efforts plus improved human elements as a result of societal change in value system will ensure effective education resource management.
Self Assessment exercise 2 1.
List the categories of resources to be allocated to ensure effective plan implementation.
2.
Outline the problems of effective resources management in the process of plan implementation in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Resources of various kinds are required to effectively carry out planning functions and plan implementation in the educational system.
These resources should be available in right quantity and rationally allocated to ensure effective policy plan implementation.
Resources that are required for 120 policy planning and implementation are largely sourced from the government at the three tiers of governance, while non-governmental and alternative sources can also provide veritable avenues for getting educational resources for policy implementation.
Resources are to be well managed in order to achieve policy objectives.
This can be achieved by exploring modern resources monitoring methods, but most importantly the human factors should be improved for effective resources management.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the required resources for planning and plan implementation.
The required resources identified are information resources, physical resources, financial resources, technical resources and manpower (personnel) resources.
Others are goals and objectives, and administrative structures.
You have also learnt the rational for effective allocation of these resources in ensuring effective plan implementation.
You equally learnt the three major sources of obtaining resources for plan implementation, which are governmental, non-governmental and alternative sources.
You also studied the reasons for effective resources management and the limitations in Nigerian.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Highlight the required resources for effective policy plan implementation in Nigerian school system.
2.
Outline the major sources of getting resources to implement educational policies in your country.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemi, J.K. (1990) (cid:8220)An analysis of the supplemental sources of financing higher education in developing countries: A case of Nigerian universities.
(cid:8221) The Educational Planner, 1 (3 &4), 44-52.
Adeyemi, J. K., and Ogonor, B.O.
(1997) (cid:8220)Managing resources for effective teaching of science and technical education in Nigerian secondary schools.
(cid:8221) African Journal of Educational Management, 5(1&2), 109- 116.
Akangbou, S.D.
(1987) The economics of educational planning in, Nigeria, New Delhi.
Vikas Publishing House.
121Dunham, D.B.
(1977) (cid:8220)A planning process to make vocational education more responsive to real needs.
(cid:8221) American Vocational Journal, 52, 26.
Hanson, K. (1968)(cid:8221)Planning change(cid:8221) in Morphet, E.L., and Jesser, D.L.
(eds), Cooperative Planning for Education in 1980.
Denver, Colo.: Conference of State Representatives.
Nwadiani, M. (2000) Economics dimension of educational planning in Nigeria: Theory and practice, Benin City: Monose Amalgamates.
Stewart, M.S.
; Powers, B.C.
; Murphy, P.D., and Crosby, R.K. (1978) (cid:8220)Using resources to support planning functions(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education.
129-151.
Wright, L.D.
(1969) :Developing comprehensive planning capability in state education agencies.
(cid:8221) Fruse, B.J.
(ed) Utah State Board of Education.
MODULE 3 IMPLEMENTING EDUCATIONAL POLICY PLANS FOR NATIONAL ASPIRATIONS Unit 1 National Education Aspirations Unit 2 Responsibilities and Strategies for Policy Implementation in Achieving National Aspirations Unit 3 Challenges and Problems of Policy Planning and Plan Implementation Unit 4 Management of Plan Implementation UNIT 1 NATIONAL EDUCATION ASPIRATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2,0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Democratization of Education 3.2 Manpower Development 3.3 Employment and Utilization of Trained Manpower 3.4 Rural Transformation 3.5 Technological Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 122 6.0 Tutor (cid:8211) Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education in Nigeria has been taken to be an instrument for facilitating national development.
It is an instrument through which the national goals and aspirations can be achieved.
In the national policy on education, the country has clearly identified a guiding philosophy, from where her goals and aspirations are derived.
For education to effectively ensure the achievement of national aspirations, it has to be well reformed and structured.
In addition, there should be commitment to educational policy implementation.
In this unit, the Nigerian national education aspirations will be considered.
They include the democratization of education; manpower development; employment and utilization of the trained manpower; rural transformation; and technological development.
Before these aspirations can be met, it is generally believed that well planned education, education policy development and sincere implementation must take place.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Give an overview of Nigeria(cid:8217)s national education goals and aspirations • Explain democratization of education as a national educational aspiration • Explain manpower development as a national educational aspiration • Explain utilization of trained manpower as a national educational aspiration • Explain rural transformation as a national educational aspiration • Explain technological development as a national educational aspiration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT All over the world, education is considered to be a key element of developmental process.
Investment in education (formal, informal and training) will provide and enhance necessary skills, knowledge, attitudes and motivation required for social, economic and technological development of any nation.
In line with this universal belief that education will provide the magic wand to national prosperity and social re-awakening, the Nigerian 123national educational goals and aspirations as derived from the philosophy of education are clearly spelt out in the National Policy on Education as follow: a. the inculcation of national consciousness and national unity; b. the inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society; c. the training of the mind in the understanding of the world around; and d. the acquisition of appropriate skills and the development of mental, physical and social abilities and competencies as equipment for the individual to live and contribute to the development of the society (Federal Republic of Nigeria 2004:7&8).
These educational goals are meant to serve as weapons of achieving the overall national goals and aspirations; which are also encapsulated in the National Policy on Education, FRN (2004:6) as follow: a. a free and democratic society; b. a just and egalitarian society; c. a united, strong and self-reliant nation; d. a great and dynamic economy; and e. a land full of bright opportunities for all citizens.
From the above discourse, we can deduce that the Nigerian national educational aspirations cover the following: • democratization of education • human resource development • utilization of trained manpower • rural transformation • technological development.
In order to achieve these goals, aspirations and values, the national policy on education, FRN (2004:8) mandated government to take various measures to implement educational policy provision.
3.1 Democratization of Education Democratization of education is a policy of ensuring equality of education opportunity provided to all citizens in order to achieve universal education.
It is a policy that advocates for right of all citizens to education.
It is meant to go against the policy of privatization and commercialization of education or what is termed in some quarters as (cid:8220)corporationization(cid:8221) of education.
124 Under the policy, there should be decentralization of management, funding and decision-making.
The entire educational system is to be democratized.
UNICEF (1986) suggested that democratization of education should cover full equality of education opportunities for all citizens and also promote legislative, educational, social and financial measures that would enable the DISADVANTAGED of the society obtain education.
Realizing the need to achieve national aspirations by democratizing education, the Nigeria(cid:8217)s philosophy of education (FRN2004, Section, 1, Sub-Section 4(a) & 5(c)) inter alia provided as follows: Section 4(a): (cid:8220)every Nigerian child shall have a right to equal educational opportunities irrespective of any real or imagined disabilities, each according to his or her ability.
(cid:8221) Section 5(c): (cid:8220)the provision of equal access to educational opportunities for all citizens of the country at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels both inside and outside the formal school system.
(cid:8221) Expanding access to education seems to be mandatory.
The matters arising from the above are: - how far have we gone in realizing this aspiration of democratizing education?
- what are the strategies required to achieve this aspiration?
- what are the challenges and problems inhibiting the realization of this aspiration?
These and many others will be addressed in the subsequent units in this module.
3.2 Manpower Development It is believed that the training of skilled personnel is sine qua non to national development, rather than money and physical infrastructures.
This is because it is the well trained and knowledgeable personnel that can exploit and manipulate other resources for the purposes of the national development.
However, the creation of human capital, as we call training of skilled personnel, requires a serious effort on the part of all stakeholders, especially the government to invest in the educational infrastructure and other inputs to provide the required manpower to cover all sectors of the national life.
125Shortage of manpower in the critical areas of the economy will impact negatively on the national development aspirations.
All levels and types of education are relevant in human resources development in general.
However, the tertiary education(cid:8217)s major goals as contained in the national policy on education, (FRN, 2004; Section 8, Sub- Section 59(a), (c) and (d)) are: Sub-Section 59(a): (cid:8220)contribute to national development through high level relevant manpower training.
(cid:8221) Sub-Section 59(c): (cid:8220)develop the intellectual capability of individuals to understand and appreciate their local and external environment.
(cid:8221) Sub-Section 59(d): (cid:8220)acquire both physical and intellectual skills, which will enable individuals to be self-reliant and useful members of the society.
(cid:8221) For these goals to be achieved, a lot of resources are required for effective, qualitative teaching and research.
Adequate funding; quality instructional facilities and equipment; quality students(cid:8217) and well trained and motivated teachers are to be put in place and also sustained.
There must also be quality support services put in place for effective policy implementation.
The issues to be addressed in the subsequent units are: - funding of manpower development effort - quality of manpower development process - problems and challenges of manpower development process - the issue of relevance of training to the achievement of national aspirations - the strategies required to reinforce and enhance effective manpower development by our institutions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Outline the national educational goals.
2.
Highlight the major issues in the process of democratization of education.
3.3 Employment and Utilization of Trained Manpower 126  One of the major problems confronting the realization of the national aspirations today is the high rise of unemployment of the young men and women who have been trained at one level of education or the other, especially at the tertiary level.
According to Akangbou (1982), any nation that could put a growing proportion of its citizens to work in productive jobs will record a rising per capita income.
This implies an increase in the income due to each individual of the nation.
If the trained citizens are provided with relevant education that will equip them with certain skills, their levels of productivity will rise and this will lead to a rise in the level of the national income and also the per capita income if they are utilized.
Unfortunately, there is crisis of employment in Nigeria.
Training for any type of skills does not necessarily guarantee employment.
Most times, training is not relevant to the demands of today(cid:8217)s world.
In some cases, there is lack of required resources to train a labour force or the people who know how to use those trained, that is human resources managers.
Inability to optimally utilize the trained manpower is seen as a loss of investment on education, especially in poor countries.
It is attributed to inadequacies of education policies and plans.
Blaug (1972) opined that: (cid:8230)others might argue, and many have argued, that education is at least in part responsible for the whole problem of open and disguised unemployment, claiming the bulk of existing formal education in less developed countries restricts children(cid:8217)s initiative and thus stunts the entrepreneurial spirit, or at any rate discourages them from taking up self-employment which might in turn create jobs for others.
Education planning, policies and policy implementation are faulted for the high level of unemployment in Nigerian, a situation that will continue to deny us the realization of the national aspirations.
The issues to address in the subsequent units in this module include: - Planning education to focus on relevance of education - Entrepreneurship education planning - Challenges of trained manpower utilization - Policy implementation strategies to confront unemployment of trained manpower.
3.4 Rural Transformation Transformation of rural areas is an aspiration of education in any developing country and Nigeria is not an exemption.
Education has been seen as the key 127to general development of a nation and rural transformation.
Education provides the means for securing a better life, but some youths in the rural areas tend to believe that better life can only be got from urban areas.
Because of this, they set off for the cities, leaving the village undeveloped.
They prefer to stay in the cities doing odd jobs rather than stay back in the rural areas for better opportunities.
Perhaps the type of education being offered is contributing to this situation, as it has been considered to emphasize training for white collar jobs than for self-employment, which is what the rural areas desire for development.
The negative notion that only the un-educated should work on the farm can not transform the rural communities, and will hinder national integration.
Thus, the nature of our educational plans and their implementation strategies has been accused of aggravating unemployment and backwardness of the rural areas.
This is because according to Nwankwo (1981), education in Nigeria (cid:8220)schools(cid:8221) the youth into flight from farming and other forms of activities that can transform the rural areas; and encourages youth migration into urban areas.
Many of the rural communities today are shadows of their old selves.
People only remember the rural areas during political campaigns and occasional ceremonies.
It is argued that while education may not be the direct culprit in the backwardness of the rural areas, it is accused of doing nothing to alleviate the decay of the rural areas.
Since rural transformation is one of the nation(cid:8217)s aspirations and there is huge expectation from education to lead the way, the following issues should be addressed.
- how to evolve policies for rural transformation - how to plan and structure education for rural transformation - what education plan implementation strategies to put in place to achieve rural transformation.
- what constraints to be overcome for success to be achieved.
The following suggestions by Chaytor (1975) concerning rural education policy considerations are still relevant today.
They are: 1. education for social and cultural change; 2. education for economic change and agricultural development; 3. education for rural technological change and industrial development; and 4. education for self-reliance and national improvement.
128 According to him, for education to transform rural areas, one must lay emphasis on science in the widest sense.
This can be done through the integrated approach to the study of science in rural schools.
Efforts should be made to relate education to overall community needs (FRN, 2004; Section1, Sub-Section 9(f)).
3.5 Technological Development In this age of scientific and technological advancement, there is growing expectation that the nation(cid:8217)s educational system will be dominated in both contents and delivery by science and technology.
Nigeria, like all other countries aspires to have her development driven by science and technology.
This is why the National Policy on Education (NPE) provides for science, technical, vocational and technological education from primary to the university levels.
At the primary education level, mathematics, science and computer education are part of the curriculum, while ICT is to be given urgent attention.
The junior secondary education curriculum incorporates Mathematics, Integrated Science and Introductory Technology.
In addition, the pre-vocational subjects are included.
The senior secondary education emphasizes the sciences and vocational subjects.
Section 5, Sub-Section 30(f) of the NPE (FRN, 2004) stipulated that (cid:8220)government shall provide necessary infrastructure and training for the integration of ICT in the school system.
(cid:8221) There is also provision for Technical Colleges, where various technical trades are to be learnt.
Technical teachers are to be trained at the Colleges of Education, Polytechnics and Universities.
The Monotechnics and Polytechnics are to offer Business and technology courses.
However, admission into the technology and business courses is to weigh in the ratio of 70:30.
This is to emphasize the high hope placed on technology education as the tool for achieving the technological development goal.
At the university level, Section 8, Sub-Section 69(a) of the NPE (FRN, 2004) stipulated that (cid:8220)a greater proportion of expenditure on university education shall be devoted to Science and Technology(cid:8221) Sub-Section 69(b) of the same Section 8 stipulated that (cid:8220)not less than 60% of places shall be allocated to science-oriented courses in the conventional universities and not less than 80% in the Universities of Technology.
(cid:8221) In so much that we believe in the efficacy of education in transmitting the science and technological knowledge and skills that would usher in 129momentous social and economic development of this nation; the following issues continue to bother the citizens.
- Are the laudable policy provisions for science and technological education faithfully implemented to guarantee technological development?
The answer is no!
- Do we have adequate facilities and equipment in the school system to facilitate the realization of technological aspiration?
The answer is also no!
- Do we have enough quality teachers at all levels of education to affect teaching-learning delivery in science and technology education?
The answer is no!
- Is technology education cost intensive?
The answer is yes!
In the course of this module, we will examine: § The problems and challenges confronting technology education policy implementation.
§ The implementation strategies to bring development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Highlight the problems inhibiting the realization of the national education aspirations of rural transformation and effective utilization of the trained manpower.
2.
Outline why it will take sometime for national aspiration of technological development to materialize in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Education has been regarded as the panacea to all developmental problems by all nations.
Citizens believe that if education is well planned, good policies and plans formulated, designed, and faithfully implemented, such would facilitate development in all ramifications.
There is no nation without aspirations and Nigeria(cid:8217)s national policy on education clearly stated her own goals and aspirations, which have been encapsulated in this unit as: democratization of education, manpower development and utilization; rural transformation; and technological development.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the general overview of the Nigeria(cid:8217)s national educational aspiration, which are derived from the national 130 philosophy of education.
We have discussed the aspirations under democratization of education; manpower development, utilization of trained manpower; rural development and technological development.
Under each of them, certain issues were raised as per why the country has not been able to realize her national aspirations through education.
6.0 TUTORED-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the constraints to the realization of democratization of education in Nigeria.
2.
Suggest ways through which Nigeria can realize her aspiration of technological advancement through educational system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akangbou, S.D.
(1982) Qualitative and quantitative aspects of educational planning.
A set of Modules prepared for BREDA, Dakar, Senegal Chaytor, D.E.B.
(1975) (cid:8220)Training teachers for education in rural areas(cid:8221) in Yoloye, E.A., and Nwosu, S.N.
(eds.).
The Drive Towards Modernization.
Ibadan: Association for Teacher Education in Africa.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) National policy on education (npe).
Lagos: Federal Republic of Nigerian (FRN).
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981) Government and education.
Mimeograph.Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
UNICEF (1985) (cid:8220)The democratic values; developed nations; developing nations; education development; higher education; international education; international exchange; international programmes; role of education.
(cid:8221) France: UNICEF.
131 UNIT 2 RESPONSIBILITIES AND STRATEGIES FOR POLICY IMPLEMENTATION IN ACHIEVING NATIONAL ASPIRATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Responsibilities of Government 3.2 Federal Government(cid:8217)s Responsibilities 3.3 State Government(cid:8217)s Responsibilities 3.4 Local Government(cid:8217)s Responsibilities 3.5 Educational Reform 3.6 Strategies for Accomplishing National Aspirations 3.6.1 General Strategies 3.6.2 Specific Strategies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The expectations from education in the realization of the national developmental aspirations as we discussed in unit one of this module are enormous.
As such, effective implementation of educational policies and plans is critical to such aspirations.
To get it right, that is to have functional education, the responsibilities of the three tiers of governance in the country should be well defined and pursued.
In addition, necessary reforms have to take place to incorporate innovations that can lead to development.
For all these to work seriously towards a common purpose, the strategies for policy and plan implementation should be well identified and defined.
In this unit, you will learn the responsibilities of government; structural and institutional 132 reforms required; and the strategies for implementing policy plans needed for accomplishing national goals and aspirations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Outline the responsibilities of federal, state and local government in educational policy process and plan implementation • Highlight the structural and institutional reforms required for educational plan implementation • Explain the general and specific strategies required for educational policy and plan implementation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Responsibilities of Government The decision makers have often faced with the issue of who takes responsibility in the general management of education, policy process and implementation.
This is because the nature and implementation of education plans are greatly determined by the roles and responsibilities of all the levels of government.
To this end, various designs and suggestions have tried to resolve such issues as to who formulates policies and implements plans at the primary, secondary, tertiary and other forms of education in the country.
In addressing these issues, the 1999 Constitution of the Feral Republic of Nigeria recommends that all the three tiers of government shall have a joint responsibility for all levels and types of education; with the exception of the primary education, where the Federal Government(cid:8217)s role is limited to the maintenance of standards.
Generally speaking, the federal government is principally responsible for tertiary institutions and unity schools; the states are responsible for secondary schools and some tertiary institutions; while the local governments are responsible for primary schools.
The various governments are to make policies and implement such policies in their respective domains.
But in practical terms, the administrative lines are not so clearly demarcated in most cases.
133In addition, the part being played by the private sector in education policy implementation today is very significant.
We shall outline some of these responsibilities separately in the next section.
3.2 Federal Government(cid:8217)s Responsibilities The responsibilities of the federal government in education provision cover a wide range of functions.
They cover policy making, resources provision, maintenance of standards and policy and plan implementation.
The federal government coordinates and supervises all education efforts in the country.
Let us discuss the specifics.
1.
At the basic education level, the federal government formulates the policy and designs the implementation framework.
Federal government also allocates resources through the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) and pays the 50% counterpart funds for UBE.
Standard is also maintained through inspection and monitoring by Federal Inspectorate System.
2.
At the secondary education level (senior school), the federal government is also responsible for policy formulation, inspection, final examinations such as WAEC, NECO, NABTEB, and the management of Unity schools and Federal Technical Colleges.
It also funds the implementation of policy plans in these institutions under its management at this level.
3.
At the tertiary education level, the federal government is largely responsible for policy formulation and setting implementation guidelines for policy plans.
It controls the federal universities; polytechnics; monotechnics; colleges of education; and research and academic institutes.
These institutions are managed through several agencies.
The National Universities Commission (NUC) manages the universities, the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) manages the polytechnics and monotechnics and the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) manages the colleges of education.
They set physical and academic standards and benchmarks for these institutions.
They regulate their activities.
In addition, the federal government is responsible for the centrally conducted matriculation examinations into the higher education institutions through the Joint Admissions and matriculation Board (JAMB).
The federal government also provides open and distance learning through the National Open University of Nigerian, which is also controlled by the NUC.
4.
For adult and non-formal education, the federal government is responsible for policy formulation and implementation framework.
It is also responsible for the coordination and monitoring of the implementation.
134 5.
Special education policy formulation and implementation guidelines are responsibilities of the federal government.
The federal government is not really involved in the practical implementation of the special education policy.
It however, trains teachers for the mainly few government and privately owned special schools.
This is done through the Federal College of Education (special) and a few federal universities running special education.
6.
Nomadic education policies are also formulated by the federal government, including the policy implementation framework.
There is a federally managed Nomadic Education Commission, which is responsible for the day- to -day management of nomadic and migrant fishermen education.
The effectiveness of the federal government in its education responsibilities will largely determine the nation(cid:8217)s achievement of her aspirations.
We can not claim to have attained the national aspirations of democratizing education if the policy implementation framework for (cid:8216)adult education(cid:8217), (cid:8216)special education', and (cid:8216)nomadic education(cid:8217) is not faithfully followed.
7.
It is also the responsibility of the federal government to define the national education policy objectives, design school structure, and ensure uniformity of standards across the states and setting the condition of service for teachers in the system.
8.
The federal government through the Federal Ministry of Education is in charge of all aspects of international education, including foreign education aids, exchange programmes etc.
3.3 State Government(cid:8217)s Responsibilities The detailed day-to-day management below the university and tertiary education levels largely rests with the respective state governments.
Even today, the state governments are responsible for the management of several universities and other tertiary institutions owned by them.
They also formulate certain policies and implement the policy plans in the primary, secondary and tertiary institutions owned by them in accordance with the requirements of the National Policy on Education.
Section 12, Sub-Section 109 stipulates that the state Ministries of Education shall have responsibility for the following: a.
Policy and control over primary, secondary education and tertiary institutions owned by the state; b.
Planning, research and development of education; c. Inspectorate services for monitoring and improving standards; 135d.
Provision of broad educational services; e. Co-ordination of the activities of school boards and/or Local Education Authorities as prescribed by law; f. Examinations, testing and evaluation at primary and junior secondary school levels; and g. Providing appropriate education laws and ensuring their enforcement.
(FRN, 2004:57).
Specifically: 1.
The State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB).
The state pays 50% counterpart funds for the implementation of UBE in the respective states.
2.
The state formulates policies for the management of the state secondary schools and technical colleges.
The schools are monitored for policy implementation compliance by the state(cid:8217)s ministry of education.
The state(cid:8217)s school Board is responsible for the recruitment, promotion and payment of teachers(cid:8217) salaries and allowances.
3.
As mentioned above, some states are also responsible in financing their tertiary institutions and providing resources to meet the minimum standards set by the federally established regulating agencies.
4.
The state governments are largely responsible for the implementation of policies and guidelines on adult education and special education.
They set up adult education centres across their respective states.
The focus of these two types of education is not encouraging because there is no well defined framework for the policy implementation.
They are not well organized and coordinated like the formal education system.
3.4 Local Government(cid:8217)s Responsibilities The local governments are responsible for implementation of educational policies and plan implementation at the primary education level in their respective states.
Education policies for the basic education, which incorporates the primary education emanate from the federal government.
The local governments manage the primary education through their Local Education Authorities (LEAs.).
The NPE (FRN, 2004:57), Section 12, Sub-Section 110 specifically states that local government shall, through their LEAs have responsibility for the financing, and management of primary education within their local government areas.
136  Sub-Section 110 (a-f) particularly prescribed the following responsibilities for the LEAs.
a. the appointments, promotion, discipline and transfer of primary school teachers and non-teaching staff within their areas of jurisdiction; b. the payment of primary school teacher(cid:8217)s salaries and allowances; c. the payment of pensions and gratuities; d. the re-training of teachers; e. the overall management of their educational plans, and f. supervision and quality control in all primary schools in their areas of jurisdiction with federal and state authorities.
The capability of the local governments to carry out the above responsibilities will largely determine the success of policy plan implementation at the primary education level.
The quality of plan implementation will determine the quality of children at this foundation level, which will consequently impact on the quality of students going into the secondary education level and subsequently the tertiary education level.
Therefore, the realization of national aspirations through education starts from the quality of policies, policy implementation and outputs from the foundation level of education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
State five educational responsibilities of the federal government.
2.
Outline five educational responsibilities of local government in your country.
3.5 Educational Reform Occasionally, reform is necessary in education in order to do away with old practices and also to incorporate new innovations into the educational system.
Reforms usually address issues of efficiency and effectiveness as well as the re-organization of educational institutions in order to align the organizational structure with the specific roles and responsibilities for which various governments are responsible.
Structural, institutional and systemic reforms are required to address the nation(cid:8217)s educational system, which has been described by many to be in a 137critical state.
The following are the recent reforms going on to make the nation(cid:8217)s educational system more effective.
1.
Structurally, the Ministry of Education is proposed to consolidate the 21 parastatals under it into 6 broad strategic groups (National Framework for Education, 2006).
The groupings are based on the following factors.
• Customers(cid:8217) focus • Nature of the specialized functions performed by each parastatal.
It is hoped that this will yield the benefits of slimmer, streamlined and focused institutions.
2.
Education sector is being packaged to benefits from a comprehensive ICT ecosystem with the following components.
§ Fully automated and ICT driven processes of back office tasks, including examination management and learning delivery § One hundred percent computer literacy for secondary and tertiary sectors § One hundred percent computer literacy for teachers across the three levels of education (National Framework for Education, 2006:10) 3.
Increase in access to education at all levels through the active involvement of private participation in the establishment of schools.
4.
Attempts to increase innovative programmes and entrepreneurial courses, especially at the higher education level to encourage self employment of young school leavers.
5.
Funding pattern and structure of the educational system need reform to involve more participation from stakeholders and invent cost recovery mechanism.
6.
Some new policies and reforms may also require legislative reform.
3.6 Strategies for Accomplishing National Aspirations 3.6.1 General strategies Generally, the policies that concern government involvement in the management of education will be effectively implemented by considering the following strategies so as to achieve national aspirations.
1. provision of education must still involve strong government participation 2. the ministry of education (federal and state) should be repositioned to focus its core mandates of policy formulation, monitoring and 138 implementation of formulated policies and designed plans; and setting and maintenance of standard 3. monitoring mechanisms should be reviewed and enhanced 4. developing and instituting monitoring mechanisms for education boards and parastatals 5. ensuring that persons appointed to various education boards and councils to manage educational institutions and agencies should be of high integrity, with relevant qualifications and cognate experience 6. there should be advocacy for attitudinal change to data collection, storage and use 7. eliminating gangsters and cultism from the school system by providing adequate extra-curricula activities to positively engage students.
Also there should be legal framework to facilitate sanctions and enforcement regime against culprits.
8. examination system should be ICT driven, so that ICT will assist in plugging leakages and enhance efficiency in examination management 9. there should be creation of data bank to facilitate easy access to required data for educational planning, policy formulation and implementation.
3.6.2 Specific Strategies Series of strategies have been suggested for effective policy implementation at the various levels, types and aspects of the nation(cid:8217)s educational system.
They are highlighted as follow: 1.
Teacher Education Teacher education should be driven for effectiveness through the adoption of the following strategies.
a.
The quality of teachers at all levels should be enhanced by raising the qualifications of teachers at certain levels of education.
For example, primary school teachers should have at least NCE, JSS should be taught by degree holders.
The requirement of teachers in the tertiary institutions should also be reviewed.
b.
Making mandatory training and re-training of teachers through in- service and on-the-job training at all levels of education will enhance teachers(cid:8217) quality.
c. Raising the morale of teachers through enhanced remuneration and incentive packages, giving teachers sense of belongingness and self recognition will also enhance quality of output.
1392.
Early Childhood Education a.
It has been suggested that the structure of education be reviewed to 3- 6-3-3-4 to formalized the pre-primary education so as to encourage attendance b.
Policy framework and curriculum should be developed for pre- primary education c. Teachers should be specially trained for early childhood education d. Early childhood education should be integrated into the primary education and specialized learning and playing facilities provided 3.
Basic Education i. Enrolment should be increased by expanding school infrastructures and increase teacher recruitment ii.
The learning and working environment should be improved by providing adequate offices, laboratories, libraries, staffrooms, and classrooms to facilitate the work of all categories of pupils, students and teachers iii.
There should be periodic review of curriculum iv.
Improve funding to provide up-to-date facilities and equipment for teaching and learning is suggested v. Resources utilization to be effectively monitored by encouraging monitoring organizations like the PTA, NGO(cid:8217)s and civil society by increasing their capacity vi.
There should be investment in ICT infrastructure, learning contents and teacher training at the JSS level.
4.
Secondary Education a.
School infrastructure should be expanded, and teaching and non-teaching staff be strengthened to increase school enrolment b. JAMB problems should be minimized by creating innovation enterprise institutions, vocational schools and alternative centres c. There should be offering of academic, vocational and general education subjects, and regular review of secondary education curriculum d. Introduction of entrepreneurship courses into curriculum e. Designing and implementing of staff capacity building programmes that will include: package of motivational incentives, training and re-training of teachers, ICT awareness, conducive work environment etc.
5.
Higher Education 140 a.
Higher education institutions should be fully consolidated to make maximum use of available space b.
Increase access to the higher education institutions to encourage enrolment c. Considering viable polytechnics to be awarding degrees d. Participation of private sector to increase funding and access to higher education e. Encourage science and technology by expanding facilities, and modernized teaching, learning and research facilities f. Encourage E-learning, distance and open learning by increasing capacity building of the open and distance university g. Encouraging internally generated funds h. Introducing relevant programmes that will encourage self employment and entrepreneurship i.
Increase research efforts by setting up research and development centres j.
Regular review of curriculum k. Regulating agencies (NUC, NBTE, NCCE) should be improved and empowered through increased capacity building l. Encourage quality teaching and research by funding continuous training of lecturers, increase teaching and research facilities and academic and non-academic motivation.
m. Make acquisition of ICT skills compulsory for students, academic and non-academic staff n. There should be visitation conducted to the institutions.
The reports of such visitation should be implemented o.
Accreditation of programmes should be upgraded and recommendations arising there from should be implemented.
Minimum standards should be maintained.
6.
Adult Education a.
Provision of education to adult learners and school dropouts b.
Adult education to encourage purely literacy, numeracy, vocational skill acquisition in relevant areas to community needs c. Engage motivated facilitators and instructors to motivate the adult learners d. Provide enabling environment and capacity building to encourage adult learners and out-of-school learners e. Delivery of adult and out-of-school programmes can be through radio and television.
7.
Special Education 141 a.
Provision should be made for children and students with learning difficulties and disabilities at all levels of education b.
Provision of specialized infrastructure and learning facilities for people with special education needs c. Teachers teaching categories of special students should be highly motivated and well trained d. Provide job opportunities for educated special persons to encourage attendance.
8.
Curriculum a.
Content standards for all subjects in all the levels of education should be determined so as to align curriculum contents to the national visions and aspirations b.
National curriculum framework should be developed and made available to schools and relevant agencies c. Curriculum should be periodically reviewed at all levels of education.
9.
Inspection and Supervision a.
Employment of adequate and well qualified inspectors to enhance educational policy implementation monitoring and evaluation b.
Training course and certification should be developed for inspectors and supervisors c. School heads should be trained through in-service training in the practice of inspection and supervision as they are the intra school inspectors and supervisors.
10.
Standards a.
Minimum academic and learning standards should be developed for all levels of education b.
Minimum standards should be put in place for all aspects of the educational system, which include funding, infrastructure, teaching personnel c. Minimum standards should be fully implemented to enhance the quality of instruction and graduates.
11.
Funding 142 a.
Government should increase funding of education by striving to meet the 26% of annual budget as recommended by UNESCO b.
Developing capacity to monitor the utilization of allocated funds to institutions to ensure accountability c. Encouraging private participation in the funding of education d. Re-consideration of the policy of giving loan to students and drawing up effective cost recovery mechanism.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Highlight three reforms you will like to see in the nation(cid:8217)s educational system.
2.
Outline five strategies that can enhance effective policy implementation at the higher education level.
4.0 CONCLUSION For effective implementation of policies and plans in the educational system, the roles and responsibilities of the three tiers of governance must be well defined and followed.
In addition, the educational system should undergo reform from time to time to move with modernization and innovation in all aspects.
Finally, adequate strategies should be in place for effective implementation of educational policies and plans.
It is only when these are done faithfully that the nation(cid:8217)s educational goals can be attained and consequently the realization of the national aspirations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the process and strategies required for the realization of national aspirations.
We have done this by studying the roles and responsibilities of government at all levels.
You studied the likely reforms in the educational system that will enhance the effectiveness of the system.
You also studied the general and specific policy implementation strategies that will facilitate the accomplishment of national aspirations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Highlight six (6) responsibilities of the federal government in the nation(cid:8217)s educational system 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 143 FRN (2006) National framework for education.
Unpublished Draft FRN (2004) National policy on education.
Lagos: Federal Republic of Nigeria FRN (1999) Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Abuja: Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981) Government and education.
Mimeograph.
Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
UNIT 3 CHALLENGES AND PROBLEMS OF POLICY PLANNING AND PLAN IMPLEMENTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 144 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Weak Data and Information Base 3.2 Infrastructural Decay 3.3 Inadequate Quality Manpower 3.4 Inequitable Education Opportunities 3.5 Poor Governance and Management 3.6 Inefficient Resources Allocation and Utilization 3.7 Disturbing Standard of Education and Quality Assurance Mechanism 3.8 Rapid Growth of the Nation(cid:8217)s Population 3.9 Rising Cost of Education 3.10 Non-Implementation of Policies and plans as concieved 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It has been recognized that only faithful and effective education policy planning and plan implementation that can facilitate the realization of the nation(cid:8217)s goals and aspirations.
Yet, there is a need that effective policy implementation as seriously hampered by various challenges and constraints in most developing countries, in particular, Nigeria.
These problems range from attitudinal to infrastructural.
In this unit, you will learn in detail these challenges and problems confronting educational policy planning and plan implementation in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Outline the challenges and problems of policy planning and plan implementation • Explain the impact of each problem on effective policy planning and plan implementation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Weak Data and Information Base In Nigeria, dearth of reliable data and paucity of accurate information have constituted a serious limitation to effective policy planning and plan implementation.
As discussed in the earlier units, data and information in respect of the major parameters for policy planning and implementation are 145difficult to obtain.
Because of this, it has been difficult to make accurate projection and forecast of educational inputs and resources required for policy planning and plan implementation.
The ministry of education and other agencies responsible for education most times keep outdated data, which may not be useful for planning purposes.
Data and information needed for policy planning process include data on population, enrolment, schools, personnel, funding and so on.
The quality of policies and their implementation rest largely on the reliability of the data used in the planning process as well as in the implementation monitoring and evaluation.
In addition to weak data base in the country, many planners have not seen the need for the adoption of the innovative management information system (MIS).
MIS requires the use of computers and other electronic means for data and information processing and analysis.
Various suggestions have been discussed in the earlier units of this course on how to improve the nation(cid:8217)s data base.
They include conducting quality census, establishment of data bank, and widening of access to necessary data and information from the official sources.
3.2 Infrastructural Decay There is an unprecedented infrastructural dilapidation at the national, state, local and institutional levels in Nigeria.
It may be difficult to implement any educational policy or plan effectively with the situation on ground.
The school facilities and equipment are in total disrepair at all levels of education.
The school buildings are collapsing, the ones still standing are either with leaking roofs or no windows and doors.
Most schools have few good chairs and tables left for the use of teachers and ever increasing enrolment.
Many schools have no library, workshop and science laboratory.
Students are only exposed to practical classes in the sciences when final examinations are approaching.
Many schools are not connected to electricity and water, and even where they do, the services are either epileptic or hardly provided.
In the face of this decay, it may be difficult to meaningfully implement any policy, especially in the nation(cid:8217)s public institutions.
For example, it may be difficult to effectively implement the policy of vocational and technological education without electricity and functioning workshop.
The security facilities are even inadequate for the protection of the few facilities and equipment available.
146 To realize the nation(cid:8217)s aspirations in all ramifications, there should be serious infrastructural development, repair, and maintenance.
The teaching- learning environment should be improved to facilitate policy implementation.
3.3 Inadequate Quality Manpower It has been revealed that large numbers of the teaching manpower in the country(cid:8217)s school system are either unqualified or under-qualified (FRN, 2006).
At the same time capacity building and staff development are inadequate.
This problem varies from state to state; while some have surplus unemployed trained teachers, some are faced with gross inadequacy.
The teachers constitute a major factor in the implementation of educational policies and plans.
The capacity of the training institutions at producing quality teachers is worrisome.
The quality of students admitted to be trained as teachers is becoming worrisome.
The mode of training of some institutions is also worrisome.
Many of the part-time teacher training programmes require urgent review.
In addition, infrastructural support for teacher training programme is inadequate.
Apart from the problem of quality of teachers, there is no effective system of staff deployment, leading to many teachers assigned to teach subjects or courses other than their specialization.
3.4 Inequitable Education Opportunities The National Policy on Education provides that access to educational opportunities should be made equal for all citizens of the country at all levels.
However, the education sector has been found to display serious inequalities in term of gender and geographical distribution of educational opportunities during implementation.
The FRN (2006) noted that (cid:8220)there is a sharp divide between rural and urban areas, and between Northern and Southern states.
(cid:8221) Some states have as many as ten private and public universities, while some have none.
The is the same practice with other educational facilities across states and the nation.
Most quality teachers are posted to urban schools at the expense of the rural schools.
Schools in urban areas have more teaching-learning facilities than the rural schools.
Persons with special needs are not well catered for in the educational policy implementation.
Equality of educational opportunities has become a serious challenge to policy makers and educational managers.
147 3.5 Poor Governance and Management In Nigeria, government and educational management structures are over- bureaucratic.
The federal ministry of education has the highest number of departments and agencies.
In some situations, functions are duplicated, which could lead to confusion and conflict.
Sometimes government activities are too centralized to give effective direction to policy implementation.
All these could lead to ineffectiveness and lack of decisive action.
Situations like this could lead to inconsistency of educational policies.
According to Aghenta (2003), many educational plans have been abandoned before they are ready for implementation due to inconsistent directives and counter-directives from government ministry and its many agencies.
You will remember the policies of school takeover and hand-over between federal and state governments in the past, as well as between states and religious bodies.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
Highlight the constraints of inadequate data on policy implementation.
2.
Can you say that the state of educational infrastructure in your country can ensure the realization of national aspirations?
3.6 Inefficient Resources Allocation and Utilization Financial and physical resources are very essential for policy planning and plan implementation.
But observations have shown a gross inefficiency in the ways resources are allocated, and particularly how resources are utilized by the institutions and agencies responsible for policy implementation.
We read daily of money stolen or misappropriated by officers of many institutions.
Some are facing financial mismanagement charges in the ICPC and EFCC.
The internal control of financial utilization is very inadequate in many educational institutions.
To address the problem, system of accountability should also be put in place, which should involve adequate monitoring and auditing.
There should also be a stable mechanism of rational financial allocation and judicious use of resources.
If funds are judiciously allocated and utilized, it will positively affect the ways the physical resources are also allocated, utilized and maintained.
In addition to the problem of allocation and utilization, is the problem of the seemingly inadequate funding of education and inability of stakeholders to agree on rational ways of funding education in the country.
Adesina (1981), cited in Aghenta (1993; 115) succinctly attributed the financial constraint to 148  - Lack of adequate funding - Under-estimation of the cost of educational programme - Over-estimation of the anticipated financial resources for education - The inability of the government to mobilize the people(cid:8217)s support for public education - Wastage or division of the money meant for education 3.7 Disturbing Standard of Education and Quality Assurance Mechanism.
Today, there is a serious dissatisfaction with the public education at all levels in Nigeria.
The argument centres on the falling standard of inputs into plan implementation as it is today cannot guide the nation(cid:8217)s educational system to achieve its goals and national aspirations.
This skepticism about the standard of public education system has led to an unprecedented expansion of private schools at all levels, where things do not seem to fare better.
Despite this problem, the quality assurance mechanism is not strong enough to coordinate the plethora of inspection and monitoring agencies and departments put in place at all levels of education.
The inspection and monitoring units and agencies always list their own constraints, which include inadequate human and material resources to function effectively.
This is why many institutions cannot even meet the minimum standards set for their operations and policy implementation.
A lot needs to be done in this regard to improve the nation(cid:8217)s standard of education.
3.8 Rapid Growth of the Nation(cid:8217)s Population Nigeria population was 55.6 million in 1963.
By 2006, a period of 43 years the population has risen to about 178 million (more than 30% growth rate).
The structure of the country(cid:8217)s population has always shown a large youth base.
This is the group that requires education at all levels and this gives rise to demand in excess of capacity of education.
Nwadiani (2000) concluded that the inability to cope with the explosion of learners in the nation(cid:8217)s school system could affect implementation of education programmes and plans.
Nwankwo (1981) also remarked that the result of high rate of population growth is that bold educational targets and plans very quickly get out of hand.
This is because various expansion targets and policy plans for their realization are often unrealistic because of explosion in youth population.
3.9 Rising Cost of Education 149 The problem of inflation and unstable performance of the economy often impact on the cost of education.
The cost of providing educational facilities and equipment and the salaries and allowances of personnel to implement educational policies and plans is always rising.
In this situation, the unit cost of education will soar and also the total cost.
Very recently, a bag of cement cost less than #1000.00, but today, the cost is #2000.00.
There is no implementation of policies on school expansion and building rehabilitation that will not be hampered, especially during this period of economic meltdown across the globe.
Teachers are equally demanding for increase in their wages to enable them cope with the rising cost of living.
In situations like this, decision-makers are forced to cut down cost by amending plans and cutting down targets.
Implementation process is most time disrupted and aborted to save cost.
The rising cost is often a function of macro-economic indices and internationally dictated, which makes internal cost adjustment and reduction efforts difficult.
3.10 Non-Implementation of Policies and Plans as Conceived The educational system in Nigeria has witnessed various policy enactments and plans.
Unfortunately many of them never saw the light of day.
In few cases, they are implemented, but no full implementation.
Many end up on the papers on which they are prepared and designed either as a blue-print or white-paper.
Many well intended policies in the past were aborted in the course of implementation.
This was common during the military rule, when the polity was very unstable due to coups and counter-coups.
A new regime of rulers always failed to sustain the implementation of educational policies and programmes of their predecessors.
Instability of governance did a lot of havoc in this regard for a long time in the country.
It is hoped that with serious implantation of democratic governance, the situation may change for better.
However, it is envisaged that different political parties with different visions and manifestoes may not implement educational policies and plans in the same way.
For example, the recent teachers(cid:8217) salary adjustment has not been implemented or partially implemented by some states.
Even the payment of the counterpart funds by states in the funding arrangement of UBE implementation has not been fully done.
Many states have boldly antagonized the plan of providing the UBE children with mid-day meal.
The situations when educational policies are not implemented or partially implemented cannot usher in educational development that could aid the realization of national aspirations.
150  Self Assessment Exercise 2 1.
Highlight the problem of inadequate funding on plan implementation.
2.
What are the reasons for non-implementation of policy plans in your country?
4.0 CONCLUSION Policies and plan implementation have been seriously constrained in Nigeria.
The problems have multifarious root, ranging from economic, attitudinal, and socio-cultural to political.
The policy planning process and monitoring of plan implementation require data and information, which are not often reliable and readily available in the country.
Funding is inadequate and the limited available funds are inefficiently allocated and utilized, ditto for other resources and educational facilities and infrastructure.
Population growth and ever increasing cost of education have also been found to be problems confronting policy planning and plan implementation.
It has also been found that non- implementation of policies and plans as conceived may hinder educational development and realization of national aspirations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the problems and challenges of policy planning and plan implementation in Nigeria.
You have learnt that the problems may hinder educational development and national growth.
The problems studied include weak data and information base, infrastructural decay, inadequate quality manpower, inequality of educational opportunities, poor governance and management and so on.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSINGMENT List the major problems confronting effective policy planning and plan implementation in your country?
1517.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemi, J. K. (1995) (cid:8220)Stages in the planning process in Peretomode, V. F. (ed) Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: JOJA Publishers, 145 (cid:8211) 155.
Aghenta, J.A.
(1993) Principles and practices of educational planning: Focus on the developing Countries.
Benin city: NSEP FRN (2004) National policy on education (NPE).
Lagos: Federal Republic of Nigerian (FRN).
FRN (2006) National framework for education.
Unpublished draft.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981) Educational planning: Theory and methods.
Lahore/Karachi: IZHARSONS.
Nwadiani, M. (2000) Economic dimension of educational planning in Nigeria: Theory and Practice.
Benin city: Monose Amalgamates.
UNIT 4 MANAGEMENT OF PLAN IMPLEMENTATION CONTENTS 152 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Planning the Plan Implementation 3.2 Planning Techniques 3.3 Monitoring During Implementation 3.3.1 Need for Monitoring 3.3.2 Review Process 3.3.3 Evaluating the Level of Implementation 3.4 Policy Plan Impact Assessment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Management entails process of planning and administering the activities of an organization to ensure rational use of the available resources to achieve its goals and objectives.
Implementation of organizational policies and plans is a serious activity that requires effective planning, monitoring, evaluation and appraisal.
In this unit, we will study the requirements and techniques for planning the plan implementation.
We will also study the place of monitoring, evaluation and impact assessment of policy plans.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Outline the dimensions that influence the planning of plan implementation in education.
- Highlight the requirements for planning plan implementation.
- Outline the techniques needed to plan the plan implementation.
- Explain the place of monitoring during plan implementation.
- Explain the appraisal mechanism and impact assessment of the implemented policy plans.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning the Plan Implementation 153Planning is a management function, which assists organizational leadership to make rational decisions.
Planning is goal oriented; as such it should be carried out during the process of policy-making, plan design, and especially before plan implementation.
This is the period for rational allocation of available resources (usually limited) to all aspects of implementation, guided by the goals and objectives of the plan.
Planning must take care of the stakeholders and beneficiaries of the plan to be implemented.
The following will be discussed in detail to guide you in the process of planning of policy plan implementation: 1.
Dimensions influencing planning of plan implementation 2.
Requirements for planning the plan implementation 3.
Techniques for planning the plan implementation Dimensions Influencing Planning of Plan Implementation The context in which planning and the plan implementation takes place dictates the substance and process of planning.
According to Lamar, et.
al (1978) it is important that one should understand the process and its contextual interactions and influences which are of various dimensions.
The dimensions could be cultural, social, economic, technological and political.
They continuously influence the substance and process of planning.
Leaders and planners should understand and appreciate these dimensions during the policy planning and the plan implementation processes.
1.
Cultural Dimension:- the culture of the people should be guided and taken into consideration when planning to implement an education policy plan.
This is very important in a multi-cultural nation like Nigeria.
Planners should take cognizance of anything that may offend peoples(cid:8217) tradition, religion and thereby impede implementation of plan.
This should cover the building design, dressings, and worship and so on.
Imposition of one group(cid:8217)s culture on another group may result to conflict in acceptance of policy plan.
2.
Social Dimension:- the social groups and strata should be considered in planning the plan implementation.
A good plan that does not respect the clients(cid:8217) background may fail during implementation.
The fee paying education policy may not go down well with all the strata of the society.
There is a big divide between the rich and the poor in Nigeria.
3.
Economic Dimension:- at any level of management, plan implementation should be guided by the economic capability of the implementing organization or government.
As such, planning for plan implementation should consider the financial resources available or that may be available; the sources of income and the sustainability of 154 funds.
Planners should employ the strategies of projection and estimation to determine the future economic viability of implementation of any plan.
Failure to recognize the economic influence has derailed the implementation of many educational policies and plans in the past.
The planners should study the micro and macro performance of a country(cid:8217)s economy when planning for policy implementation.
4.
Technological Dimension:- The world is daily growing technological in its operations, from even the basic to the complex exigencies of human existence.
Teaching-learning process has gone technological.
Computers, other electronic devices and ICT have introduced more complexity to knowledge delivery.
Even the planning process has gone technological.
For these reasons, planners should consider the level and availability of technology when planning for plan implementation.
The economic dimension is a factor in deciding the type and level of technology to be involved.
5.
Political Dimension:- The politics of educational planning and implementation is serious in the developing nations.
Education policies cannot be separated from politics, and the political process directs the education process and activities.
The planners should understand the type of government in power (military or democratic); the vision and mission of government in power; and the manifestoes of the ruling political party when planning and designing the implementation of education policies and plans.
Planning of education and plan implementation should operate within the ideological framework of the ruling political party.
It is, however, advised that ideological framework of the political parties or any government should be in tandem with the socio-economic realities.
Planning Requirements The planning process places certain requirements upon its context to actualize the implementation goals.
These requirements are very important; they include: 1.
Leadership and Management Commitment 2.
Competencies of Planners 3.
Time 4.
Finance 5.
Information 6.
Organizational Climate (Lamar, et.al 1978) 1551.
Leadership and Management Commitment: The commitment of the political leadership (government) and other organizational management is very strategic in planning for implementation.
If the leadership is not committed to faithfully implementing a plan, whatever the planning technique used will be in vain.
2.
Competencies of Planners: The planners and others involved in planning and operationizing implementation must be competent enough to detect loopholes and gaps.
It is the competent persons that can fully utilize the substances available.
3.
Time: Time is precious in the planning process.
The time to plan and ability to properly schedule time for the implementation of each aspect of the plan are determined by the competence of planners and managers.
4.
Finance: Funding is a critical factor that should decide the planning and the implementation processes.
Planning of implementation process should include proposition for rational financial allocation and judicious utilization of fund.
5.
Information: It should be stressed that information has been taken to be the fuel that allows the planning and implementation processes to function effectively.
As such, there should be adequate and timely information in the process of planning for the implementation of educational policies and plans.
6.
Organizational Climate: A conducive and encouraging organizational climate is necessary for effective performance of those to be involved in the planning and operationizing of the plan implementation.
3.2 Planning Techniques There are many management techniques that can be employed by planners to facilitate planning for implementation purposes.
There are peculiar techniques for different planning situations.
The technique for planning the implementation of financial policy in education may differ from the ones for policies to guide infrastructures and educational structure.
The competency of the planner is very essential is important in adopting appropriate technique.
The following are some of the techniques that can be used, which you should be very familiar with in the course of your study.
They include: 1.
Management by Objectives (MBO) 2.
Planning Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) 3.
Delphi Management Technique (DMT) 4.
Planning, Programme and Budgeting system (DPBS) 5.
Zero-Based Budgeting (ZBB) 6.
Convergence Technique (CT) 7.
Simulation 156 8.
Nominal Group Technique (NGT) 9.
Forecasting and Trend Analysis Method (FTAM) 10.
Modelling 11.
Fault Tree Technique (FTT) 12.
Management Information System (MIS) 13.
Advocate Team Process (ATP) 14.
Scenario Technique (ST) (Lamar, et.al 1978; Adeyemi,1999) The list is inexhaustive.
You may see other techniques in other texts.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
List the dimensions that can influence the planning of implementation process.
2.
List 6 planning techniques that can be used for planning purposes.
3.3 Monitoring During Implementation Monitoring is a process that deals with watching, checking and keeping track of events or objects during an implementation process for the purpose of detecting errors, problems and inadequacies, which are meant to be corrected to ensure success.
According to the sixth edition of Oxford Advanced Learner(cid:8217)s Dictionary of current English (2000), monitoring is defined as a process that watches and checks things over a period of time in order to see how it develops, so that necessary changes can be made.
You can see from this definition that the purpose of monitoring is to effect necessary changes during the implementation process.
It should also take place over time, so as to monitor the performance of implemented activity, which could be policy, plan, project and programme.
Therefore, continuous monitoring should be an integral part of educational systems(cid:8217) management and plan implementation.
3.3.1 Need for Monitoring The educational organization like any other organization requires effective monitoring.
Monitoring is a planning/management component designed to assist leaders, managers, government and other decision makers to review the level of accomplishment of a formulated policy or designed plan.
Monitoring of the level of plan implementation is needed for the following reasons: 1571.
To ascertain that the implemented plan is consistent with its original design.
2.
To determine the level of utilization of inputs (resources) allocated for the purpose of implementation.
3.
For quality control and assurance 4.
To provide the basis for judging the impact of inputs into the implementation process.
5.
To facilitate the evaluation of the use of resources during implementation.
6.
To enable managers detect specific problem(s) confronting implementation for quick remedy.
7.
Monitoring is needed as an essential part of the accountability process in an organization.
All stakeholders are always interested in judicious utilization of resources during policy implementation.
It is effective monitoring that can expose dubious use of resources by operators (can be ministry officials, school officials, teachers, etc.)
8.
To provide data and information on the strength and weaknesses of all aspects of the implementation process.
3.3.2 Review Process A review process is a component of monitoring.
The process entails a brief, written report, which could be monthly or quarterly to sensitize the managers to carry out evaluation and planning activities.
The written report could be supported by oral presentation of the monitoring officers.
This enables the manager to review the level of accomplishments of the plan being implemented.
According to Tuttle and Hopkins (1978), the benefits of the review process are: 1.
To discuss any new development (unforeseen) that relate to the plan implementation process 2.
To re-assess the priorities that has been set during the policy implementation planning processes.
3.
To effect necessary adjustments on the implementation activities and the time schedule for implementation as a result of new data and information received 4.
To make adjustments required for implementation.
3.3.3 Evaluating the Level of Implementation Evaluation of implementation process enables the managers to measure the progress made during the operational process of policy plan, especially 158 within a given time frame.
Plan implementation evaluation is geared towards the measurements of the worth, value, quality and performance of resource inputs into the implementation process.
Evaluation of policy implementation process is done formally and informally.
The formal evaluation is scientific and authorized by the organization(cid:8217)s leadership.
Qualified monitoring and evaluation officers are dispatched to collect data and information on the implementation activities and resources utilized, which are analyzed to determine the worth of the plan or policy being implemented.
Informally, the level of policy implementation is done by all stakeholders, both informed and non-informed concerning the value, worth or performance of the implementation activities and process.
Informal evaluation can be subjective, because scientific technique is not used.
For example, it is easy for the populace to pass judgment on the worth of UBE.
You may hear words like (cid:8220)useless(cid:8221), (cid:8220)aimless(cid:8221), (cid:8220)impact less(cid:8221) programme that is only being implemented to (cid:8220)steal public money(cid:8221).
They may not pass this conclusion based on any scientific evaluation, but gossips and hearsays.
Nevertheless, informal evaluation is sometimes needed to ginger the implementing authority into better action.
That is, it compliments formal evaluation.
According to Soumelis (1977) as cited by Nwadiani (2000), evaluation is not restricted to the project of plan outcomes, but it has a direct and/or indirect implication for those involved, or responsible for plan implementation, who always feel that people are simultaneously evaluating them along with the plan being implemented.
Government and other educational authorities are never at ease when they realize that people will pass judgment on their public actions, especially policy implementation activities and processes.
The evaluation or appraisal of policy and plan implementation in the educational system should be conceptualized in tune with Harris (1947), who advised that it should address the following: 1.
The purposes of the plan being implemented (aims and objectives) 2.
The resources allocated and utilized 3.
The activities and processes involved 4.
The expected results or outcomes.
These four should guide the evaluation process of plan implementation.
3.4 Policy Plan Impact Assessment 159Policy or plan assessment check is implemented once the policy or plan has been on long enough to produce desired result.
Policy or plan implementation timeframe varies, as such some commonsense is required to determine how long it should take a policy or plan to bring desired result.
To assess the impact of the UBE, we need to wait for about 9 to 12 years, when the product will have completed the 9 years of UBE, having gone through the 6 years primary unit and the 3 years junior secondary unit.
Haddad (1994), however, warn that if assessment of policy or plan implementation is not favourable or policy or plan outcome is lacking, it should not immediately imply that the policy or plan design or implementation process was faulty.
Before making any conclusion, it is important to first check if certain shortcomings are the causes of poor implementation.
The resources allocated, the political environment, the socio-economic factors; the implementing personnel should first be examined.
It is advised that policy or plan should not be terminated until the adequacy of implementation activities and process is assessed.
Policy decision can be re-examined if inadequacies are found so that necessary adjustment can be done.
After this, we can re-visit the implementation planning or the implementation stages or the implementation resources.
The same criteria used during policy evaluation stage are used to carry out policy or plan impact assessment.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 1.
Highlight the purposes of monitoring during plan implementation.
2.
What should be the focus of policy implementation appraisal?
4.0 CONCLUSION Effective implementation of policies and plans requires adequate planning, monitoring and regular appraisal of the implementation process and activities.
The design of the plan and the planning of its implementation are determined by the planning capacity.
Planning is goal-oriented and ensures rational use of resources and is necessary during policy making, plan design and should precede the implementation proper.
Policy plans should be carefully monitored during implementation.
It is an activity that generates data and information for scientific evaluation of the implementation process.
Evaluation of policy implementation activities and process ensures objective appraisal for impact assessment of the policy or plan being implemented.
160  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that certain management components like planning, monitoring, evaluation and appraisal are essential for planning for effective policy and plan implementation.
You learnt the dimensions that influence planning of plan implementation; the requirements and techniques that can be adopted in planning for implementation.
You also learnt the essence of monitoring during implementation as well as the purposes of evaluating the level of implementation.
Finally, you study the essence and procedure of policy plan impact assessment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Outline the dimensions that should be appreciated when planning the plan implementation.
7.0 REFRENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemi, J.K. (1999) (cid:8220)The relevance of management by objective (MBO) to Nigeria(cid:8217)s educational system(cid:8221).
Journal of Public Issues, 1(1), 64- 69 Aghenta, J.
A (1993) Principles and practice of educational planning: Focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: NSEP.
Hadddad, W. D (1994) The dynamics of education policymaking.
Washington D. C: The World Bank.
Harris, C.W.
(1947) (cid:8220)The appraisal of a school: Problems for study.
(cid:8221) Journal of Educational Research, 41.
Lamar, C. F., Gyuro, S. J., Burkett, L.A. and Grey, K.E.
(1978) (cid:8220)An overview of comprehensive planning(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) Comprehensive Planning for Vocational Education.
Virginia: The American Vocational Association Inc., 13- 45.
Nwadiani, M. (2000) Economics dimension of educational planning in Nigeria: Theory and practice, Benin City: Monose Amalgamates.
Oxford Advanced Learner(cid:8217)s Dictionary (2000) Sixth Edition.
Oxford: OUP Soumelis, C. (1977) Project evaluation methodologies and techniques.
Pans: UNESCO.
161 Tuttle, F.T.
and Hopkins, C.O.
(1978) (cid:8220)Implementation of planning programme(cid:8221) in Lamar, C.S.
(ed) idem.
Virginia: the American Vocational Association Inc. 203-210.
162
