 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDP 806 COURSE TITLE: MANPOWER APPROACH IN EDUCATIONAL PLANNING 1COURSE GUIDE EDP 806 MANPOWER APPROACH IN EDUCATIONAL PLANNING Course Developer: Dr. O. J. Fadipe N. I. E. P. A. Ondo.
Course Writer: Dr. O. J. Fadipe N. I. E. P. A. Ondo.
Course Editor: Prof. J.
A. Akinola Faculty of Education, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile Ife.
STAFF IN CHARGE Dr S O Ogundiran National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr S O Ogundiran National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos 2EDP 806 (cid:8211) Manpower Apporaches in Educational Planning.
Introduction Manpower Approaches in educational Planning is a course that discusses a linkage between manpower and educational planning.
Human capital concept is the provision of a skilled labour force in relation to educational planning.
It therefore involves the training of educated citizens in the acquisition of specific or general skills that will enable them to function effectively and efficiently in the society.
Manpower is the (cid:8216)human capital(cid:8217) that has acquired specialized skill through formal and / or informal educational training.
Manpower, therefore, represents the human resource of the nation in various aspects of human endeavours.
It is the education received through the acquisition of specific skills that will enable the individual to cope effectively and efficiently in job performance in any given situation.
You can now see the linkage between manpower approaches and educational planning.
The discipline that make up this course are many, among which are highlighted as follows: • Introduction to Manpower Planning in Nigeria • Development Plans in Nigeria • Roles of Educational institutions in the Education and Training of Intermediate and High (cid:8211) Level Manpower • Performance Evaluation of Nigerian Education • Projecting Manpower requirements • Needs of High level Manpower • Manpower Problems and Utilization 3• Education and Employment • Occupational Analysis of Employment • Sectorial Distribution of Employment • Manpower Shortages of modernizing Economics It is important that you understand all the discussions in this course.
The level of this course demands that you put in extra efforts, by reading any available materials (published and unpublished), that are related to the course, to enhance your thorough understanding of the course.
Such materials include published and unpublished journal articles, magazines and bulletins, among others.
There are fifteen (15) units packaged in 4 modules in this course.
It also includes a course guide (CG) that explains what the course is all about.
The Course guide gives advice on the suggested time that could be on each unit of the course so that you can complete the course successfully.
It also provides some guides to Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) details of which are made available in the Assignment file.
What you will learn in this Course This course, Manpower Approaches in Educational Planning is to assist you to understand the relationship between manpower, which is provided through human capital development in terms of formal and /or non formal educational training.
It is believed that education, at all levels, especially the higher level, is planned in such a way that it will 4produce the type of citizens needed for the national economic development in various aspects.
Manpower relates to the formation and utilization of human capital.
The concept of human capital refers to the provision of a skilled labour force in relation to educational training, the focus of this course.
The training given is focused.
It is deliberately planned in such a way that it achieves a purpose.
The purpose is the provision of certain skills- diverse skills, taken into consideration the quantum and the quality desired.
This is the essence of this course.
In this course, you will learn about some related concepts associated with manpower and educational planning.
Such concepts are basic to this course.
They include the concepts of manpower planning human capital formation and human capital utilization.
By the time you have gone through the relevant readings and discussions about this, you will have a clear overview of manpower approaches in educational planning.
You will also learn about the identified problems of manpower planning in Nigeria, which prompted the setting up of the Asby Commission of 1959, which report came out in 1960.
The history of manpower planning in Nigeria cannot be completed without examining the Ashby Commission and the emphasis on it s report because, the commission happened to be the first formal attempt by Nigeria to forecast the educational needs of Nigeria at the post (cid:8211) secondary and higher education levels.
The report of the commission led to the setting up of some bodies that served as organizational arrangements for manpower planning assessment and implementation.
5The various development plans in Nigeria will also be discussed in this course, in addition to some of the methods of forecasting employed during the various development plans.
The course will also assist you to have more insight into the concepts of training and education which are basic to the acquisition of different skills necessary for manpower planning and development.
You will also learn about the performance and evaluation of Nigerian education and training.
Under projections of manpower requirements, you will learn about some methodologies of projecting manpower requirements.
In all, not less than five of these methods are recognized in this course.
You will also be sensitized to the level of sophistication of some of them and why those that are less sophisticated are commonly employed in developing countries.
Apart from the discussion about the factors affecting the needs for high - level manpower, you will learn about the issues of education and employment.
You will then see and learn about the different occupational models and how the level of education attained determines the placement of an individual in the respective sectors of the economy.
The course also gives an insight into a number of issues related to educational training and employment.
You will learn about how and why the education system is over producing the real manpower needs for national development, the rising unemployment of the educational graduates in various fields, and why the educational institutions 6should liaise with the employers of labour in manpower planning and development of human resources.
The course will finally recognize and discuss the different categories of shortages of modernising economies.
Course Aims The aims of the course are as follows: The course aims at assisting you to understand the relationship between manpower and educational planning.
It will make you to understand the role of educational planning in the production of necessary skills for development.
It is hoped that these will be achieved by taking you through the four (4) economic modules which are as follows: 1.
Introduction to manpower Planning in Nigeria (consists of 4 units) 2.
The Roles of educational institutions in the Education and Training of Intermediate and High (cid:8211) Level Manpower (consists of 3 units).
3.
Projections of Manpower Requirements (consists of 4 units) 4.
Occupational Analysis of Employment and Sectorial Classification of manpower Services (consists of 4 units).
The four (4) modules consist of a total of 15 units.
Course Objectives You will discover that each of the 15 units in this course has its own specific objectives.
You are expected to carefully go through each of the 7objectives and in the course of your studying each unit, you must note when each specific objective is achieved.
At the end of this course, you should be able to: 1.
Define Manpower Planning, Human Capital, Human Capital Formation and Human Capital Utilization 2.
State why Educational Planning should be integrated with Manpower Planning 3.
List the identified Manpower Problems in Nigeria 4.
List and explain the Organizational Arrangements Established for Assessing Manpower Needs for Manpower Development 5.
Describe the Differences and Similarities between Education and Training 6.
Identify the various Development Plans and state their Objectives 7.
Describe the Impact of tertiary Education on Human Capital Development 8.
State the Characteristics of Education in Economic Analysis 9.
List the most Commonly used Methods of Estimating Manpower Requirements and Describe their Processes.
10.
Mention some Factors Influencing Requirements for High-level manpower and explain how they influence High Level Manpower Requirements 11.
List and Explain some Problems of Manpower Development and Utilization in Nigeria 12.
Explain how Education is the major Determinant of the Occupational Groups which an Individual Belongs to 813.
Describe the Characteristics Feature of each of the Three (3) Occupation Sectors Recognized in this Course.
14.
Explain why the Educational System is over (cid:8211)producing the real Manpower Needs of Development 15.
Explain why Educational Institutions should liaise with the employers of labour in Manpower Training 16.
Identify and Explain the Various Categories of Manpower Shortages.
Working through this course To complete this course, you are required to study each unit very well, read the recommended text books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria, in addition to other materials that may be available to you.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises at different intervals as you will see in the course.
You are required to submit the assignments for evaluation purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take you between sixteen (16) to twenty (20) weeks to complete.
Listed below are the components of the course, what you have to do and suggestions as to how you should allocate your time to each unit, so that you may complete the course successfully and on time.
Course material Major components of the course are: 91.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Reference / Further Readings.
Study Unit The study units in this course are as follows: Module 1: Introduction to Manpower Planning in Nigeria Unit 1: Overview of Manpower Planning Unit 2: The need for Manpower Planning Unit 3: Organizational Arrangements for Manpower Planning, Implementation and Assessment Unit 4: Development Plans in Nigeria Module 2: The Role of Educational Institutions in the Education and Training of Intermediate and High Level manpower Unit 1: Education and Training Unit 2: Performance and Evaluation of Nigerian Education and Training Unit 3: Education and Economic Growth Module 3: Projection of Manpower requirements Unit 1: Methodology of Projecting Manpower Requirements Unit 2: Estimating Manpower Requirements Unit 3 Factors Affecting the Needs for High-Level Manpower Unit 4: Manpower problems and Utilization in Nigeria 10 Module 4: Occupational Analysis of Employment Unit 1: Educational and Occupational Characteristics: Labour Segmentation Approaches Unit 2: Sectorial distribution of Occupation Unit 3: Manpower Shortages of Modernizing Economics Unit 4: Education and Employment In the first module, the first unit discusses some basic concepts which are basic to the course.
These concepts are: manpower planning, human capital, human capital formation and human capital utilization.
It also discusses the important of manpower approaches in educational planning and why educational planning should be integrated with manpower planning.
In the second unit of the first module, you are introduced to the manpower problems in Nigeria that led to the setting up of the Asby Commission.
The unit discusses the activities of the Commission.
The recommendations in its report include the setting up of a number of organizational arrangements.
These arrangements were listed and discussed.
In the 4th unit, the three (3) development plans in Nigeria were discussed.
In the various plans, apart from the state objectives of the various plans, you will also discuss the priority of the needs of the government for the growth of the economy.
The unit also discusses two main features of the Third National Development Plan which are the Labour Force and 11Employment Projections as well as the Manpower Survey Report of 1977.
The first two units of module two which double as units five (5) and six (6) of the course discusses issues related to education and training.
The units discuss the concepts of education and training and the performance and evaluation of Nigerian education.
The structure of formal education is also examined and then the rationale for investment in education.
Unit seven (7) discusses education and economic growth, while unit 8 and 9 discuss various methods of projecting manpower requirements.
Unit 10 discusses various factors affecting the needs for high level manpower.
Some factors were listed and discussed.
Unit 11 identifies four (4) major problems of manpower which are well discussed.
Units 12 and 13 discuss the occupational analysis of employment and sectorial classification of manpower services.
The two units recognize some occupational models and also discuss exhaustively the sectorial distribution of occupation.
Unit 14 discusses issues related to education and employment, while unit 15 recognizes some manpower shortages of modernizing economies.
The two (cid:8211) fold manpower problems are identified and the categories of shortages recognized are discussed.
Students Self Assessment There are many assignments in this course.
Almost every unit has an assignment which varies in number.
You are advised not to miss any of the assignments which are students(cid:8217) self assessment exercise.
Presentation Schedule 12The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor (cid:8211) marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
Please guide against lagging behind in your work.
Assessment There are three aspects of assessments.
First are self - assessment exercise, second is the tutor-marked assignment and the third is a written examination.
You are advised to please be sincere in attending to the exercises.
You will be required to apply information, knowledge and skills that you have acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in your schedule of presentation.
Your assessment tests will carry 50% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final examination, which will carry 50% of your total marks.
Tutor (cid:8211) Marked Assignment (TMAs) There are about 30 tutor (cid:8211) marked assignment (TMAs) in this course.
All the assignments count for 50% towards your total course work.
Assignment questions for this course are contained in the assignment file.
After completing each assignment, send it with tutor (cid:8211) marked assignment to your tutor.
13 End of Course Examination The final examination concludes the assessment for the course.
It constitutes 50% of your total marks for this course.
You will be informed of the time for the final examination.
Summary The following are the major highlights of what you will learn in this course: 1.
The concepts of manpower planning.
Human capital, human capital formation and Human capital utilization 2.
Linkage between Manpower Planning and Educational planning 3.
Manpower problems in Nigeria.
4.
Organizational Arrangements established for Assessing Manpower Needs for Manpower Development 5.
Education and Training 6.
Development Plans in Nigeria 7.
Impact of Tertiary Education on Human Capital development 8.
Characteristics of Education in Economic Analysis 9.
Education as the Major Determinants of Occupational Groups in which an Individual Belongs to 10.
Factors Influencing Requirements for High - Level manpower 11. the Need for both the Educational Institutions and the Employers of Labour to liaise 12.
The Various Categories of manpower Shortages.
14EDP806: MANPOWER APPROACHES IN EDUCATIONAL PLANNING Course Developer: Dr. O. J. Fadipe N. I. E. P. A. Ondo.
Course Writer: Dr. O. J. Fadipe N. I. E. P. A. Ondo.
Course Editor: Prof. J.
A. Akinola Faculty of Education, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile Ife.
STAFF IN CHARGE Dr S O Ogundiran National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr S O Ogundiran National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos 15MODULE 1: INTRODUCTION TO MANPOWER PLANNING IN NIGERIA.
Unit 1: Overview of Manpower Planning.
Unit 2: The need for Manpower Planning.
Unit 3: Occupational analysis of Employment and Sectoral Classification of Manpower Services.
Unit 4: Development Plans in Nigeria MODULE 2: THE ROLES OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF HIGH LEVEL AND INTERMEDIATE MANPOWER Unit 1: Education and Training Unit 2: Performance and Evaluation of Nigerian Education and Training.
Unit3: Education and Economic Growth MODULE 3: PROJECTIONS OF MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS Unit 1: Methodology of Projecting Manpower Requirements Unit 2: Estimating Manpower Requirements Unit 3: Factors affecting the needs for High-level Manpower Unit 4: Manpower Problems and Utilization in Nigeria MODULE 4: OCCUPATIONAL ANALYSIS OF EMPLOYMENT Unit 1: Educational and Occupational Characteristics: Labour Segmentation Approaches Unit 2: Sectoral Distribution of Occupations Unit 3: Manpower Shortages of Modernising Economies Unit 4: Education and Employment 16MODULE 1.
INTRODUCTION TO MANPOWER PLANNING IN NIGERIA.
Unit 1 Overview of Manpower Planning.
Unit 2 The need for Manpower Planning.
Unit 3 Occupational analysis of Employment and Sectoral Classification of Manpower Services.
Unit 4 Development Plans in Nigeria UNIT 1 OVERVIEW OF MANPOWER PLANNING IN NIGERIA.
CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction.
2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1 Definitions and review of Basic Concepts.
3.1.1 Manpower Planning and Human Capital.
3.1.2 Human Capital Formation and Human Capital Utilization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment.
7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be introduced to some concepts which are very important when discussing manpower approaches to educational planning.
Are you familiar with manpower approaches when education is being planned?
It is a direction or way in the planning of education.
Many times, the government will deliberately focus on certain development, and since education can be used as an instrument to achieve or attain the development, it is then planned in such a way that the type of development envisaged is achieved.
You will also recall that education is a means of providing the society with the skills it needs for development.
This is why education is planned in such a way that the required skills for development are attained.
In this unit, which is the first in the three main units that make up this first module, you will learn about some concepts which are basic to the understanding of the course: (cid:8216)Manpower 17approaches in educational planning(cid:8217).
You must therefore ensure that you understand them very well because they are basic to this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: * define manpower planning and human capital * define human capital formation and human capital utilization.
* state the importance of manpower approaches in educational planning.
* state why educational planning should be integrated with man power planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Manpower Planning And Human Capital Defined .
The concept of manpower planning as you must have observed, is made up of two important words, that is, (cid:8216)Manpower(cid:8217) and(cid:8217) Planning(cid:8217).
These are the operating words which are concepts that are popular in economics.
The concept of manpower planning can not be easily understood unless you view it from the activity which is supposed to do.
This section therefore delves into what the concept is to do.
In addition to manpower planning, you will also be opportune to define (cid:8216)Human Capital(cid:8217), (cid:8216)Human Capital Formation(cid:8217), and (cid:8216)Human Capital Utilization(cid:8217).
3.1.1 Manpower Planning and Human Capital The concept of manpower planning takes various forms.
There are various definitions by different authors which are not put in the same words but if they are critically examined, you will discover that they all mean the same thing.
You may not bother yourself about the different definitions but concern yourself with the essence.
Manpower on its own came into being through the formation of (cid:8216)human capital(cid:8217).
Human capital concept relates to the provision of a skilled labour force that has gone through educational training.
It involves the training of the educated citizens in the acquisition of specific skills that will enable them to function in the society.
Garba (2000) describes human capital as the total stock of human resources produced by a country from which it can pool skills (know-how), knowledge (know-what), entrepreneurial and innovative capacities required to produce, distribute and utilize ideas, goods and services to generate growth and development.
Manpower 18planning can be described as an attempt to forecast the future demand for educated manpower.
It leads to the acquisition of skills needed for the economy.
In other words, the skill acquired by a person enables him to do certain things (for example, to teach, to construct a building, to repair engines, to sow, to drive, etc).
The skills acquired by people thus turned them to become important (cid:8216)human resources(cid:8217).
Manpower planning thus implies an attempt to integrate economic development and educational planning.
It is a conscious attempt by the government to link the development of their educational systems to the demand for educated manpower by their economies.
From our discussion so far, you will agree that (cid:8216)manpower(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)human capital(cid:8217) are synonymous.
This was also the view of Ojo (1986:1).
According to him, while human capital is synonymous with manpower and means more than population or labour, manpower (cid:8220)is the managerial, scientific, engineering, technical, craftsman and other skills which are employed in creating, designing, developing organisations, managing and operating productive and service enterprises and economic organisations(cid:8221).
Because of the differences in skills acquired by people, there exist specialised skills in different occupations.
In modern economy therefore, this network leads to a complex situation where demands for some skills become surplus while others are scarce.
This is to say that at a point in time, there are surpluses of certain type of manpower in search of employment while at the same time, there are shortages of others which are in demand.
In economic parlance, this situation makes the manpower market (cid:8216)imperfect(cid:8217).
For the proper development of the economy, all available resources, especially (cid:8216)human resources(cid:8217), must be properly co- ordinated and utilized.
This is what manpower planning emphasizes.
Yesufu (2000:361) thus defines manpower planning simply as (cid:8220)the process of determining and effecting a balance between the available or potential human resources of a nation and their effective disposition and utilization(cid:8221).
He thus viewed human resources as all embracing, inclusive of all who work now or are likely to be productively employed sooner or later.
This can be subsumed in Folayan Ojo(cid:8217)s (1986:1) definition of manpower planning as (cid:8220)the process of determining the policies and programmes that will develop, utilize and distribute manpower with a view to achieving a country(cid:8217)s broader aims of socio-economic and political development(cid:8221).
Ojo goes further to identify what manpower planning intends to do thus: 19 v identify the requirements for manpower for various sectors of the economy; v planning of formal education, on-the-job training, in-service programmes and adult education so as to provide required skills; v analysing the structure of incentives and the utilization of manpower, including unemployment and underemployment and appropriate measures for alleviating them; v developing the necessary organizations and institutions to be responsible for the execution of manpower programmes, and; v developing management and labour techniques, working conditions and industrial relations in order to ensure maximum productivity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE I Can you now explain the concepts of Manpower Planning and Human Capital?
Can you notice any difference between the two?
3.1.2 Human Capital Formation and Human Capital Utilization.
Human capital formation is an important concept in manpower approaches in educational planning.
The basic hypothesis upon which human capital formation rests is that individuals that have received more education or training should earn more than those with less education and less skill.
Investing in higher education is therefore conceived as an education that is purchased not necessarily as an end in itself but for the sake of the benefits which is expected to yield later.
(See Fadipe, 1984).
Human capital formation is therefore the process of improving human capital through (investing in) education.
This improvement can be seen in the development of human skills, knowledge and work capabilities.
You should therefore note that one of the important activities in the process of human capital formation is formal education.
Human capital formation can therefore be situated within the concept of development process.
This is captured in the definition of Ojo (1986:1) that manpower planning is (cid:8220)the process of determining the policies that will develop, utilize and distribute manpower with a view to achieving a country(cid:8217)s broader aims of socio-economic development(cid:8221).
Manpower planning therefore deals with human capital formation, allocation and utilization.
While human capital formation deals with issues of the supply of human capital, human capital utilization is concerned with issues relating to the demand and the effective and efficient use of the stock of human capital.
Effective and efficient utilization of human capital demand that the 20educated citizen must be properly placed considering his qualification, training and experience.
This is to say that he must be given the opportunity to perform optimally on the job.
From this discussion, you will notice that two important concepts emanate.
These are: human capital formation and human capital utilization.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In your own words, explain your understanding of the concepts of Human Capital Formation and Human Capital Utilization that emanate from this discussion.
4.0 CONCLUSION In order to understand and have a proper overview of manpower approaches in educational planning, it is important that you familiarise yourself with some basic concepts which are operational in the discussion of this unit.
The concepts will continue to re-occur in the course of our discussion.
Manpower planning and human capital concepts are basic to this module.
You will notice that education of the citizens lead to the acquisition of certain skills needed for the economy of a nation.
In other words, human capital formation is acquired through formal education through which citizens acquire essential skills needed for the nation(cid:8217)s economy.
Note that if human capital is accumulated without being utilised, it leads to a waste.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about some basic terms related to Manpower Approach in Educational Planning.
Four of these concepts were discussed and that there is no doubt that they have assisted you to have an overview of this module.
You must have observed from the discussion that the first two concepts, that is, manpower planning and human capital are closely related.
The type of manpower or human capital envisaged will influence the planning of education.
In other words, manpower planning attempts to integrate economic development and educational planning.
Through this integration, skills needed are acquired by the citizen.
You also learn that human capital formation is the process of improving the job capability of 21the citizen through education and that human capital utilization is the use of all the human capital available.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is Manpower Planning?
Identify the common features in (cid:8216)Manpower(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)Human capital(cid:8217).
2.
What is Human Capital Formation?
Support your view with the need for proper Human Capital Utilization.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fadipe, J.O.
(1984).
(cid:8220)Economic Returns to Investment in Higher Education in Oyo State of Nigeria(cid:8221) (Unpublished Ph.D Thesis).
Ibadan: University of Ibadan.
Fadipe, J.O.
(1985).
(cid:8220)Two Decades of Manpower Planning in Nigeria (1960-1980) in Andrian Forum Vol.1 No.1 February, 1988.
Pp 81- 94.
Fadipe, J.O.
(2009).
Investment in Higher Education.
Ibadan: Pedals Publishers.
Garba, P.K.
(2000).
(cid:8220)Human Capital Formation, Utilization and the Development of Nigeria: A System Analysis(cid:8221) in 2002 Annual Conference of the Nigerian Econ.
Society.
Ojo, F. (1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Manpower Planning Experience(cid:8221) In Ojo, F., Aderinto, A. and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilization in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: Lagos Univ.
Press.
Pp 1-21.
Yesufu, T.M.
(2000).
The Human Factor in National Development: Nigeria.
Benin/Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd and Univ.
of Benin.
22UNIT 2: THE NEED FOR MANPOWER PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content: Manpower Planning in Nigeria (1960-1970) 3.1 Problems of Manpower Planning 3.2 The Ashby Commission 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In most developing nations of the world especially in Africa, the need for manpower approach in educational planning was very important in the 1950s and 1960s.
You may wonder why this was so.
In this unit, you will discover why most of the developing countries, including Nigeria made concerted attempt to integrate their economic development with educational planning.
This led to the training of their educated citizens in the acquisition of specific or general skill that will enable them to function so as to move the country forward.
During this time, there was a general interest (worldwide) in manpower planning or manpower forecasting because of the awareness that human capital was indeed, very relevant to development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: v List the identified manpower problems in Nigeria.
v State why the Ashby Commission was set up in 1959. v State the approach adopted by Sir Frederick H. Harbison and why it was referred to as Rule-of-Thumb approach.
v Describe Harbison(cid:8217)s approach to Manpower planning 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Identified Problems of Manpower Planning in Nigeria 23In Nigeria, it was recognised as far back as the colonial period, that there was problem in the provision of high-level manpower for plan implementation.
With this inadequacy, there could not be effectiveness in any attempt at developmental planning.
It was not until the early 1960s that Nigeria really started a systematic manpower planning to correct this misdemeanour.
You will recall that in Unit 1 of this module, manpower planning was described as an attempt to forecast the future demand for educated manpower.
This leads to the acquisition of skills needed for the economy.
The following informed the need for a systematic manpower planning in Nigeria: v Unemployment problem of the school leavers: In the early 1960s, the country experienced a serious drift in the large number of youths from the rural areas to the urban areas in search of wage employment.
This massive drift led to serious unemployment of school leavers.
v The need to provide skilled manpower for the expanding economy and to gear the educational system to meet the need.
The economy was expanding and the available manpower was grossly inadequate for development programmes.
It was again very difficult to recruit adequate number of skills (specialists) required for the economy and to replace the expatriate staff who were leaving in droves.
This is also because they were not available.
v The World Bank Report of 1955 advocating for the need to increase, as speedily as possible, the number of adequately trained Nigerians who would be able to contribute effectively to economic growth.This was an indication of inadequate indigenous manpower needs in the country.
v There was largely an occurrence of surplus unskilled labour and shortage of skilled labour in Nigeria resulting in an imperfect labour market situation.
v Recognition by some advanced nations like U.S. that manpower was a basic resource which was then an indispensable means of converting other resources to the use and benefit of mankind.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE I Can you now state the need for manpower planning in Nigeria?
3.2 The Ashby Commission of 1959 Do you know that the last discussion you had actually led the Nigerian Government to embark on a proactive approach in educational planning?
24The government, in 1959, set up the Ashby Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Eric Ashby with the main objective of conducting an investigation into Nigeria(cid:8217)s needs in the field of post-school certificate and higher education up to 1980.
In other words, Sir Eric Ashby(cid:8217)s commission was mandated to forecast the educational needs of Nigeria (post-secondary and higher education) over a period of twenty years (1960-1980).
There were some basic problems in Nigerian education which you should know in order to be able to appreciate the task given to Sir Eric Ashby(cid:8217)s commission.
When the commission was set up, there was a serious disequilibrium in primary, secondary and post-secondary education.
There was also a lack of balance in the geographical distribution of education facilities especially between the South and the North.
Ashby Commission invited a leading authority, Sir Frederick H. Harbison to prepare a special report on (cid:8220)High-level Manpower for Nigeria(cid:8217)s Future(cid:8221).
Professor (Sir) Frederick H. Harbison, thus, did a rough sketch of Nigeria(cid:8217)s requirement for high level manpower in the period 1960- 1970.
Harbison was also to identify the constraints that would obstruct the achievement of the manpower objective.
That the ten-year objective of the federation should be to develop its system of higher education to a point where employment of expatriates, on any sizeable scale, becomes unnecessary after 1970.
Harbison(cid:8217)s approach was referred to as (cid:8216)Harbison(cid:8217)s Rule-of-Thumb(cid:8217) because it was not based on scientific reasoning but on value judgement assumption.
Harbison, for example, assumed that if the GNP would continue to grow at 4% p.a.
as it was in 1950 and that if the national economy was to achieve 4% rate of economic growth, the senior and intermediate manpower should grow at 8 and 13% respectively.
On the basis of Harbison(cid:8217)s approach, the Ashby Commission came up with an estimate for the period 1960-1970.The commission prepared an estimate of the need to produce 50,000 persons in the intermediate and 30,000 in the high level manpower category by 1970.
Do you know the implication of this recommendation?
It was an indication that the Ashby report emphasised relationship between growth in education and national income.
Ashby commission(cid:8217)s report which was submitted in September(cid:8217) 1960 made the following recommendations among others: 25v establishment of an appropriate organisational arrangement for the purpose of assessing manpower needs and for formulating programmes for effective manpower development in the country on a continuing basis; v that manpower development must be articulated with programmes of capital formation; v that manpower planning should, therefore, be regarded as an integral and indispensable part of general planning for economic development.
The commission(cid:8217)s report infact, made the government to take a serious look at manpower planning.
One of the positive reactions of the government was its decision to accept the organisational arrangements recommended by Ashby commission that led to the establishment of the following: v National Universities Commission (NUC) v National Manpower Board (NMB) v Regional (State) Manpower Secretariat v National Manpower Secretariat Each of the organisational arrangements identified (stated) are to be discussed in the next unit.
It is important to let you know that the commission(cid:8217)s report formed the basis for the First National Development Plan, 1962-1968, which was the first post-independence development plan in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Why was the Ashby Commission set up in 1959?
2.
Identify some of the tasks of Sir Frederick H. Harbison.
3.
What do you understand by the Rule-of-Thumb approach adopted by Sir Frederick H. Harbison 4.0 CONCLUSION In the discussion you have just had, a number of problems were identified.
For government to realistically solve such problems that are fundamental to the nation(cid:8217)s economy, a holistic approach should actually be thought of.
This informed the setting up of the Ashby Commission 26which made far-reaching recommendations to solve the problems initially identified.
You will also recall that the government in its wisdom put in place a number of structures to ensure the effective arrangement and implementation of the various recommendations that were recommended.
These arrangements will be the subject of our discussion in the next unit.
5.0 SUMMARY Three main issues were discussed in this unit.
Can you remember them accordingly?
These are the problems of manpower planning in Nigeria.
It was the problems that eventually led to the setting up of the Ashby Commission under the Chairmanship of Sir Eric Ashby who enlisted the services of an expert in person of Professor Frederick Harbison.
You will recall that he was associated with the (cid:8216)rule-of-thumb(cid:8217) approach which some people were not comfortable with.
What was the major criticism of this rule-of-thumb approach?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
1.
List some of the manpower problems in Nigeria before the setting up of the Ashby Commission.
2.
Identify at least one recommendation of the Ashby Commission report.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fadipe, J.O.
(1985).
(cid:8220)Two Decades of Manpower Planning in Nigeria (1960-1980) in Andrian Forum Vol.1 No.1 February, 1988.
Pp 81- 94.
Fadipe, J.O.
(2009).
Investment in Higher Education.
Ibadan: Pedals Publishers.
Garba, P.K.
(2000).
(cid:8220)Human Capital Formation, Utilization and the Development of Nigeria: A System Analysis(cid:8221) in 2002 Annual Conference of the Nigerian Econ.
Society.
Ojo, F. (1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Manpower Planning Experience(cid:8221) In Ojo, F., Aderinto, A. and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilization in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: Lagos Univ.
Press.
Pp 1-21.
Yesufu, T.M.
(2000).
The Human Factor in National Development: Nigeria.
Benin/Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd and Univ.
of Benin.
27 UNIT 3 ORGANISATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR MANPOWER PLANNING ASSESSMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 National Universities Commission (NUC) 3.2 The National Manpower Board (NMB) 3.3 Regional (State) Manpower Committee 3.4 National Manpower Secretariat 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we deliberated exhaustively on the report of the Ashby Commission.
We also stressed the positive reaction of the government to the commission(cid:8217)s recommendation of the need for the establishment of appropriate organisational arrangements for the purpose of assessing manpower needs and for formulating programmes for effective manpower development in the country on a continuing basis.
This was an indication that the Nigerian government was serious in ensuring effective development of its manpower in the country.
In this unit, you will learn about the various institutional organisational arrangements put in place for Manpower planning assessment and implementation.
We have once identified this machinery for manpower planning.
Can you briefly recollect their names?
From their names, can you also think of what they 28were supposed to do?
You can now compare your answer to what we are about to discuss.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
List the organisational arrangement established for assessing Manpower needs and formulating programmes for manpower development; 2.
Identify the roles of the National Universities Commission (NUC) and National Manpower Board (NMB).
3.
Explain why the following bodies why set up: - Regional (State) Manpower Committee - National Manpower Secretariat 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 National Universities Commission (NUC) This National Universities Commission was established by the Federal Government consequent upon the recommendations of the Ashby Report in 1960.
Its functions then were: v To initiate and consider in consultation with Nigerian universities, plans that would ensure required development that would enable the universities meet national needs.
v To examine financial needs of the universities.
The NUC was to receive block grants annually from the Federal Government and allocate appropriately to the universities according to their needs.
v The commission has since been upgraded to the status of a (cid:8216)Grade A(cid:8217) parastatal of the Federal Ministry of Education, now playing supervisory roles for all universities bothering on accreditation, recognition, setting minimum standard among others.
It is headed by an Executive Secretary.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State why the NUC was established.
3.2 National Manpower Board (NMB) 29Please note that the National Manpower Board (NMB) was established by the Federal Government of Nigeria in 1962 on the recommendation of the Ashby Commission.
The establishment was significant in the history of manpower forecasting in Nigeria.
It was expected that the Board could source and make available qualitative employment statistics.
Because of the serious shortage of necessary data on manpower planning in Nigeria, the National Manpower Board delved into the investigation of manpower situation in Nigeria in 1963.
As a statutory body, some of the functions of the Board include the following: v The determination of the nation(cid:8217)s manpower needs in all occupations; v formulating for consideration programmes for manpower development through university expansion, training, scholarships, fellowship and other facilities; v co-ordinating the policies and activities of the Federal and State Ministries primarily concerned with manpower problems; v responsibility for employment policies including measures to deal with unemployment and the optimum utilization of the nation(cid:8217)s manpower resources; v finding solutions to the problems of shortages and surpluses of manpower; hence, it was to assess and advise on development plans for their manpower implications, and; v the determination of the country(cid:8217)s manpower requirements and human resources development.
For sometime, the Board was faced with a number of problems.
Its contributions, for example, were restricted to providing an analysis of some aspects of the manpower implications of the plan, an analysis which was never utilised either for revision of the plan or for policy formulation for employment promotion.
It even managed to conduct a few manpower surveys like the (cid:8216)Sectoral Manpower Survey(cid:8217) of 1964 and (cid:8216)A survey of Labour Force Requirements(cid:8217) in 1965.
In spite of all these, the NMB had limited impact on national manpower planning.
Its relevance could no longer be sustained/accommodated by the government.
This led to its eventual scrapping in 2005 and its absorption by other parastatals like the Nigerian Institute for Social and Economic Research (N.I.S.E.R.)
that posted most of its professional staff members to the Human Resources department of the Institute.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List some of the expected functions of the NMB.
2.
Can you identify some of the problems of NMB?
30 3.3 Regional (State) Manpower Committee In the last discussion, you learnt of the activities of the National Manpower Board which was established as one of the recommendations of the Ashby report.
Another arrangement put in place was the setting up of the Regional Manpower Committee to complement the National Manpower Board.
You will recall that Nigeria was a federation.
During this time, Nigeria consisted of three regional governments (cid:8211) Northern, Western and Eastern regional governments.
Three regional committees were therefore established, one for each region while the fourth (Federal Manpower Committee) was also set up.
In other words, four manpower committees (three regional and one federal) were set up to complement the National Manpower Board.
According to Ojo (1986:37), the following were the terms of reference of the committees: v to assess the manpower requirements of the various arms of the public sector within the region and the manpower implications of the development programmes, and to supply such information to the secretary of the National Manpower Board.
v to examine, from the regional government(cid:8217)s points of view, the implications of the results of the work of, and the recommendations of the National Manpower Board.
v and in the light of the above, to advise the regional government on the implementation of the National Manpower Board; v to advise the National Manpower Board on matters referred to the committee by the board.
When the National Manpower Board was reconstituted in 1976, each region was advised to set up the Regional Manpower Committee (cid:8220)to perform similar functions as recommended by the Ashby Commission(cid:8221).
They were to complement the work of the national body (NMB) to make it relatively easier.
The problems of the committee bothered on inadequate staff and the problem of the NMB.
Can you still recollect the problems faced by the National Manpower Board?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Why was the Regional Manpower Committee set up?
313.4 National Manpower Secretariat (NMS) The NMS was set up as part of the recommendation of the Ashby Commission.
It was headed by the Secretary to the NMB.
The Secretariat was also located at the Federal Ministry of Economic Development being the ministry responsible for overall development planning.
Its functions include the following: v to handle manpower statistics; v promote the development of employed manpower; v create employment opportunities; v expand training facilities; v maintain a national register of high level manpower resources, and; v secure the optimum utilization of manpower resources.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 1.
What informed the setting up of the National Manpower Secretariat?
2.
From this discussion, do you think the National Manpower Secretariat should be set up?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed about a number of structures put up by the government to ensure effective arrangements and implementation of the various recommendations of the Ashby Commission.
This, infact led to the setting up of a number of bodies.
The discussion that you have just had in this unit bothered on the functions and responsibilities of the various bodies.
Inspite of the efforts of the government, a number of limitations were still recognised.
Can you recall some of these?
What you should also notice are the activities of the identified structures that were discussed.
Do you agree with the activities of the various bodies?
You should think seriously about this poser.
In view of what you have learnt so far, do you agree with the eventual scrapping of the National Manpower Board?
If the government feels the Board(cid:8217)s activities are no more relevant, what do you think can be done to ensure that its activities are still not entirely neglected?
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have exhaustively discussed a number of organisational arrangements put in place for the effective implementation of the Ashby Commission(cid:8217)s recommendation.
You will also recall that the functions of the bodies were also discussed to support their relevance.
You should be 32able to list the bodies established and their expected functions after which you can then cross-check and assess yourself.
Are you satisfied with your performance?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify any 3 of the organisational bodies set up on the recommendation of the Ashby Commission report and describe their functions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fadipe, J.O.
(1985).
(cid:8220)Two Decades of Manpower Planning in Nigeria (1960-1980) in Andrian Forum Vol.1 No.1 February, 1988.
Pp 81- 94.
Fadipe, J.O.
(2009).
Investment in Higher Education.
Ibadan: Pedals Publishers.
Ojo, F. (1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Manpower Planning Experience(cid:8221) In Ojo, F., Aderinto, A. and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilization in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: Lagos Univ.
Press.
Pp 1-21.
Yesufu, T.M.
(2000).
The Human Factor in National Development: Nigeria.
Benin/Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd and Univ.
of Benin.
UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENT PLANS IN NIGERIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 First National Development Plan (1962-1968) 3.2 The Second National Development Plan (1970-1974) 3.3 The Third National Development Plan (1975-1980) 3.3.1 Labour Force and Employment Projections 3.3.2 Manpower Survey Report (1977) 4.0 Conclusion 335.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last two units, you learnt about the Ashby Commission and its impact on manpower planning in Nigeria.
You will recall that a number of problems were identified which were mainly connected with the country(cid:8217)s inability to produce high level manpower.
This inadequacy, among others, could not lead to effectiveness in an attempt at developmental planning.
You will also recall that the country attained its independence in 1960.
This had implication for Nigeria to look for technical and financial assistance for its development plans.
Technical assistance was provided by the Ford Foundation of the United States.
Two American economists were thus provided and took positions in the Federal Ministry of Economic Development at the Economic Planning Unit.
The First National Development Plan (1962-1968) could be said to have defined the Nation(cid:8217)s Planning goals and left the regions to focus on specific priorities.
In addition to this First National Development Plan, you will also have the benefit of having an insight into the Second and Third National Development Plans respectively in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: v Identify what informed the setting up of the First National Development Plan in Nigeria.
v State the major objectives of the various development plans.
v State the priorities of the needs of the government for the growth of the nation(cid:8217)s economy in the First National Development Plan (1962-1968) with what the nation(cid:8217)s economy was in the 1970s.
v State the significant features in the Second National Development Plan.
v Describe the methods of forecast of the Second National Development Plan vis-à-vis the First.
v Describe the main features of the Third National Development Plan and with respect to the Labour Force and Employment Projections as well as Manpower Survey Report of 1977.
34 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The First National Development Plan (1962-1968) The First National Development plan was the first post-independence development plan in Nigeria.
You will remember that Nigeria became independent in 1960.
You will also recall that in 1959, just before the attainment of independence, the Ashby Commission was set up to forecast the educational needs of the country.
One could then say that Nigeria(cid:8217)s educational development in this period was an offshoot of the Ashby report.
The First National Development Plan defined the nation(cid:8217)s planning goals and left the regions then, with the specific priorities.
You may wonder what the nation(cid:8217)s goals were and what the region(cid:8217)s specifics were.
Among the nation(cid:8217)s goals were the needs to ensure: 1. that the economy grew very fast at a rate of not less than 4 percent on the average; 2. that education of all kinds and at all levels must be accelerated but with emphasis on technical and managerial manpower.
3.
That national education goals advocated for an educational programme that would increase as rapidly and, as economically possible high-level manpower which was considered indispensable to accelerated development.
From this discussion, the following issues (among others) emanated: v There was a strong link between education and development.
v There was the need to accelerate economic growth which could be done through increased production of high-level manpower and thus ensure development.
The following priorities were set in the Federal Government programme to accelerate the achievement of the above issues: v Increase in the number of secondary schools and development of teacher training.
v Improvement of the primary education through the provision of better classrooms and introduction of modern aids to teaching.
v Provision of necessary assistance to the universities.
The first National Development Plan had one important feature during this period which was, that education plans were made on regional basis.
The following will suffice: 35i.
Northern regional government tried to correct the vagueness and unspecified goals of the past.
ii.
Both the Eastern and Western regional governments respectively paid emphasis on qualitative improvement of teachers and investment in more directly productive sectors of the economy.
For example, the Eastern regional government only made budgetary allocation but without any specific plan, the Western regional government indicated increase in both agriculture and industrial sectors in its plan.
The two regional governments, mostly emphasized the training of intermediate and junior manpower in the education sector.
You will observe that governments - both Federal and the regions had started linking education to the provision of their manpower needs.
They also started their development plans using education as the main instrument for planning.
Furthermore, this observation is to further justify the title of this course which is Manpower Approaches in Educational Planning.
Further more, that each of the three regions had its own set of priorities as a federation unit.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Can you establish some linkages between education and development plan in this last discussion?
2.
What were the main focus/priorities of government in the First National Development Plan?
3.2 The Second National Development Plan (1970-1974) In the last discussion, we observed that federal government had started to use education to develop and provide needed manpower for the economy.
The discussion also showed that government had started to formally adopt education as an instrument through which necessary manpower can evolve.
Could you now see that there was a gradual link between manpower planning and educational planning?
The Second National Development Plan paid greater attention to education than the First National Development Plan.
It was believed that much of the activities of the National Manpower Board in 1965 and 1969 were used in preparing manpower targets for the Second National Development Plan.
Some features of this development plan include the following: 36v Inclusion of 95 percent of the labour force who were not wage earners and never before included in the previous forecasting exercises.
v Use of a modified version of OECD (Parnes) Mediterranean model (of 1962) to forecast (this relates education to the manpower target of the economy).
- OECD method is to be discussed later in this course, v On the basis of the 1965 Survey of Labour Requirements, occupations mixed ratios were applied to the sectoral employment estimates to derive occupational totals for the economy which were summed over all sectors.
You need to be informed that adjustments were however made for changes in pre-occupational structures of industries for example, allowing a 10 percent increase in the ratio of high level manpower to total wage employment during the plan period and providing a range of occupational estimates based on changes in occupational mixes between 1963 and 1965.
Because the methods employed for projections for the second plan period were based on better assumptions and data as compared to the earlier plan period which was based on employers(cid:8217) forecasts and Harbison(cid:8217)s Rule-of- Thumb, this second development plan was more acceptable.
Poor statistics employed however made its accuracy and usefulness doubtful.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the features that made the Second Development Plan better than the first.
3.3 The Third National Development Plan (1975-1980) The focus of the 3rd National Development Plan was on the growth of the labour force and the likely growth in employment opportunities.
The scope of manpower analysis was broadened and emphasis laid on the expansion of employment opportunities, industrial attachment programmes, occupational guidance and strengthening of existing educational and training facilities.
It could be regarded as the boldest since planning began.
It also made provision for the establishment of additional institutions especially in the areas related to manpower needs.
It made provision for the establishment of more universities and university colleges (totalling 13) for which another capital expenditure of N208.9 million was earmarked as federal commitment.
37Quoting substantially from (cid:8220)A Manpower Programme for Economic Development(cid:8221), Ojo (1986) identified the following as the manpower objectives during the Third National Development Plan period: i. the expansion of employment opportunities through the implementation of employment-oriented programmes and the removal of constraints on the growth of employment in various sectors of the economy; ii.
provision of industrial attachment programmes, occupational guidance, and similar schemes which are aimed at bridging the gap between education and the world of work, and; iii.
strengthening of existing educational and training facilities and establishment of additional ones in identified areas of need.
Federal Government also committed itself to universal primary education for which an amount of N300 million was earmarked during 1975-80 as capital expenditure.
During this period, there were two major activities carried out by the NMB.
These are: i. Labour Force and Employment Projections, and; ii.
Manpower Survey Report (1977).
These two activities are to be discussed later.
3.3.1.
Labour Force and Employment Projections In the projected unemployment rate, as stated in the Third National Development Plan (1975-1980) and quoted by Fadipe (1999), the rate of unemployment in labour force was assumed to be 4.5 percent or 1.31 million, in absolute figures, in 1975.
In the same period, the total gainfully occupied people was 27.91 million in a labour force assumed to be 29.22 million.
By 1980, labour force was assumed to have risen to 32.74 million with 31.76 million gainfully employed while the unemployment rate was expected to have fallen to 3.0 percent as shown in table 1 below.
Table 1: PROJECTED UNEMPLOYMENT RATE (cid:8211) 1975 AND 1980 (in million) Year Labour Gainfully Unemployed Unemployment Force Employed rate in the Labour Force 1975 29.22 27.91 1.31 4.5% 381980 32.74 31.76 0.98 3.0% Source: Federal Republic of Nigeria: Third National Development Plan 1975-80, Vol.
1, Table 32.5, P. 372; Fadipe, J.O.
(1999:92) Going through the plan document, you will observe that the projected employment increased in eight industrial sectors (Agriculture, Mining, Manufacturing, Building and Construction, Electricity and other Distribution, Transport and Communication and Services) based on employment-output ratios.
Increase was supposed to be from 27.91 million in 1975 to 31.76 million in 1980.
This suggested that there would have been an increase of 3.85 million during the plan period over the previous plan.
In the large and medium-sized establishments, the document projected an assumed increase of 1,500,000 in 1975 to 1,980,000 in 1980 showing an increase of 480,000 during the 5-year plan period.
Please note that out of the eight sectors considered, according to the 3rd development plan, the largest increases were supposed to be from construction, manufacturing and services sectors.
It was also assumed that the quality of labour force improved steadily on the basis of educational and skill content.
For example, it was estimated that about 6.1 percent of the employees in large and medium-size establishments were in the service category, 16.8 percent in the intermediate category, and 29.1% in the skilled while 48% were in the residual category.
For the period of the plan, a projection of 7.2 percent and 7.0 percent increase per annum were made in both the senior and intermediate manpower respectively.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 v State the major features of the Third National Development plan.
v Labour force and employment projections were largely based on assumptions, what do you think these portend for the estimates?
3.3.2 Manpower Survey Report (1977) The manpower survey report of 1977 was based on the information collected from a number of establishments employing ten or more persons.
Not all establishments however responded to the questionnaire sent though a substantial percentage did.
The three categories of workers 39involved were the senior, intermediate and skilled manpower while information on the education sector was separately given.
The following were the highlights of the report with regards to the sectoral manpower situation in the economy: v The non-Nigerian participation was discovered to vary from 11 to 25 percent in education sector but fell to 6 percent in strategic sectors like medical and technical among others.
v The percentage of Nigerians employed in trained manpower in some identified sectors were: Service - 37.4 Construction - 25.6 Manufacturing - 14.5 Commerce - 10.0 Others - 13.5 v The report focused mainly on the current manpower situation then and future projections.
v Deductions from the overall report showed that Nigeria(cid:8217)s main manpower problem was the shortage of manpower with strategic skills followed by unemployment and under-employment of educated and uneducated manpower.
As for manpower imbalances, the NMB assumed that employment will grow at about an annual rate of 4 percent during 1977-80, that is less than 5 percent growth rate observed during 1975-77.
To these, the Board added the estimated requirements in 1977 and the manpower requirements for meeting (cid:8216)Wastage(cid:8217) during 1977-80 plan periods.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 List the highlights of the Manpower Survey Report of 1977.
4.0 CONCLUSION For you to familiarise with the Developmental Plans, you must ensure that you cast your mind back to the situation that prevailed preceding the respective plan period.
You must also try as much as possible to identify the main focus of the respective plan periods ensuring that the highlights of each are specifically noted.
It is advisable for you to note the improvements recorded in subsequent periods.
For example, note the 40improvement recorded in the 2nd national development plan period over the first and then the third national development plan over the second.
Note that the concept of development refers to advancement to a high (economic) state.
It refers to growth and increase in, for example, economic state of a nation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the three national development plans of 1962-1968, 1970-1974 and 1975-1980.
The main focus of the nation in each of the three development plans was highlighted.
You will also notice that in all the development plans, the importance of education was stressed.
In fact, education was being used to achieve the various developments envisaged.
This is why it is believed that to achieve rapid economic growth; there must be heavy investment in the right kind of skill that can be brought about through education.
In addition to the specific development plans identified, we also discussed two important activities of the National Plan period, that is, Labour Force and Employment Projections and Manpower Survey Report of 1977.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the objectives of each of the three National Development Plans.
2.
Identify some issues that link the nation(cid:8217)s development to education.
3.
List the main features of the Labour Survey Report of 1977.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adesina, S. (1982).
Planning and Educational Development in Nigeria.
Lagos: Board Educations Ltd, Ibadan.
Akangbou, S.D.
(1983).
(cid:8220)Economics of Educational Planning in Nigeria(cid:8221).
(Mimeo) Fadipe, J.O.
(1988).
(cid:8220)Two Decades of Manpower Planning in Nigeria(cid:8221) in Andrian Forum.
Vol.
1 No.
1 Feb., 1988.
Pp.
81-94.
Ojo, F. (1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Manpower Planning Experiences(cid:8221) in Ojo, F.. Aderinto, A. and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilization.
Lagos: Lagos University Press 41 MODULE 2: THE ROLES OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF HIGH LEVEL AND INTERMEDIATE MANPOWER Unit 1 Education and Training Unit 2 Performance and Evaluation of Nigerian Education and Training.
Unit3 Education and Economic Growth UNIT 1 EDUCATION AND TRAINING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives Main Content Definitions What is Education?
What is Training?
Characteristics of Education in Economic Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Formal education has a significant role to play in the education and training of manpower.
You will recall that we attempted to relate manpower to the formation of (cid:8216)human capital(cid:8217).
Furthermore, we described human capital concept as the provision of a skilled labour force that has gone through educational training and that it also involved the training of the educated citizens in the acquisition of specific skills that will enable them to function in the society.
This information is necessary 42in order to have a solid background of what you will learn in this unit which is (cid:8216)Education and Training(cid:8217).
You will also learn more about the two concepts which are considered germane in the development of Man, who is the human capital from where the following can be derived: Skills (Know-how), Knowledge (Know-what), Entrepreneurial and innovative capacities required to produce, distribute and utilize ideas etc that could assist to generate growth and development.
You will recall that this was discussed in the first unit of Module1.
You may therefore wish to go through Unit 1 of Module 1 again to refresh your memory.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: v define training; v describe the differences and similarities between training and education; v describe the functions of education.
v identify some characteristics of education as in economic analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Definitions 3.1 What is Education?
Education is generally accepted as a process of transmitting thecultural heritage, stabilizing the present and improving or changing the future.
It promotes development (cid:8211) cognitively, affectively and psychomotively.
There is no doubt that the best legacy to bequeath to a child is sound education.
It is quite obvious that knowledge is the greatest asset to process.
Do you know that the traditional sources of wealth like gold, oil and other merchandise have already given way to thoughts and ideas.
The formal school system is generally accepted as a major agent of education.
Thoughts and idea originally generated and acquired lead to development.
Education is regarded as the most important means of upgrading the human intellect and skills for productive employment.
Lester Smiths (1957) submitted that (cid:8217)education does not lend.
itself to definition(cid:8217).
It has the attributes of a living organism which has some permanent features, 43but still changes constantly and adapting itself to new demands and new circumstances.
It instils into the citizen the skills required to function.
Education is a process, a vehicle and a means.
It is, for instance, a process of acquiring knowledge of some basic facts of life; it is a vehicle or means by which a generation transmits to its succeeding generation, its cherished cultural and associated values considered for positive development.
Furthermore, education can also be conceptualised as connoting and meaning some positive commodity, the quantum, stock or level of such knowledge and experience that is acquired.
The knowledge and experience including the skills acquired makes him a capital, that is, human capital.
3.2 What is Training?
Training can be described as a form of teaching and/or practice which aims at bringing about a desired standard of behaviour or efficiency.
It has application in the realm of development of skills (Adewale, 1989).
According to Peters (1966), it is generally used in relation to the acquisition of competence in some sphere.
Training can also mean a preparation for a trade or profession.
Training can thus be used as a vehicle or means of acquiring a skill to function.
The direction it will take will be incorporated into the training and this depends on the need or skill desired that will assist the operation.
From the above, you will agree that training is a form of applied education which inculcates professionalism, skills and craftsmanship for specific jobs and occupations.
Training can be acquired under formal and informal conditions through institutions like adult education or under extra mural conditions.
There is no doubt that education and training are however closely related.
Can you however identify some few elements of differences between education and training?
If we introduce the concept of cognitive, what Peters (1966) referred to as cognitive perspective, the distinction between the two becomes more manifest.
Being educated thus implies wholeness.
The educated individual is intellectually integrated than cognitively adrift.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Describe the differences and similarities between (cid:8216)Education(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)Training(cid:8217).
443.3 Characteristics of Education in Economic Analysis Viewing education in developed and developing countries could make us assert that it is operating in a dual society (cid:8211) a developed and developing societies respectively.
While there is an almost total abolition of illiteracy in the developed world, illiteracy in developing countries appears to be increasing especially because of population growth even though enrolment ratios are improving considerably.
In the light of these postulates, we can now discuss some characteristics of education as related to the economy as follows: v The direct economic impact of education is on the quantity and quality of occupational skills with labour accounting for a substantial percentage of the national input and education as the major source of the productivity of labour.
You will also notice that education has a direct impact on the economy through the increase in the stock of knowledge.
v It also has many indirect effects.
For example, it may raise the level of initiative and inventiveness of the population; it may also promote economic and social mobility.
The education system can also serve as an instrument of selection through which its leaders, entrepreneurs, administrators and even technicians can be found and their quality improved.
v The demand for education may be for production purposes and for consumption.
This is to regard education as investment and consumption.
Education can therefore be used to earn a living and also to enjoy the fruits of living.
v The role of education as an item of consumption, and that it can be treated as a social item in national accounting as obscured the part it plays as an economic investment.
Some economists attempted to distinguish between investment in technical education as productive and expenditure on general education as consumption.
They ought to look at general education as a necessary prelude to technical education; they should not underestimate the role of the educational system as economic infrastructure.
There is need to look at the whole part of national expenditure on education which results in the raising of income as economic as well as a social investment.
v Education requires a relatively long-term span for its returns to accrue, but it has a lower rate of obsolescence that is, being out of 45date, than most physical capital.
The educational system as a whole requires a time span of between ten to twenty years for planning purpose.
Quicker results can however be achieved by influencing the students already on course or in the (cid:8216)pipelines(cid:8217).
For example, special training facilities can be organised for young people in the educational system, temporary adjustment of the curricula and teaching methods and programmes of re-schooling by re-capturing people who have already passed out of the educational system.
These short-term devises should not however jeopardise the attraction or benefits of long-term functioning of the education system.
Can you remember the pivot teacher education programme introduced in the early and middle seventies whereby government introduced a teacher education programme that attracted successful secondary school graduates to go for a one-year teacher education programme?
The unsuccessful ones were to spend two years.
v The education system is also interlocked functionally with the socio-economic environment.
The expansion of education is expected to be linked to the employment situation since people(cid:8217)s expectation is to earn a living commensurate with their educational attainments.
Educational planning should be integrated with over- all planning to avoid the problems of the educational unemployed on the one hand and the shortages of trained cadres on the other.
v The education system is a large consumer of its own product.
In many developed countries, the largest single category of high-level manpower is qualified teachers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List at least five (5) characteristics of education in economic analysis.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you must have discovered that education and training are closely related.
What you should note very seriously are the functions of The two concepts especially with regards to their roles in manpower development.
Education, training and experience are ingredients through which skills are acquired.
(cid:8216)Training(cid:8217) is a form of applied education while (cid:8216)education(cid:8217) on its own is a process of acquiring knowledge.
In developing countries, there are people working in occupations in which they are over qualified.
This is to say that they took up employment where ordinarily people with lesser qualifications should be.
This, no 46doubt, is a case of employment problem which is common in developing countries.
It bothers on the relationship between education acquired and the job one is engaged in.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, attempt was made to differentiate between education and training.
You will recollect that education was described as a process (cid:8211) a process of transmitting knowledge.
It was also described as a vehicle and a means.
Training however was conceptualised as a form of applied education.
It inculcates professionalism and skills.
It thus emphasises practice rather than theory.
The two concepts are said to be closely elated.
You should however be able to differentiate between them notwithstanding their close relationship.
Over five characteristics of education in economic analysis were also recognised and identified.
If you carefully go through the characteristics, you will discover that they are mostly functional.
They expressed the roles of education to economic development and their contributions to national development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the features that differentiate (cid:8216)Training(cid:8217) from (cid:8216)Education(cid:8217)?
2.
List and discuss briefly some characteristics of education in economic analysis.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adesina, S. (1982).
Planning and Educational Development in Nigeria.
Lagos: Board Educations Ltd, Ibadan.
Akangbou, S.D.
(1983).
(cid:8220)Economics of Educational Planning in Nigeria(cid:8221).
(Mimeo) Fadipe, J.O.
(1988).
(cid:8220)Two Decades of Manpower Planning in Nigeria(cid:8221) in Andrian Forum.
Vol.
1 No.
1 Feb., 1988.
Pp.
81-94.
Ojo, F. (1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Manpower Planning Experiences(cid:8221) in Ojo, F.. Aderinto, A. and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilization.
Lagos: Lagos University Press 47Phillips, H.M. (1964) (cid:8220) Education(cid:8221) and Development(cid:8221) in Maheu, R. (ed) Economic and Social Aspects of Educational Planning.
Paris: UNESCO UNIT 2 PERFORMANCE AND EVALUATION OF NIGERIAN EDUCATION AND TRAINING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Structure of Formal Education in Nigeria 3.2 Rationale for Investment in Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Nigeria, education and training have, no doubt, multiplied tremendously since the colonial era.
You have been intimated with the concepts of education and training in the previous unit.
The discussions you had then would assist you in this unit because of the background information it gave you.
Do not forget that training could be a form of applied education that emphasises professionalism, special skill acquisition and craftsmanship needed for specific jobs and occupation.
The tremendous expansion has led to a number of challenges that bother on the performance of the Nigerian education system.
Has Nigeria education achieved the purpose for which it was designed?
A number of issues to be discussed in this unit will gear you up to the challenges that bother on the need for effective educational planning for developmental purposes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 48At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 3 describe the structure of the Nigerian formal educational system.
4 explain the variants in the educational system; 5 explain the rationale for investing in education 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Structure of Formal Education in Nigeria As recognised above, the structure of formal education in Nigeria can be described as a 6-3-3-4 system.
Can you explain what this structure mean?
It means that the Nigerian educational system can broadly be divided into four (4) major groups, that is, primary (which lasts for 6 years), junior secondary (3 years), senior secondary (3 years) and higher education (4 years).
The total minimum period of completely investing in human capital that terminates in the award of a degree is sixteen (16) years.
In other words, the National Policy on Education (NPE) in Nigeria, popularly referred to as the 6-3-3-4 system gives a total of sixteen years.
This can be regarded as the minimum period of schooling.
For a degree course that lasts for more than four (4) years like Medicine and engineering for example, how would you describe the structure?
Either is definitely more than 4 years which is the minimum for higher education.
In other words, instead of the total minimum period of 16 years needed to obtain a degree, the total number of years may be 18 years for Medicine and 17 years for Engineering courses respectively.
It then means that the total gestation period educationally wise for the formation of human capital depends on the course of study of a citizen.
You should, however, note that the concept of university education should not be confused with higher education.
Other higher educational institutions, apart from the university, include Polytechnics and Colleges of Education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Attempt a schematic illustration of the structure of Education in Nigeria for each of the following: i.
Primary to a degree in Medicine.
ii.
Primary to a Higher Diploma in a Polytechnic.
iii.
Primary to a Nigeria Certificate in Education (NCE).
3.2 Rationale for Investment in Education 49 From the discussions you have had so far, you will agree that in most developing countries of the world, educational planning based on manpower approach has been much emphasised.
You will also notice that high level manpower has mainly been the products of higher educational institutions, that is, universities, polytechnics, etc.
So far, higher education could then be associated with rapid social, political, psychological, and of course, economical and technological developments.
In fact, you need to know that the assumption (cid:8211) widely shared by educationists and economists, that education is a good investment in national development may be responsible for the huge investment currently being witnessed in higher education in Nigeria.
Today, for example, Nigeria has about fifty (50) Universities (cid:8211) public and private, forty (40) Polytechnics and as many as over sixty (60) Colleges of Education.
The quest for higher education in Nigeria is frightening because of the existence of many unaccredited (higher) institutions which the government has discovered so far.
Combs (1968) actually stressed the danger inherent in investing in education if such education should fail to turn out the right (cid:8216)mix(cid:8217) of manpower or that if the right (cid:8216)mix(cid:8217) is turned out but the economy could not use it.
He the cautioned or warned the system against its failure to turn out the right numbers and combinations of manpower needed for optimum development in many countries of the world.
This logic was also shared by Harbison (1973) who observed the existence of an employment problem which he referred to as (cid:8216)mal- employment, in developing countries and even in many advanced countries of the world.
Mal-employment simply refers to a situation where people work in occupations which do not (cid:8216)fit(cid:8217) their qualifications.
In other words, such people find themselves in occupations which underutilise their education, training or capacity for growth (Fadipe, 1999).
You may wish to know the cause of underutilisation of labour.
Of course, this can be attributed to (cid:8216)over-education(cid:8217) or (cid:8216)over-schooling(cid:8217).
This situation arises when the recipient finds it difficult to get job appropriate to his or her training or educational attainment.
Over-education, for example, could be said to have led to the displacement of high school graduates by college graduates in the job queue as reported by Berg (1970) and Thurow (1975).
Jobs meant for high school graduates were taken over by college graduates who, by all circumstances, should settle for better jobs because of their higher education.
Fadipe (1999) further asserted in his work on Education and Employment, that if over- schooling people cannot settle for lesser job, that is, work below their 50expectation, they have to stay out of the labour force for a long period of time.
Can you recognise this kind of employment situation in some occupational sectors in Nigeria?
Do you know that in some Nigerian primary schools, there are some teachers with Masters and even Doctoral degrees?
If you are diligently following this discussion, you will realise that investment in education leads to the development of not only the individual, that is, human capital development, but also the nation.
In addition, the following are also very important for investing in education: v That the new generation must be given appropriate knowledge that the previous generations have already accumulated; v That the new generations should be taught how the existing knowledge can be used to develop new products, to introduce new processes and productive methods and improve the efficiency of organisations in business, government and social services; v That people must be encouraged to develop entirely new ideas, products, processes and methods through creative approaches.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Describe the possible reasons why it is good to invest in education.
2.
What is mal-employment?
What are the effects of mal- employment to the economy?
4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion in this unit shows that the structure of Education in Nigeria is actually not sacrosanct as represented in the 6 - 3 - 3 (cid:8211) 4 acronym.
The varieties is an expression of he recognition of specialised courses that span over four (4) years indicated for tertiary education.
This should be noted by you because of the importance of higher education to manpower development.
In this unit also, you must have realised that the major importance of higher education is the possibility of producing people who are competent through the acquisition of appropriate skills needed for development.
If the education acquired should fail to turn out the right (cid:8216)mix(cid:8217) of manpower, or the right (cid:8216)mix(cid:8217) is turned out but the economy cannot use it, there will be no serious development.
5.0 SUMMARY 51 In this unit, you have learnt much about the structure of formal education in Nigeria.
Your attention was drawn to the variants of the structure and what informed the variants.
Investment in education was equally considered and its importance informed the relatively high allocation to education every year though the allocation to education by the Nigerian government always falls short of the 26 percent recommended by the United Nations.
You will however agree that higher education contributes to development (social, political, economic and technological).
You must remember the problems listed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the structure of the Nigerian formal educational system.
2.
Explain the variants in the educational system 3.
Explain the advantages of investing in education.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Berg, I.
(1970).
Education and Jobs: The Great Training Robbery.
New York: Praeger.
Bowman, M.J. and Anderson, C.A.
(1963).
(cid:8220)Concerning the rates of Education in Development(cid:8221) in Geertz, C. (ed).
Old Societies and New States: Free Press of Glence.
Denison, E.F. (1962).
The Sources of Economic Growth in the US and the Alternatives before us.
New York: Committee for Economic Development.
Denison, E.F. (1967).
Why Growth rate Differ.
Washington D.C.: Brookings.
Fadipe, J.O.
(1999).
(cid:8216)Education and Employment: Approaches to labour Market Segmentation Models(cid:8217) in Studies in Educational Planning and Administration (SEPA) Vol.2(1) September, 1999.
Federal Government of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Abuja: NERDC.
Harbison, F. (1973).
Human Resources and the Wealth of Nations.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Pp 139-143.
Harbison, F.H.
and Mayer (1964).
Education, Manpower and Economic 52 Growth.
New York: McGraw Hill.
UNIT 3 EDUCATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Contributions by Rate of Returns 3.2 Contributions by Efficiency and GNP 3.3 Contributions by Educational Level 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION If you are conversant with the economy of a developing country like Nigeria, you will agree with the assertion that Nigeria has witnessed a rapid growth since independence.
If however viewed critically, the developmental impact has not been very impressive.
Nigeria has been experiencing a number of problems that have been affecting its development.
Can you name some of the problems that have been affecting development in Nigeria?
Compare your list with those we shall be discussing later.
Meanwhile, let us attempt a look at some empirical studies to be able to appreciate the effect and contributions of education (human capital investment) on the growth of the economy.
In fact, you will further agree that there is a causal relationship between education and economic growth.
You are advised to carefully and diligently go through the following studies to be able to appreciate the discussion.
532.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Describe the impact of tertiary education on human capital development; Describe the contributions of education to economic growth; Explain the contributions of education by rates of returns, and; Identify three characteristics of education in economic analysis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Contributions by Rate of Returns Returns imply the yield of investment in education.
An investment, for example, can be justified if the expected yield (return) is greater than or equal to the expected yield from other types of investment.
Do you also know that returns may be economic or non-economic?
Economic returns refer to the yield of investment in education measured by the level of increased productivity due to higher education.
The economic profitability of higher educational expenditure by a country leads to the growth of he nation(cid:8217)s economy.
This is the subject of our discussion which will be examined.
The contribution of education to economic growth was once assessed by Denison (1962), using the incomes of the educated as an indicator of the returns to education.
In his study, he saw education as a significant source of economic growth which was responsible for 12 percent of the total growth in the 28-year period (1929-1957) of study.
In another study, Denison (1967) examined the sources of economic growth in the U.S. and eight Western European countries over the period 1950-1962.
In only three of the nine countries (United States 0.49, Belgium 0.43 and Italy 0.40), did education account for as much as between 0.4 to 0.5 percentage points in national income growth per annum.
Education also accounted for more than 10 percent of the total growth rate in only three out of the nine countries (Davis and Morrall III, 1974).
These are, U.S. (15%), Belgium (14%) and the United Kingdom (12%).
For the remaining six countries, Norway and Italy (7% each), France (6%), Netherlands (5%), Denmark (4%), while only 2% of Germany(cid:8217)s total growth was attributed to education.
Many economists continued to find solution to the extent by which education contributes to economic growth.
They were not deterred by the avalanche of criticisms they were facing.
54 3.2 Contributions by Efficiency of Education and GNP Efficiency refers to the degree of effectiveness with which something is done.
In this discussion, we are referring to the degree or level of effectiveness of education.
Briggs (1969), in his study, observed that the economic state of underdeveloped countries and their slow rate of progress could be attributed to their deficiency in education.
The problems which many developing and under developed countries have been having with their state of education, which is regarded as deficient, led to the slow progress in the state of their economic development.
Harbison and Mayer (1964) also examined the economic development of 75 countries.
They showed the indicators of the level of economic development in the countries and related them to the level of education.
13 indicators were used, among which are: v the Gross National Product (GNP) per capital (in US dollars), and; v the percentage of the active population engaged in agriculture.
One of their major findings was that the correlation between the composite index of human resource development and GNP per capital was positively very high.
In other words, they found significant statistical relationships between levels of human resource development (education) on the one hand and levels of GNP on the other for 75 countries.
3.3 Contributions by Educational Level Psacharopoulos (1973) in one of his studies also estimated the contribution of education to economic growth by educational level for a number of countries.
None of the 13 countries studied has its highest contribution of growth to education in the higher level of education, but over 50% of them have the highest percentage of the contribution of education to economic growth in the primary level.
On the average, the contributions of education to economic growth in the different levels are: v Higher level: 14 percent v Secondary level: 40 percent v Primary level: 46 percent 55From the discussions so far, you will agree that: v Education leads to earning higher wages, that is additional education enhances greater pay which also results in the growth of the economy.
(Denison, 1962).
v That education is one of the sources of growth of national income growth.
(Denison(cid:8217)s study of 9 countries) v Education that is deficient leads to stunted growth of underdeveloped countries (Briggs(cid:8217) 1969 study).
v Level of education attained linked to economic development (as in Harbison and Mayer(cid:8217) s 1964 study).
v More education, less economic growth then lower education (Psacharopoulos(cid:8217) 1973 study showed a decreasing growth with increase in education.
Either positive or negative, the study shows that education relates to economic growth.
In fact most of the study showed a positive relationship.
At the earlier discussion we had in this unit, you were requested to list some problems that have been affecting development.
You may now compare your list with the following recognised problems: poor funding, brain-drain syndrome, disequilibrium education supply and demand, instability of the academic calendar and poor quality of education.
You may now explain how the points listed constitute problems to development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
Describe how education affects economic growth.
2.
Identify some problems that do affect economic development.
Describe the way the points mentioned affect economic development.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have demonstrated, through a number of empirical studies that there is a positive relationship between education and economic growth.
Investment in education by both the individual and the society (government) yield private and social returns.
The benefit to the country leads to economic growth which is usually measured by the GNP.
From the robust discussion in this unit, there is clear evidence that investment in education leads to economic growth.
Can you still remember clear cases where these linkages manifest?
The discussion notwithstanding, 56you should be able to recognise the problems of effective manpower in developing countries and again why there should be emphasis in investment education.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has further discussed a number of salient characteristics of education as related to the economy.
Can you still recollect the discussion you had with respect to education and economic growth?
This will further convince you that education is important to development.
Investments in education as well as the specific contributions of education to economic growth were issues that were extensively discussed.
All these discussions are still very germane to this course since education that is well planned influences the nation(cid:8217)s manpower requirements.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 1.
Describe the contributions of education to economic growth.
2.
List four (4) problems that affect human capital development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewole, A.
(1989).
Ethics and the Educational Community.
Jos: Fab Arich Publisher Ltd. Berg, I.
(1970).
Education and Jobs: The Great Training Robbery.
New York: Praeger.
Bowman, M.J. and Anderson, C.A.
(1963).
(cid:8220)Concerning the rates of Education in Development(cid:8221) in Geertz, C. (ed).
Old Societies and New States: Free Press of Glence.
Denison, E.F. (1962).
The Sources of Economic Growth in the US and the Alternatives before us.
New York: Committee for Economic Development.
Denison, E.F. (1967).
Why Growth rate Differ.
Washington D.C.: Brookings.
Fadipe, J.O.
(1999).
(cid:8216)Education and Employment: Approaches to labour Market Segmentation Models(cid:8217) in Studies in Educational Planning and Administration (SEPA) Vol.2(1) September, 1999.
57Federal Government of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Abuja: NERDC.
Harbison, F. (1973).
Human Resources and the Wealth of Nations.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Pp 139-143.
Harbison, F.H.
and Mayer (1964).
Education, Manpower and Economic Growth.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Ojo, A.
(1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Important Planning Experiences in Aderinto, A.; and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilisation in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: Lagos University Press.
Peters, R.S.
(1966).
Ethics and education.
London: George Allen & Unwin.
Phillips, H.M. (1964).
(cid:8220)Education and Development(cid:8221) in Maheu, R. (Eds) Economic and Social Aspects of Educational Planning.
Paris: UNESCO.
Smith, L. (1957).
Education: An Introductory Survey.
London: Penguin Books Limited.
P7.
Thurow, L. (1975).
Generating Inequality: Mechanics of Distribution in U.S. Economy.
New York: Basic Books.
Yesufu, T.M.
(2000).
The Human factors in National Development.
Benin&Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
MODULE 3 PROJECTIONS OF MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS Unit 1 Methodology of Projecting Manpower Requirements Unit 2 Estimating Manpower Requirements Unit 3 Factors affecting the needs for High-level Manpower 58Unit 4 Manpower Problems and Utilization in Nigeria UNIT 1 THE METHODOLOGY OF PROJECTING MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Forecasting Manpower Requirements 3.1.1 The Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method 3.1.2 Harbison(cid:8217)s Rule-of-Thumb 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that in Unit 1 of the first module of this course, we discussed some basic concepts in manpower planning.
Attempt was also made to explain the conscious attempt of government to link the development of their educational systems to the demands for educated manpower by their economies.
You will agree that this effort of government was to ensure that the required skills needed for the economy are produced.
This is to say that the educational system was geared towards offering courses in the different skill areas to produce the required manpower.
From this discussion therefore, there is need to decide on the quantum of the manpower needed.
This is because the government should avoid what we referred to earlier as an (cid:8216)imperfect manpower market(cid:8217).
Can you remember this concept?
It refers to a situation where at a point in time there are surpluses of certain types of manpower in search of employment while at the same time, there are shortages of others which are in demand.
You are advised to go through Unit 1 of Module 1 again in order to avoid this kind of situation of 59(cid:8216)imperfect manpower market(cid:8217).
Attempts were made to delve into manpower forecasting in many countries of the world including Nigeria to evolve (cid:8216)a perfect manpower market situation(cid:8217) that will lead to a near perfect economy.
Several methods of manpower forecasting used in various parts of the world have been recognised.
The methods will be the subject of the discussion in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: v Describe the importance of National Population Census to manpower forecasting; v List some of the most commonly used methods of estimating manpower requirements; v Describe the processes involved in estimating manpower requirements using any of the methods identified; v List/identify some of the deficiencies in the use of each of the methods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Forecasting Manpower Requirements Basic to the projection of manpower requirements in a country is the availability of necessary data.
This will assist to obtain information required especially on the existing labour force.
Different information will also be needed on the nature of the labour force.
In other words, there should be an inventory of the labour force specifying its composition by level of education, training and even experience in addition to the occupational distribution of the existing labour.
One important activity that appears to be a must for the above is the conduct of credible national population census.
Have you ever participated in a census survey before?
The exercise is usually more than the head count.
Certain information is usually included in the questionnaires which are very vital.
In developed countries of the world, the information required is very comprehensive and reliable.
The exercise is usually taken very seriously.
Population is about the living conditions of the people as against mere figures.
Attention is expected to be devoted to the structure, composition and distinctive characteristics which are elements of development.
In many developing countries of the world however (including Nigeria), data obtained from the census are not very reliable.
They are fraught with many inadequacies.
You will recall that a number of complaints accompanied the last census conducted in 2006 in Nigeria.
Can you recall 60some of these problems?
Can you also recall some litigation that arose from the last census?
You should be able to identify some of the complaints of some of the states.
Why was the complaints made?
These are some of the issues that make census data unreliable.
Unfortunately, the data are supposed to be used for planning purposes and utilised to address the challenges confronting the nation.
What then becomes of what the country is planning for when the data to be used are unreliable and questionable?
Ideally, a country should conduct a national census every ten years (decimally).
The one conducted before the last (2006) was in 1991 (cid:8211) 15 years difference!
In Nigeria, the conduct of census has always been fraught with a lot of problems related to politics.
In fact, conduct of census has always been extremely sensitive and politicised.
Many (cid:8220)non-conventional(cid:8221) results emerged for example, from the 1963 census (still used for planning purposes then) and its gross unreliability was generally accepted.
This led Ojo (1986) to express his dismay on how educational and manpower planners and researchers have helplessly used various and, sometimes, ridiculous assumptions to take care of the suspected inadequacies in the 1963 census figures.
This unfortunately led to frequent adjustment of the 1963 census figures upward because of suspected under-enumeration or atimes revised downward to correct for over-enumeration.
Atimes, the figures were not adjusted.
You will recall that the latest census conducted in 2006 is fraught with a lot of problems.
Some states like Lagos, for example, are still contending the figures released so far.
The final figures are still being awaited though the country(cid:8217)s population is said to be about 140 million.
In this discussion, you will have to discuss some of the common methods of forecasting manpower requirements.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Why are we having problems of unreliable data for manpower in Nigeria?
2.
What are the implications of this inadequacy to manpower planning?
3.1.1 The Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method The Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method is one of the methods of estimating manpower requirements.
It is regarded as the most commonly used method in developing countries because of its simplicity.
The simple nature of this method is because it does not lend itself to serious technicalities whereby the operations will rely on a comprehensive and sophisticated data.
This method involves: 611. asking employers how many and what kind of labour they expect to employ in the next four years or at some specific date in the future; 2. deduction of the total number of death, retirement and migration from the aggregate of the above.
This is expected to assist in the estimate of existing and future/expected manpower shortages with necessary adjustments made.
Survey questionnaires administered to employers of labour and supplemented by interviews, where necessary, are employed mainly in this exercise.
Unlike in the other methods which are more sophisticated, the Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method does not depend on a set of unrealistic assumptions.
The National Manpower Board used this method to conduct some establishment surveys of manpower study of 1963 and that of 1977.
Ghana, in like manner, also used this method for its two major manpower surveys of 1960 and 1968.
Limitations of the Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method The following deficiencies are recognised in this method: v it is mainly useful for short-term forecasting (1-3 years).
It is therefore unreliable for long-term forecasting (5-15 years and above) especially in a growing economy.
The growing rate of the economy may be unpredictable hence, this method will be a suspect (cid:8211) it cannot cope.
Can you think of the indicators of a growing economy that may lead to the ineffectiveness of this method?
(Think of the need for new industries with its implication of the need for new skills etc); v employers may not be able to adequately identify their future manpower requirements.
Their assumption may be susceptible to guess work.
The new skills required in the future may also be susceptible to guess work.
In addition to the above, Fadipe (1988) referred to earlier work done by Blaug (1976) and Akangbou (1983).
One of the widely acknowledged problems centred on the issue of clarity, that is, whether a stated (cid:8216)demand for skilled workers(cid:8217) means that the respondent is unable to find skilled workers at a salary appropriate to skilled workers or merely that he would like to have better trained workers for unskilled rates; That few respondents are in a position to make a serious assessment of their future demand for manpower since respondents have nothing to gain 62from devoting much time to the questionnaire, many will either ignore it or responded to it casually instead of treating it seriously.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Describe the process involved in the Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method of estimating future manpower requirements.
2.
List at least two limitations of this method 3.1.2 Harbison(cid:8217)s Rule-of-Thumb In our earlier discussion on Ashby(cid:8217)s Commission, you will recall that this commission employed the services of an expert, Professor Frederick Harbison who was to draw a rough sketch of Nigeria(cid:8217)s requirement for high level manpower between 1960-1970.
His approach in carrying out this assignment was referred to as Harbison(cid:8217)s Rule-of-Thumb.
Harbison, an internationally respected human resources expert concluded, based on his experience in many developing countries, that the critical manpower requirements to assure economic growth were the high-level technologists, scientists, doctors and other professionals on one hand, and the intermediate consisting of craftsmen, laboratory assistants, nurses, technicians etc on the other.
Can you recollect why this method was referred to as the rule-of-thumb approach?
It was because assumptions were made about the appropriate levels of formal education for each occupation and estimates of the required number of persons by educational level were then made.
Specifically, what the method did was to determine output and employment in various sectors of the economy based on the following assumptions: i. that third level educational manpower, that is, those who successfully completed higher education, should grow twice as fast; ii.
that second level educated manpower, that is those who completed secondary education successfully, should grow thrice as fast as Gross National product (GNP).
This method was discussed in Module 1.
Can you still recollect the discussion you had then?
The problem with the method was that of its subjectivity.
It was not based on any scientific approach.
The assumption was that if the GNP would continue to grow at 4 percent per annum, (as it was in 1950), and if the national income was to achieve 4 percent rate of economic growth, the senior (those with higher education ) should grow twice fast, that is 4X3 (but equated to 13 percent).
Using these indices, Ashby(cid:8217)s Commission came up with its estimate in absolute figures for the period 1960-1970.
That by 1970, 500,000 persons would be required in 63the high-level manpower category, while 30,000 will be required in the intermediate level manpower category.
What the Rule-of-Thumb method did was to establish relationship between growth in education and national income, the logic of which Ashby(cid:8217)s Commission bought and reflected in its report.
Interestingly, this method has been used before Nigeria in some African countries such as Egypt, Zambia, Tanzania and Kenya.
It was also used in several South-East Asian countries like India.
Limitations of Harbison(cid:8217)s Rule-of-Thumb approach include the following: 1.
It implies a rigid relationship between occupation and education.
This is because of the basic assumption that every rate of economic growth demands definite skill requirements and that these skill requirements in turn, make definite call on the educational system which is not necessarily true.
2.
There is no rigid relationship between educational background and occupational affiliation except probably in medicine and law.
This (cid:8216)non-substitutability(cid:8217) assumption does not hold.
(See Ojo, 1986).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Describe the basic problem that makes this approach incredible.
4.0 CONCLUSION You would have observed that in an attempt to forecast manpower requirements, a number of methods were discussed.
Some of these methods have been used in Nigeria before.
In fact, the two methods were used in Nigeria in the 1960s.
If you observed each of them, you will notice that a lot of assumptions were made which in reality may not be true.
This is why some of them are said to be incredible.
Most of the techniques employed to forecast requirements in most developing countries including Nigeria are fraught with inadequacies.
These inadequacies are the consequence of the problem of data used to estimate the future requirements.
You will also notice the importance of a national population census which forms the basis of most of the projections.
Unfortunately, the level of sincerity in the course of conducting a national population census falls below a pass mark in most developing countries.
Notwithstanding the problems identified, you should note that developed 64countries started the way developing nations started and they have also once witnessed some problems which developing nations are currently witnessing.
What is important is that we should continue to make use of what we have and try as much as possible to improve on them.
5.0 SUMMARY Attempt was made to discuss at least two methods of manpower forecasting that were regarded as commonly used in developing countries.
You learnt much of the importance of a national population census which was said to be basic to manpower forecasting.
The first method of forecasting discussed is the Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method which was regarded as the simplest and most commonly used in developing countries.
You will also remember that the second one discussed was once used in Nigeria during the time of Ashby Commission.
In the next unit, you will discussed about other more sophisticated methods.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe why national population census is important in manpower forecasting.
2.
List two commonly used methods of manpower forecasting in developing nations.
3.
Describe the characteristic features of the two methods mentioned and explain some of their limitations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akangbou, S.D.
(1983).
Economics of Educational Planning in Nigeria.
Blaug, M. (1976).
An Introduction to the Economics of Education.
London: Penguin Book.
Fadipe, J.O.
(1988).
(cid:8220)Two Decades of Manpower Planning in Nigeria(cid:8221) in Andrian Forum.
Vol.
1 No.
1 Feb., 1988.
Pp.
81-94.
Ojo, A.
(1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Important Planning Experiences in Aderinto, A.; and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilisation in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: Lagos University Press.
Yesufu, T.M.
(2000).
The Human factors in National development.
Benin&Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
UNIT 2 ESTIMATING MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS 65 CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Parnes (cid:8211) Mediterranean Regional Project Method (Parnes (cid:8211) MRP Method) 3.2 The Tinbergen Econometric Model 3.3 The Survey Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you were introduced to two important methods of forecasting manpower.
The two that were discussed, you would have noticed, were commonly used in developing countries.
Nigeria, being a typical developing country used the methods before.
You will recall that in the last discussion, we cited the use of the Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method in the conduct of some establishment surveys of manpower study in 1963 by the National Manpower Board.
In addition, that the method was used in Ghana in its two major manpower surveys of 1960 and 1968.
The other method discussed was the Harbison(cid:8217)s rule-of-thumb which was used in Nigeria during the Ashby Commission.
In this unit, we shall go further to consider which are more scientific than the earlier ones discussed.
They were equally more valid and tenable.
The methods are the Parne(cid:8217)s Mediterranean Regional Project Method also known as OECD (Parne(cid:8217)s) Model, The Tinbergen Econometric Model and The Survey Method.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 3 Describe Parne(cid:8217)s Mediterranean Regional Project Method for estimating manpower requirements; 4 Describe the processes involved in estimating manpower requirements using the Tinbergen(cid:8217)s Econometric Model and The Survey Method; 5 Identify the limitations in the use of the methods discussed, and; 666 List the characteristic features of any of the methods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 The Parne(cid:8217)s Mediterranean Regional Project Method (Parne(cid:8217)s (cid:8211) MRP Method) The Parne(cid:8217)s MRP method is also known as OECD (Parne(cid:8217)s) Model.
This method relates education to the manpower target of the economy or that it links manpower requirement to productivity.
This is why Yesufu (2000) described it as a joint manpower and educational planning exercise.
It was an approach adopted under a Mediterranean Project of the Organisation of European Co-operation and Development (OECD).
The following stages in this method were recognised by Ojo (1986:14-15).
v A manpower inventory is made for the base year; v The target output, usually as set forth in a development plan, is broken down by sectors which may be further subdivided by industries; v The aggregate employment for the economy as well as for each sector or industry is estimated on the basis of some assumptions about productivity; v The occupational structure of the labour force is converted into an educational structure by applying a standard measure of the educational requirements for successful performance in each occupation.
Allowances are then made for deaths, retirements, emigration, so as to derive the forecast of the demand for educated people in the target year on the achievement of the projected output; v The orders of magnitude for the expansion of the educational system are then established to close the gap between demand and presently-expected supply.
In addition to the criticisms, Yesufu contended that Parne(cid:8217)s MRP interpreted education/training too narrowly in terms of manpower requirements but the education has more than the manpower dimension e.g.
basic personal, intellectual, cultural and political dimensions.
Yesufu (2000:372) however faulted the assumed difficulty in qualifying productivity.
He argued that if the method was scientifically and otherwise valid and tenable, the lack of or insufficiency of data could not be the fault of the method but that the method may not be relevant (at least temporarily) and cannot be applied until the data becomes adequate.
That what should be done was to build up the necessary data in the form 67of manpower data bank which is continuously updated.
It was suggested that the element that should be most emphasised, is total factor productivity, and not necessarily labour productivity which is the focus, sector-wise of the MRP model.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the main focus of this method?
2.
Identify at least two (2) limitations of the MRP model.
3.2 The Tinbergen Econometric Model This method is also referred to as Tinbergen(cid:8217)s regression equations which concluded that high level manpower has to grow at approximately the same rate as the national income.
According to Harbison (1973), the model assumed the existence of direct and quantifiable relationships between (existing) stocks of secondary and higher education output and the given rates of GNP.
In other words, it assumed a direct relationship between manpower and GNP growth, that is, the existing stock of the levels of manpower on the one hand and the rate of GNP growth on the other.
This is an indication that Tinbergen Model assumed a positive correlation between the quality of manpower and productivity.
When you take a look back at the MRP model earlier discussed, its focus appears to be on labour productivity instead of total factor productivity.
The purpose of Tinbergen(cid:8217)s model suggested a structure of the educational system that is needed in order to allow the economy to grow at a certain rate, and how such structure should change with changes in the growth rate.
Limitations The following are the criticism of the Tinbergen(cid:8217)s Econometric Model.
Apart from the need for a high degree of data availability and quality which unfortunately are not all that available in many developing countries, many of the assumptions on which the model is based are presumptuous and questionable.
For example, the following assumptions upon which Tinbergen(cid:8217)s Econometric Model relied are questionable: 1.
That technology and productivity remain constant over time.
This is questionable; 2.
That the number of persons with secondary education and with higher education is proportional to the volume of production in the same time period is equally presumptuous; 683.
That the approach fails to draw a distinction between types of education (e.g.
technical or academic) and does not distinguish between the sectors of the economy may not be necessarily true because of the inherent differential demand for various categories of manpower and skills as between industrial and other economic sectors even when they demonstrate comparative levels of productivity.
It is important that a national manpower plan must take note of these differentials both with respect to sectoral growth and the consequent demand and utilisation of manpower.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the unique features of the Tinbergen Econometric Model as discussed in this section.
3.3 The Survey Method This method according to Yesufu (2000) is referred to as the Micro/Establishment Survey Method.
It elicits basic information on the identified industry/establishment.
It is based on some previous studies and also on the understanding of the industrial sectors of the economy.
It is from this that a representative list of establishments is fashioned out.
The following are the recognised characteristic features of the model: v The industrial establishments are chosen/selected based on such indicators like age, size of labour force, capitalisation and technology used.
v A well prepared questionnaire is administered on establishments to obtain information on employment trends with a base date of about three (3) years earlier.
v The labour force in the base year is expected to be broken down by occupations and projected by the enterprise for approximately five years ahead, according to the planned or expected growth and/or structural changes over the projected period.
v All vacancies existing at the survey date are presumed filled.
v Labour force projections are also made in departmental or sectional basis.
This is expected to be highlighted as expected structural changes with its manpower implications.
v At the analytical stage, the occupations of the industry are collated separately with their requisite minimum recruitment, educational or training standards.
69v Total factor productivity and labour productivity are compared.
Total factor productivity (the expected performance of the enterprise in terms of profitability or service delivery are set against the collated labour force projection whose cost (wages, salaries, allowances, severance costs etc) are subsumed into the overall costs of the enterprise to determine not just the profitability but also the trend of productivity.
The result obtained as per the trend will assist to make necessary adjustments accordingly.
v At every steps of the forecast, consultations are held to ensure that decisions made are based on reasonable assumptions and real market conditions.
The final results are grouped into two as follows: 1. basic manpower forecast, which provides the labour force projections.
It is eventually utilised for manpower plan and guideline for recruitment personnel management for the time- being, and; 2. a collation of the staff by various levels etc and the requisite training that will enhance optimal performance.
These are translated into in-service training, orientation scheme etc.
This method appears a bit sophisticated.
It is also rigorous and not as simple as others earlier discussed.
It is however more detailed and makes its result a bit credible.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Identify a number of stages involved in the successful conduct of the Micro/Establishment Survey Method.
2.
Can you identify a number of problems associated with this method?
4.0 CONCLUSION You would have noticed that the methods discussed in this unit are actually more sophisticated and scientific than those discussed in the previous unit.
Notwithstanding the fact that the results obtained from the methods would be more credible, a lot of patience is required.
All the methods discussed still have their limitations.
The Tinbergen Econometric Model for example, suffered from the unavailability of respected valid data in addition to many questionable assumptions on 70which it is based.
The Parne(cid:8217)s (cid:8211) MRP method also suffered from lack or inadequate data.
In a situation where data available is inadequate, it will be difficult for the result obtained to be credible and valid.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has further exposed you to some additional methods of forecasting manpower requirements.
The three methods discussed, no doubt, are more reliable than those discussed in the previous unit.
Both the Parne(cid:8217)s (cid:8211) MRP Method and the Tinbergen Econometric Model were more tedious than the earlier ones discussed.
You will observe that the procedure involved in the conduct of investigation using any of the three methods is more cumbersome.
Invariably, the results however appeared more credible and valid.
The survey method as discussed was more or less a micro establishment survey method involving the use of a well prepared questionnaire.
You should note the information the questionnaires administered demanded from the establishment.
These are considered as good indicators for planning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 1.
Describe the stages involved in the use of any of the three methods discussed in estimating manpower requirements.
2.
Identify the limitations in the use of any of the three (3) methods.
3.
Why the results are obtained from both Parne(cid:8217)s (cid:8211) MRP method and the OECD method described as more credible and valid?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akangbou, S.D.
(1983).
Economics of Educational Planning in Nigeria.
(Mimeo) Blaug, M. (1976).
An Introduction to the Economics of Education.
London: Penguin Book.
Fadipe, J.O.
(1988).
(cid:8220)Two Decades of Manpower Planning in Nigeria(cid:8221) in Andrian Forum.
Vol.
1 No.
1 Feb., 1988.
Pp.
81-94.
Ojo, A.
(1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Important Planning Experiences in Aderinto, A.; and Fashoyin, T. (Eds) Manpower Development and Utilisation in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: Lagos University Press.
Yesufu, T.M.
(2000).
The Human factors in National development.
71Benin&Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
UNIT 3 FACTORS AFFECTING THE NEEDS FOR HIGH- LEVEL MANPOWER CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Assessing Manpower Needs 3.2 Factors Influencing the Needs for Manpower 3.2.1 Nature of Occupation 3.2.2 Number of Workers 3.2.3 Output 3.2.4 Role of Science and Technology 3.2.5 Management Structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational planning has long been recognised as the logical response to the universal trend towards planning over-all development.
It is planning that shapes the direction of the development desired.
The achievement of educational goals is also essential to the fulfilment of the whole economic plan.
Educational planning is a cohesive force that co-ordinates and directs the many different components of an education system and ensures that goals set, whether long-term or short-term, are objectively approached.
In response to the social economic development of any nation especially developing countries like Nigeria, efforts should always be made to ensure the effective production of high-level manpower which, no doubt, is the hub of development.
In manpower planning or planning for manpower requirements especially high-level manpower, a number of factors that affect manpower needs 72should be noted and these are the subject of your discussion in this unit.
You must therefore, diligently go through the unit for proper understanding.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 3.0 List some factors influencing requirements for high-level manpower; 4.0 Explain how the factors listed influence requirements for high- level manpower; 5.0 Describe the implication of the increasing role of science and technology for high-level manpower requirements; 6.0 Explain the difficulty in estimating manpower requirements in a developing economy.
MAIN CONTENTS Assessing Manpower Needs The assessment of manpower needs in developing countries is no doubt painstaking.
In a country that is experiencing a relatively slow growth rate of the national income, the assessment of its manpower needs is usually difficult.
For instance, it is always difficult estimating anticipated structural changes in the national economy as a result of industrialisation and urbanisation.
In addition, it is also difficult to predict the distribution pattern of the working population among sectors with such different occupational patterns as in industry and agriculture or public service.
It is therefore difficult to predict changes in the industry and agriculture.
You must realise that changes in technology demands for new manpower with corresponding skills.
While this is very important, the new skills needed, may take some time before they are formed.
Because of the difficulties in the predictions of the various changes, it will be difficult to estimate the manpower needs desired.
The task of assessing manpower needs becomes more difficult in a developing country as a result of the increasing share of high-level skills in the total stock of the labour force due to the dramatic progress of science and technology.
The high-level manpower available may therefore not be able to cope with the new development in science and technology.
You must note that a shortage of qualified men, at least in some sectors of the economy, like science and technology, exists in all 73countries without exception mostly in developing countries.
You should not be surprised at this scenario because technology is constantly advancing, creating sudden new requirements which, even if all the appropriate measures were adopted, would take some years to meet as already mentioned above.
Since new discoveries fall outside the scope of planning and even of national forecasting it further makes the assessment of manpower needs required tasking.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 v Explain why it is tasking to estimate manpower requirements in developing countries.
Factors Influencing the Needs for Manpower Manpower requirements are often dictated by the needs of the industry or service.
The industries and services available are also based on the nation(cid:8217)s level of development as well as the economy of the country.
The manpower requirements of an agro-based economy, for instance, will be different from a predominantly oil and gas based.
The advent of science and technology including computer based high technology etc have reshaped the economy of many countries.
This has led to the need for additional skills that will cater the new industries.
The main factors influencing requirements for high-level manpower have been carefully studied since the early days of educational planning and there have been considerable increase and improvement in this respect.
Some of the factors are thus discussed and your responsibility is to attempt to group them in order of importance as they relate to your country.
Nature of Occupation All things being equal, you should know that the requirement for labour is premised on the need of the economy.
Once the needs are identified, the next thing is the attempt to acquire them.
If the nature of occupation for example, demands the use of capital equipment and is technology based, the greater will be the need for trained manpower in the area.
In other words, the more complicated the technology and the deeper the use of capital equipment, the greater will be the need for trained manpower to cope with these techniques.
A country that is focussing on the improvement in the area of technology will make provision for a huge capital to be able to cope.
You should also be reminded that improvement 74in technology is generally accompanied by an additional demand for engineers and technicians and diminishing requirements for unskilled labour.
The budget provision should therefore be adjusted in order to cope with the new dispensation.
In Nigeria, you will notice that the need for additional manpower requirements in different sectors of the economy for development led to the establishment of a number of specialised institutions of higher learning.
In other words, the desire for Nigeria, a developing nation, to accelerate its development has significantly influenced the need to focus on the production of additional high-level manpower by establishing specialised higher institutions.
Some of these specialised institutions, apart from the polytechnics, are in the following disciplines: 1.0 Technology (University) 2.0 Agriculture (University) 3.0 Health (School) 4.0 Nursing (School) 5.0 Petroleum (Institute/University) 6.0 Marine and Oceanography (School) 7.0 Education (University) 8.0 Policy and Strategic Studies (Institute) 9.0 Educational Planning and Administration (Institute) 10.0 Aviation (School) 11.0 Management (Centre) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Describe how the nature of job can influence manpower requirements.
2.
Give at least one institution established in each of the specialised disciplines mentioned in this section.
Number of Workers The number of workers/labour in an organisation is also expected to influence the manpower requirements of the establishment.
Consideration should always be given to the effective supervision and management of the aggregate workers in the establishment.
This can be done on sectional or departmental basis.
The number of high-level manpower requirements can be decided on the basis of the established (cid:8216)span of control(cid:8217).
In other words, the organisation might have decided how many of the workers (the maximum number) a senior officer can effectively supervise in each 75specialised area or department.
This then influences the manpower requirements.
Since the number of workers is not static, you should note that any substantial augmentation of the total number employed necessarily calls for an increase of high-level manpower to direct the workers involved.
Output The nature of the output will also influence manpower requirements.
The more complicated the product, or the more complex the working conditions, the greater must be the amount of high-level manpower in relation to the stock of labour.
If for instance, there is increased demand in the work schedule of workers, may be in the nature of the job in, for example, Medicine (where there may be need for more surgery, etc that demands more time required and more variations in medical conditions), the greater must be the amount of high-level manpower in relation to the stock of labour.
This is also applicable to all other occupations that are characterised with complex situations, may be as a result of advance technology.
Whenever the output is critical and usually uncommon, the requirements for manpower will be influenced to be able to cope with the complexity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Describe how the quantum of worker and the nature of output of an organisation influence manpower requirements.
Role of Science and Technology The applications of science to production and the introduction of innovations necessitate a new technology.
It also demands new organisational structure of production.
The implication of all these is the need for trained manpower who must have acquired the skills needed to enable them cope with the innovations.
In other words, the new inventions demand new techniques.
A good example is the role of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in the present dispensation in Nigeria.
Even organisations now demand the knowledge of ICT before a person is employed.
The different areas of computer technology still demand high-level manpower that will co-ordinate, supervise and attest to the job demands of each discovery.
Management Structure 76The structure of management can influence manpower requirements greatly.
The ideology of management as well as its philosophy coupled with some of the factors earlier discussed can influence manpower requirements.
In a more national structure of management and administration, the number of high-level manpower requirements will be less.
If it is however not rational, it may be more.
If however all other factors are considered (like the complexity of output and the growing role of science and technology), these may outweigh other considerations thus used as the deciding factor for high-level manpower requirements.
Apart from the discussions had so far, the orientation of the workers and the quality of the graduates do influence high-level manpower requirements.
Their impact is also influenced by the economy and level of production, though to varying degree.
The impact of science and technology as well as technical progress plays the most decisive part in determining requirements for high-level manpower.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How does the structure of management influence high-level manpower requirements?
4.0 CONCLUSION High-level manpower belongs to the upper cadre in an organisation.
The requirements of this category of workers depend on the needed skills of the organisation.
New skills, coupled with inventions and innovations lead to the demand for additional manpower.
The requirement is influenced by a number of factors already discussed.
You will agree that the demand for high-level manpower requirements depend mainly on economic factor.
This factor is also taken into consideration in the discourse had so far.
It is however important to weigh the importance of the factors recognised and see the extent of their influence before a final decision on the number of high-level manpower required is taken.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been able to learn about the factors influencing high-level manpower requirements in developing countries like Nigeria.
High-level manpower, as we have seen in our previous module, refers to highly skilled manpower who are specialists in their area.
The unit focussed on five major areas that influence manpower requirements.
The areas are, in fact, facts that warrant the need for additional high-level 77manpower.
You will observe in the discussion that most of the factor demands for additional skills, if carefully noted, are off-shoot of new inventions or innovations.
Some are as a result of the need for effective supervision because of the increasing number of workers.
You may also view the recognised factors holistically and fill any gap recognised.
The five factors actually, are not exhaustive.
You may also look beyond them so as to be able to add to the discussion.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 1.
Identify at least three factors that influence high-level manpower requirements and explain how they influence the requirements.
2.
Describe how the increasing role of science and technology influence high-level manpower requirements.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berg, I.
(1970).
Education and Jobs: The Great Training Robbery.
New York: Praeger.
Harbison, F. and Myers, C. (1963).
Human Resources Education and Economic Growth.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Harbison, F.H.
(1967).
Educational Planning and Human Resources Development.
Paris: UNESCO/IIEP.
Phillips, H.M. (1962).
(cid:8220)Economic and Social Aspects of the Planning of Education(cid:8221).
Inter Soc.
Sciences J. Vol.
14, No 4.
Pp 706-718.
Skorov, G. (1964).
(cid:8220)Manpower Approach to Educational Planning(cid:8221) In: Economic and Social Aspects of Educational Planning.
Paris: UNESCO.
UNIT 4 MANPOWER PROBLEMS AND UTILIZATION IN NIGERIA CONTENT 78 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Inadequate Data or Statistical Problem 3.2 High-level Manpower Immobility 3.3 The Problem of Wages 3.4 Incentives and Attitude to Work etc 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall that in one of the discussions we had on manpower planning in Nigeria, the government of Nigeria set up the Ashby Commission to conduct an investigation into Nigeria(cid:8217)s needs in the field of post-school certificate and higher education.
It is important to remember the discussion.
You are also being advised to go through the Module once again so as to fully grasp the essence of the discussion.
This is necessary because of its importance to our discussion in this unit.
The issue of provision of adequate manpower was basic to the assignment given to Sir Eric Ashby.
In this unit however, you will be intimated with the emerging problems of manpower development.
In other words, this unit will focus on some current manpower problems that have been hindering the development efforts and complicating manpower planning.
About four problems only, which are considered germane, will be discussed.
You are however advised to pay special attention to each of them and in fact, think beyond the discussions to be highlighted.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify at least three problems of manpower development and utilization in Nigeria.
2.
Explain how each of the problems identified constitute a problem.
793.
Identify other problems similar to those discussed.
MAIN CONTENT As you will see later in this discussion, some basic problems affecting manpower planning have been identified for deliberation.
Each will be discussed as a sub-section of the main content.
They are as follows: Inadequate Data or Statistical Problem Inadequate statistics do result into wrong planning.
In other words, if poor data are used to plan for the future, a wrong result will emerge.
Unfortunately, this has always been the case in most developing nations.
You will recall our discussion on the problem of the conduct of national population census.
From the census, basic data are expected to be generated.
Unfortunately, in many developing countries, figures are often falsified as a result of many factors related to politics, ethnic, geography and the economy, among others.
You can also recall our discussion about the various development plans conducted.
Most of the methods of manpower forecasts depended on a number of assumptions.
Remember Harbison(cid:8217)s rule-of-thumb approach which was not based on any scientific method.
For instance, the method of forecasting manpower was based on an assumption whereby those who successfully completed higher education should grow twice and those who completed secondary education successfully would grow thrice as fast as the Gross National Product (GNP).
He came up with wild figures that were reflected in Ashby(cid:8217)s report.
Even the popular Employer(cid:8217)s Opinion method had its limitations.
Can you remember these?
You will recall that the limitation restricted it to the estimation of manpower requirements over a short period (1-3 years) because of its nature and probable change in the economy.
You cannot fully depend also on the Tinbergen(cid:8217)s Econometrics Model because of its assumption of direct and quantifiable relationships between existing stocks of secondary and higher education outputs and the given rate of the GNP, that is, a direct relationship between manpower and GNP growth.
Any estimate that is not based on scientific prediction cannot be relied upon.
The result, in many instances, will be false.
In other words, forecasts that were made by many developing countries through false data suffer from the problem of validity.
The use of data that is not valid can result into underdevelopment because it can lead to ineffective development.
The question that comes to mind is on how can Nigeria 80overcome this problem of inadequate data?
Unfortunately, the last 2006 national population census is still contentious.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 v Highlight the reasons why data used for planning in developing countries are mostly inadequate.
v What are the consequences of manpower planning with false data?
3.2 High-level Manpower Immobility Having a large proportion of labour force that are not properly trained and therefore lack critical skills needed for development constitute a serious problem.
In fact, Harbison (1968) recognised (cid:8216)shortages(cid:8217) of persons with critical skills and knowledge required for effective national development as a serious problem in most developing nations.
This problem is further compounded by some derogatory and discriminatory policies (in Nigeria for instance) like (cid:8220)state of origin(cid:8221), (cid:8220)federal character(cid:8221), etc.
Geographical immobility of the little high-level manpower available thus worsens the proper execution of development projects and even effective planning of such projects.
You should not confuse manpower shortage with manpower requirement.
If there is proper planning for the type and quantum of manpower required at any level (cid:8211) local, state and country - , there should be no shortage or discrimination of the high level manpower.
You should also know the difference between (cid:8216)manpower requirements(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)absorptive capacity(cid:8217).
(cid:8216)Manpower requirement(cid:8217) is the evident needs for person with particular education, training and experience.
This is to say that such persons are necessary or needed for the achievement of a programme of national development.
They are thus indispensable because of their skill.
(cid:8216)Absorptive capacity(cid:8217) refers to a country(cid:8217)s capacity to provide some kind of useful employment for persons with certain educational qualifications.
In effect, this interprets to a situation whereby (cid:8216)manpower requirements(cid:8217) should express minimum essential needs while (cid:8216)absorptive capacity(cid:8217) expresses maximum number of persons who can be employed without experiencing any kind of redundancy or underutilisation of skills.
Trained manpower should be produced by (cid:8216)education(cid:8217) or training centres ranging between the maximum and the minimum, otherwise, education or training centre which is the skill- generation system is distorted or unbalanced.
If there is effective planning of manpower and the approach takes into consideration manpower needs, there will not be discrimination especially through the application of unwholesome or discriminatory policies.
Policies that can enhance 81manpower mobility should always be devised as integral part of manpower planning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Suggest ways of promoting manpower mobility 3.3 The Problem of Wages The allocation and utilization of manpower are affected by the countries(cid:8217) wage and income policies.
You may view the observed trends among states in your country and even among organisations.
Wages offered in Oil and Gas sector are different from those in the public service.
According to Metcalf (1970), the setting of wage levels is one way of enticing labour to specific occupations that are most critically needed for rapid economic and social development.
Ideally, the level of workers(cid:8217) productivity generally determines their wages.
Wage differences in most advanced countries considerably reflect differences in skills output, responsibility and level of demand.
Even in many developing countries also like Nigeria, the importance or relevance of the organisation to the economy is also a determinant of the earnings of the workers.
You should reflect on the earnings of workers in such organisations as the Banks, Oil and Gas, Teaching, and the Public Service.
What inform the discriminatory earnings in the organisations?
Again, recall what usually inform wage increase by government and the factors that are usually considered in the various white papers.
While the Salaries and Wages Commission always advocate for increases based on higher productivity, over the years, cost of living index has always been used as the main criterion for wage adjustments in Nigeria.
Notable wage commissions set up in Nigeria over the years include Mbanefo (1959), Morgan (1963), Adebo (1970) and Udoji (1973).
Nigerian government has however set up a statutory body that is saddled with the review of salaries and wages in government establishments including political office holders.
You will also observe that the Salaries and Wages Review Commission has been restricted to the public sector only, leaving the private sector to rely mostly on industrial action through which they force the private enterprises to toe the line of the public sector.
In other words, wage increases in the private sector depend mainly on union power, employers(cid:8217) ability to pay or their ability to pass on increased wage bill to consumers in form of high prices (Ojo, 1986).
82The basis for fixing minimum wage, especially in the public service has always been spurious.
Most often, this is based on cost of living index as related to urban workers, unskilled workers and low grade civil servants.
It often neglects or at variance with the situation of urban labour surplus.
This was the case with Udoji Commission(cid:8217)s recommendation fixing minimum wage rate of unskilled workers in the public sector at N720.00 per annum.
Subsequent reviews have also been following this trend.
The number of unemployed people could have been reduced and more employment opportunities created if economic criteria under prevailing labour market situation are considered.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Describe how (cid:8216)wages(cid:8217) contribute to manpower problem.
3.4 Incentives and Attitude to Work etc Attitude to work among Nigerian workers can be affected by mode of remuneration.
Unfortunately, in Nigeria, the mode of compensation often has little effect on workers(cid:8217) productivity because the emphasis has always been on paper qualification.
Most workers therefore, prefer to spend their time preparing for examination when they are expected to concentrate on their official works.
This is because it is believed that additional certificate, not necessarily productivity, will earn them advancement.
In addition to the above, the issue of incentives are very critical.
Do you know that it is one thing to estimate the needs for manpower of various qualifications but quite another to induce persons to prepare for and engage in occupations which are vital to national growth?
Often, in developing countries, people think that pay and status reflect the value of contribution to development.
This is not so!
Pay and status are more related to colonial heritage and of course, political pressures than to productivity.
For example, the rewards of certain categories of personnel vis-à-vis others are at variance.
The pay of teachers, for example, is often inadequate; the differentials in compensation between agricultural officer and agricultural assistant are too great; and the earning of scientists and engineers, in comparison with administrative bureaucrats in government ministries, are too low.
Manpower planners or human resource development planners must always consider deliberate measures to influence the allocation of manpower into high priority activities and occupations.
Other manpower problems, in addition to those discussed so far according to Harbison (1968) include the following: 83 1.
Consequences of population increase and the measures for controlling them; 2.
Underemployment and unemployment; 3.
Skill shortages and the process of developing high level manpower to overcome them; 4.
Organisational weakness and the need to find prime movers of innovation for institutional development, and; 5.
Provision of both financial and non-financial incentives in order to direct critically needed manpower into productive channels.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 v How does the possession of academic certificates encourage manpower problem in public establishments.
v Explain how (cid:8216)incentives(cid:8217) can be a (cid:8216)curse(cid:8217) as well as a (cid:8216)blessing(cid:8217) to manpower development.
4.0 CONCLUSION Manpower problems and utilisation are issues that are considered important in educational planning.
The main essence is to ensure the avoidance of pitfalls that can discourage manpower development.
In addition, such problems should, as much as possible, be noted in future manpower plan.
For example, the paucity and unreliability of population data should not be allowed to jeopardise educational and manpower planning if the political undertone is played down and it is looked upon as a purely statistical exercise.
Emphasis should always be on increase wages based on workers(cid:8217) productivity rather than mere possession of paper qualifications.
Workers(cid:8217) (positive) attitude to work as a panacea to increased productivity should always be encouraged.
SUMMARY A number of manpower problems have been recognised in this unit.
You will notice that the discussions were carefully itemised.
You should be able to further think of the implications the problems may have on manpower development.
In addition to the specific problems of inadequate data, high level manpower immobility, wages and those that bother on incentives and workers(cid:8217) attitude to work, you also learnt about the problems of some characteristics that manifest themselves in the area of employment (unemployment and underemployment), population, weakness of the organisation and the problems of funding.
84 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 1.
Identify any five (5) issues that can be associated with manpower problems.
Explain how each of them can be regarded as a problem.
2.
What suggestions can you proffer to avoid the identified problems?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Coombs, P.H.
(1968).
The World Educational Crisis.
London: Oxford University Press.
Harbison, F. (1968).
(cid:8220)A System Analysis Approach to Human Resources Development Planning(cid:8221) In: Coombs, P.H.
(Ed).
Manpower Aspects of Educational Planning.
Paris: UNESCO, IIEP.
Metcalf, J.B. (1970).
(cid:8220)Manpower Utilisation and Allocation(cid:8221) (Text of a lecture delivered at the ECA manpower seminar at the University of Lagos.
August, 1970).
Ojo, F. (1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Manpower Experience in Folayan Ojo, A. Aderinto and Tayo Fashoyin (eds) Manpower Development and Utilisation in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Pp.
1-2.
MODULE 4 OCCUPATIONAL ANALYSIS OF EMPLOYMENT Unit 1 Educational and Occupational Characteristics: Labour Segmentation Approaches Unit 2 Sectoral Distribution of Occupations Unit 3 Manpower Shortages of Modernising Economies Unit 4 Education and Employment 85 UNIT 1 EDUCATIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS: LABOUR SEGMENTATION APPROACHES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Occupational Models 3.2 Techno-Sociological Based Approach (Carter(cid:8217)s Model) 3.2.1 Primary Independent Segment 3.2.2 Primary Routinized Segment 3.2.3 Secondary Labour Market Approach 3.3 Sociological Based Approach (Carnoy(cid:8217)s Model) 3.3.1 High Education Segment 3.3.2 Monopoly Segment 3.3.3 Competitive Segment 3.3.4 Craft Segment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You must have observed in some of the previous discussions that the role of education in the economy of any nation cannot be over-estimated.
It was Harbison (1973) who posited that Man has long been known as an active agent who accumulates capital, exploits natural resources and builds social, economic and political organisations.
Through these activities, Man could be said to be an agent of national development.
You will therefore agree that a country that cannot educate its people through the development of their skills and knowledge, and then utilise them effectively may find it difficult to develop anything else.
86Since educational planning aims at the desire to achieve a better match between the educated individuals and the economic needs of the society or country, the education the individual attains (knowledge and skills acquired) is expected to influence, to a large extent the job he performs for maximum output or productivity.
In this unit, you will be further exposed to the occupational analysis of employment as related to the job an individual does.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: v Explain why investment in human capital is regarded as the key to national development; v Describe the extent to which the level of educational attainment of an individual influences the job he does.
v Identify two approaches to occupational analysis of employment.
v Describe the characteristic features of each of the two approaches, and; v How education is the major determinant of the group an individual belongs to.
MAIN CONTENT Occupational Models The idea of identifying models of occupation, which can be referred to as Labour Segmentation Models, stem from Carter (1980).
This model, according to him, was informed by the belief that the labour market is fragmented.
The fragmentation of labour market was said to have been derived from the radical theory of production and that education decides the group an individual will belong to.
In other words, that an individual has options of occupation where he can be involved or belong to, taking into consideration his education and training.
He is therefore expected to be grouped into a segment where the activities relate best to his education.
Labour segmentation refers to the fragmentation of labour market into occupational sectors where there is an existence of persisting groups, identifiable by rather permanent group characteristics.
According to Carter (1980), those who fall into one or another of these groups have different patterns of work-life which emerge largely from the structure of the labour market for the particular sets of jobs.
Carnoy (1977) shared 87this logic in addition to stressing the feature of the theory which, according to him, was the result of dividing the labour force always that is, separating the groups so that workers would compete against each other for employment, security and a share of the wage bill.
Techno-Sociological Based Approach (Carter(cid:8217)s Model) This approach was based on the theory of labour market segmentation propounded by Micheal Carter.
Carter (1980) recognised this theory based on the technological approaches of Piore (1973a), Gordon, Reich and Edwards (1973a).
It was pointed out by Carter (1980) that there was a consensus by all the theorists that there were several types of jobs in the labour market each with its distinct characteristics.
According to him, difference exists, for example, in labour living, supervisory procedures and in working conditions.
The segments recognised are: (cid:8216)Primary Independent(cid:8217), (cid:8216)Primary Routinized(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)Secondary Labour Markets(cid:8217).
The major difference between the view of Piore and that of Gordon, Reich and Edwards is where (cid:8216)productivity(cid:8217) is rooted.
While Piore believed that (cid:8216)productivity(cid:8217) is basically a technological relation determined by the amount and types of machines available, Gordon et al argued that (cid:8216)productivity(cid:8217) is rooted in social relations and not in a technological relation.
The segments recognised and their characteristics are as discussed below: Primary Independent Segment This segment embraces jobs requiring creative and self-initiating action on the part of workers.
The segment requires higher skill of development.
For example, it requires higher educational attainment which seems to be a prerequisite to the jobs unlike the routinized where the norms of the organisation are externally imposed and the educational requirement is lower.
In other words, people with the highest educational attainment are found in this segment.
It therefore boosts of high level manpower.
Primary Routinized Segment In this segment, promotion and wage patterns are internal to the establishment.
The segment is full-time.
In addition, dependability, stability, responsiveness to authority, among others, are the recognised functions of productivity in this segment.
Training on the job is a basic feature but promotion prospects depend on schooling, race and sex.
Unlike the Primary Independent Segment, the jobs in this segment do not require much creative and self-initiating action.
88 Secondary Labour Market Approach This approach absorbs the least educated individual.
In addition, it is characterised mainly by low wages and a relatively poor working conditions.
The segment, more or less, offers jobs requiring insignificant or no self-initiative or creative thinking.
It (cid:8220)comprises of jobs requiring the least on-the-job training, the minimum skills and response to simple direct orders(cid:8221) (Carnoy, 1977:38).
In other words, the functional skill required appears to be common to all since no special training is required.
Harrison (1972) also asserted that the nature of the market is such that unemployment is highest in this segment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List the three main approaches of this model.
2. describe how education influences the segment an individual belongs to.
Sociological Based Approach (Carnoy(cid:8217)s Model) Carnoy (1980) proposed a labour market segmentation model based on (cid:8220)the concepts of contradiction, correspondence and the centrality of work processes(cid:8221) (Carnoy, 1980:40).
Four segments were recognised and the differences that exist were mainly sociologically based.
This implied that different set of skills, values and attitudes are relevant to productivity in the different segments recognised.
High Education Segment This segment is characterised by a relatively well paid segment of jobs.
The segment requires high level of general education that cuts across both competitive and monopoly sectors of the economy.
There is job competition in the segment and that new jobs are constantly created by technical change.
It is also observed that this segment is dominated by male workers from the middle and upper class of the society.
In other words, that less female workers are found in this segment thus making it gender insensitive.
Monopoly Segment Monopoly segment is characterised by unions, internal hierarchies and job security for the senior employees.
Though jobs in this segment 89require less experience than jobs in the competitive sector, workers, according to Carnoy (1980) are more highly paid because they are compensated from gains in the increased labour productivity by mechanisation which is an important feature of the segment.
Competitive Segment This segment is characterised by the lowest wages, least steady employment and poorest working conditions and advancement opportunities when compared with the other segments.
According to Carnoy (1980), women are commonly found in this segment in addition to those referred to as the minority group members and new comers.
Craft Segment Jobs in the craft segment require traditional manual skills learnt after a fairly long time of apprenticeship.
Unionism is an important organisational feature of this segment.
The workers are located in the monopoly and competitive spheres, though many of them are self- employed.
Craft workers are relatively highly paid and are more autonomous in their activities than any workers except in the high education segment.
Technological advances are however seriously undermining the need for craft skills.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Describe the main characteristic features of any two of the recognised segments of this model of labour market.
2.
Why is this model described as sociologically based?
4.0 CONCLUSION You will observe in this unit, that education of an individual determines the occupational role to be played.
In other words, that the level of education attained is the most important factor that determines the segment an individual belongs to.
Furthermore, you will also notice that there is a top to bottom or bottom to top segmentation movement which are distinguished by the level of education attained.
Occupational analysis as discussed in the different approaches recognised gave an insight into the relationship between education and employment.
For maximum output, it is expected that the skills acquired (both the type and the level) must be related to the type of activities an individual engages in.
This is 90the only way through which there could be national economic growth and development.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the possible occupational analysis based on the different segmentation models.
You must have seen the relationship between education and labour.
Four models were discussed and the models were segmented on the basis of the level of the education attained.
The first model was according to the proposition of Carter who identified three segments with the first (cid:8211) Primary Independent (cid:8211) requiring creative and self-initiating skills.
In other words, it requires high level skill that could be acquired through high level educational attainment.
The other segment followed in descending order.
Notwithstanding the approaches of the two models of labour market segmentation discussed, one feature that is common to all is the existence of hierarchy in each of the models.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the roles of education in the placement of an individual in the occupational models discussed.
2.
What do you consider as the common characteristic features among the two models discussed in this unit?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Carnoy, M. (1977).
Education and Employment: A Critical Appraisal.
Paris: UNESCO-IIEP.
Carnoy, M. (1980).
(cid:8220)Segmented Labour Markets: A Review of the Theoretical and Empirical Literature and its Implications for Educational Planning(cid:8221) in UNESCO: Education, Work and Employment.
Paris: IIEP.
Harrison, B.
(1972).
(cid:8220)Education and Underemployment in the Urban Ghetto(cid:8221).
American Economic Review.
Dec. 1972.
Pp 796-812.
91UNIT 2 SECTORAL DISTRIBUTION OF OCCUPATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Primary Sector 3.2 The Secondary Sector 3.3 The Tertiary Sector 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In economics, occupations are classified into three (3) groups.
This is applicable to Nigeria which is being used as a typical example of a developing country.
The sectoral distribution of occupations recognised three (3) sectors.
These sectors are: v Primary Sector v Secondary Sector, and, v Tertiary Sector.
As you will see later, each of the sectors has its own characteristics which include the level of education and the nature of job one is engaged in.
In terms of education, the least educated are found in the primary sector.
The next educated people are found in the secondary sector while the highest educated individuals are found in the tertiary sector of the economy.
The occupations they all engaged in are very much related to the level of their education.
You will also observe that since those who belong to the primary sector are the least educated, they are the one who engaged mainly in traditional farming (agriculture).
All these characteristics are discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 92v Describe the characteristic features of each of the three (3) occupational sectors recognised.
v Explain the relationship between the level of education in each of the sectors and the occupation they engaged in.
v Explain why the primary sector is characterised by migration to the urban centres.
v Explain the reasons for low productivity of agricultural products in the rural areas.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 The Primary Sector This model embraces mainly the agricultural sector.
In Nigeria, labour in this sector is characterised mainly by low education and this is why it is manned mainly by the rural labour force.
The primary sector is also characterised by shortage of qualified manpower and the continuous drifting of essential labour from the rural to urban centres or to be engaged in other labour sectors, that is, secondary and tertiary.
The primary sector is certainly made up of the remaining rural population who are mostly aged with very low education.
Manual labour is the major method of activity.
While a larger percentage of the rural population are engaged in the primary sector of the economy, then output could not be sufficient for the entire population.
This shortcoming is informed by lack of the knowledge of modern scientific farming.
In addition, inadequate capital and land fragmentation in Nigeria were the major contributing factors to low productivity then.
Using Nigeria(cid:8217)s Third National Development plan (1975-1980) as a case study, the importance of this sector could however be seen in the sectoral distribution of gainful employment.
The plan showed that a total of 64% of the total employment was in the agricultural sector in 1975/76 (Table 1).
The implementation of the agricultural project as laid down in the plan would have required additional 20,000 senior, intermediate and skilled and semi-skilled in the ratio 12:35:53 (Table 2).
This estimate gave the skilled and semi-skilled categories (overseers, agricultural demonstrators, rangers, etc) (cid:8211) which is over 50% of the estimate required.
Table 1: Sectoral Distribution of Total Gainful Employment, 1975.
Sectors Estimated Total Gainful Occupation % No.
(Thousand) Agriculture 64.0 17,860 93Mining and Quarrying 0.4 110 Manufacturing and Processing 16.8 4,690 Construction and Building 0.9 250 Electricity, Gas and Water 12.2 3,400 Transport and Communication 0.6 170 Services 5.0 1,400 Total 100.0 27,910 Source: Federal Republic of Nigeria (1975).
Third National Development Plan 1975-1980.
Vol.
1 p.370.
By the end of the plan period (1980), employment in the agricultural sector would have decreased by 61% of the total but with a net increase in the actual number employed from 17.86 million in 1975 to 19.44 million in 1980 (FGN, 1975:373) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify the characteristic features of the primary sector.
2.
What are the reasons for low production of agricultural products?
3.2 The Secondary Sector The secondary sector consists mainly of workers engaged in manufacturing and construction.
Table 2: Estimated Additional Requirements for Agricultural Manpower By Occupational Groups Senior Category e.g.
agricultural/veterinary(cid:8230) Officers, agricultural engineers, agronomists, etc(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)2,500; Intermediate Category e.g.
agric./fisheries/(cid:8230) Superintendents, agric./livestock/(cid:8230) assistants etc (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)..7,200, and; Skilled and Semi-skilled Category e.g.
overseers, agricultural demonstrators, rangers etc(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230) 10,900 20,600 94  Source: Federal Republic of Nigeria (1975).
Third National Development Plan.
1975-80.
Vol.
1, p. 381.
This sector has been recognised as constituting the cornerstone of Nigeria(cid:8217)s development.
You also need to be informed that it employs different categories of workers (cid:8211) skilled and semi-skilled, in the different sub-sectors within this labour segment.
Some of them are found in the extractive industries such as mining and quarrying.
In addition, very many are in the various branches of manufacturing and processing.
Some are in commercial occupations which assist in the distribution of raw materials and the manufacturing of goods.
In 1975, the sectoral distribution of total gainful employment showed that secondary Labour market engaged a total of 8,650,000 people out of a total of 27,910,000 gainfully employed (Table 3).
In other words that about 31% of the total employment as at 1975 was in the secondary sector of the economy.
Within this sector, manufacturing and processing took 4,690,000 or 54.2%.
This was about 17% of the estimated total gainful occupation.
One important feature of this sector is the role of education.
The higher the educational level attained, the higher the skill and the more the demand of the job.
The remuneration attached to each job is related to the level of education.
One may rightly conclude therefore that higher education leads to upward mobility in the employment ladder.
In the analysis of a hypothetical firm, the occupational break down will show a messenger or cleaner as occupying the lowest position while the (cid:8216)professionals(cid:8217) (cid:8211) accountants, marketing executives, etc will occupy the highest position with the Managing Director at the apex of the administrative set up.
SELF ASSESSMENT 2 What differentiates this sector from the primary sector?
3.3 Tertiary Sector The tertiary sector consists of workers who perform more direct services.
Most of those in this sector are professionals.
They include the Doctors 95(medical officers), Lawyers, Judges, Teachers, Civil Servants and members of the armed forces among others.
Hanson (1956) argued that the standard attained by the society is in most cases, positively related to the proportion of the people in this sector.
In other words, that the larger the number of people in the tertiary sector the higher the level or standard of the society and the smaller the number of those engaged in the tertiary, the less the standard of such a society.
In Table 1 for example, it could be observed that the tertiary sector had 1,400,000 people gainfully employed in 1975.
The estimated employment by 1980 was put at 1.68 million or 5.3%.
This showed an increase of only 0.29 million or 7.5% of the total over a 5-year period.
If this statistics is compared with other sectors, that is, primary and secondary, the tertiary has the least number of people (Table 3).
This shows that on the average, the standard of living of an average Nigerian then could be said to be very low if we should go by the observation of Hanson (1956).
Table 3: Sectoral Distribution of Total Gainful Employment, 1975 Sector Estimated Total Gainful Occupation % No.
(Thousands) Primary 64.0 17,860 Secondary 31.0 8,650 Tertiary 5.0 1,400 Total 100.0 27,910 Source: Federal Republic of Nigeria (1975).
Third National Development Plan 1975-1980.
Vol.
1 p.370.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Describe the characteristic features of this sector.
2.
What role does education play in the engagement of workers in each of the three (3) sectors recognised?
4.0 CONCLUSION As in the previous unit, the discussion in this unit showed the close relationship between education and the occupation an individual does.
Education can easily be accepted as the determinant of the sector an individual belongs to.
It also affects the productivity of an individual because of the adage that says (cid:8220)you cannot rise above the Peter(cid:8217)s plateau(cid:8221), what you do not have, you cannot use it.
As emphasised in some of the previous discussions, education exposes an individual to new skills 96needed for development.
You saw in this unit that the level of education attained determines one(cid:8217)s placement in the occupational ladder.
5.0 SUMMARY The discussion in this unit is closely related to the previous unit.
Here, three sectoral distributions of occupation were recognised (cid:8211) primary, secondary and tertiary sectors.
The level of education attained determines the sector one belongs to.
While the primary sector consists of the least educated and its attendant characteristics, the tertiary sector consists of the most educated.
It is the level that provides the high-level manpower to the economy.
You should further look at the characteristic features of each sectors and think further on how they are shaping the economy of your country.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the relationship between the level of education and occupation in each of the sectors discussed.
2.
Explain the reason for low productivity of agricultural products in the primary sector.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fadipe, J.O.
(1999).
Education and Employment: Approaches to Labour Market Segmentation Models In: Studies in Educational Planning and Administration.
Vol.
2(1), September, 1999.
Pp.
47-56.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1975).
The Third National Development Plan (1975-80).
Vol.
1.
Lagos: Federal Ministry of Information.
Harbison, R.H. (1973).
Human Resources as the Wealth of Nation.
New York, London, Toronto: OUP.
UNIT 3 MANPOWER SHORTAGES OF MODERNISING ECONOMIES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 973.0 Main Contents 3.1 Two-fold Manpower Problems Identified 3.2 Categories of Shortages 3.2.1 Highly Educated Persons 3.2.2 Sub-Professional Personnel 3.2.3 Top-level Managerial and Administrative Personnel 3.2.4 Teachers 3.2.5 Craftsmen 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-market Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is a difference between traditional and modern economies.
The subject before us is however related to the two major problems associated with modernising economies.
Modernising economies will be equated to what operates in a modern economy.
The subject before us for discussion relates to two identified problems of shortage of persons with critical skills and secondly, surplus labour.
You must be aware that no two countries have exactly the same manpower problems.
Some countries have unusually serious surpluses, while others have very serious shortage of specialised kinds of skill.
The strategy of human resources development is however concerned with the objectives of solving these two persistent, yet seemingly diverse manpower problems, that is, the shortage of persons with critical skills and surplus labour.
While the two are present in modernising sectors of the economy, the second problem of surplus is also present in the traditional sector.
In this unit, you will learn more about these problems and identify several categories of the shortages in modernising economies of many countries.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 98v Proffer solutions to solving the problems of shortage of people with critical skills and the unutilised and underutilised manpower.
v Identify the various categories of manpower shortage.
v Identify the common features of the two manpower problems.
v Explain the concept of human capital formation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Two-fold Manpower Problem Identified In the modernising countries that are experiencing or practicing modernisation economies rather than traditional, the two common manpower shortages being experienced are: v The shortage of persons with critical skill, and; v Surplus labour.
Human resource experts have been trying to proffer solutions that could take care of these problems.
Can you think of what could be done to counter these problems?
Critical skills are no doubt, highly specialised skills where only few people do operate.
You should be able to give examples of skills that are critical.
They are scarce especially in the modern economy.
Those with critical skills have gone through the process of (cid:8220)human capital formation(cid:8221) which is the process of acquiring and increasing the numbers of persons who have the skills, education and experience which are critical for the economic and political development of the nation.
People in this cadre are usually referred to as high-level manpower (according to Harbison ,1968), that are usually needed to: v Staff new and expanding government services and industries; v Introduce new systems of land use and new methods of agriculture; v Develop new means of communication, and; v Build the educational system.
In addition, in this modern age of globalisation, such high-level manpower will operate conveniently in the super-high wave internet explorer and high technology among others.
If you critically examine the two problems mentioned above, the solutions lie in finding ways to effectively counter them through the strategy of human resources development which are (cid:8211) building skills and providing productive employment for unutilised or underutilised manpower.
99 View critically again; you will discover that the two are also intimately related.
For example: v They both have their roots in the changes which are inherent in development process; v They are related in part to education; v They are both aggravated as the tempo of modernisation is quickened, and that; v The shortage of persons with critical skills is one of the contributing causes of the surplus of people without jobs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What are critical skills?
2.
What are the solutions to the two manpower shortages recognised?
Categories of Manpower Shortages It has been discovered that the manpower shortages of modernising countries are easy and fall into several categories.
These are discussed below: 3.2.1 Shortage of Highly Educated Professional Manpower These professionals include scientists, agronomists, veterinarians, engineers and doctors.
They are mostly restricted to the urban areas where they are mostly needed, rather than rural areas.
The nature of their job is considered critical and very essential.
3.2.1 Shortage of Sub-professional Personnel They include the technicians, nurses, technical supervisors and others who are even more critical than the fully qualified professionals.
They are more qualified because: v Their requirements exceed many times those for senior professionals.
v The few qualified to enter a technical institute may also qualify to enter a university and they prefer the latter because of the higher status they are accorded, and, v Fewer places are available in institutions providing intermediate training than universities.
100 3.2.2 Shortage of Top-level Managerial and Administrative Personnel This is common in all sectors (cid:8211) public and private.
It demonstrated a dearth of people with entrepreneurial talents.
3.2.3 Shortage of Teachers Because of their mobility and tendency to look for other jobs, secondary level is mostly hit especially in the sciences and mathematics.
3.2.4 Shortages of Craftsmen of all kinds as well as book keepers, secretaries, machine operators, etc.
3.2.5 Shortage of Miscellaneous Categories like radio and television specialists, pilots, accountants, economists and statisticians.
4.0 CONCLUSION Human resources development, the process of human capital formation, assists in the acquisition of critical skills needed for development.
Unfortunately, because of the nature of the economy in both the modern and traditional settings there exist two persistent, yet seemingly diverse manpower problems which are the shortage of persons with critical skills and surplus labour.
You will notice that the problems which are related to manpower shortages are capable of distorting the economy of countries.
It is therefore expedient that solutions be found to curtail them as soon as they are noticed in the economy of a country.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about two common problems of manpower that are popular in modernising as well as traditional economies of any country.
The two are said to be related because of some common features recognised with them.
Can you still recognise these features?
You also learn about the process of human capital formation through which skills (cid:8211) especially the critical ones (cid:8211) are acquired.
About five (5) different categories of manpower shortages of modernising countries are identified and discussed.
Which of these can you identify with your country?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 101Which are the two major manpower problems common in both the modernising and traditional sectors of the economy?
2.
Explain the process of (cid:8216)human capital formation(cid:8217).
3.
Identify at least three categories into which manpower shortages of modernising countries fall.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Harbison, F.H.
(1962).
(cid:8220)Human Resources Development Planning in Modernising Economies(cid:8221).
International Labour Review.
Vol.
85, No.
5, May, 1963.
Pp.
435-438, 440-441, 456-458.
Harbison, F.H.
(1968).
(cid:8220)A Systems Analysis Approach to Human Resources Development Planning(cid:8221) In: Manpower Aspects of Educational Planning.
Paris: UNESCO.
Pp.
57-58, 59-64.
Harbison, F.H.
(1984).
(cid:8220)Approaches to Human Resource Development(cid:8221) in Meier, G.M.
(Ed), In: Leading Issues in Economic Development (4th Edition).
New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pp.
619- 622.
UNIT 4 EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Demand for Education 3.2 Education and the Modern Sector Economy 3.3 Educational Investment Decisions and the Rising Unemployment 3.4 Employers of Labour and Manpower Training 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Readings 102 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nowadays, there is no doubt that education is an investment.
You will recall the discussion we had in Module 2, Unit 1 where you learnt about the rationale for investment in education.
With the current expansion going on in higher education as being witnessed in the increasing number of higher institutions, it is expected that (investment in) education should lead to the turning out of the right (cid:8216)mix(cid:8217) which the economy should be able to utilise.
Throughout the world, education is seen as an investment that is capable of helping to speed up national development.
By now, you must have been convinced that the expansion of higher education in developing countries, including Nigeria is primarily to provide manpower for the execution of national development plans.
With the rising rate of unemployment in the country, is there no discrepancy between the output of graduates in different specialisations and the absorptive capacity of the labour market, leading in turn, to unemployment, underemployment, and to scarcity of certain types of graduates?
These are some of the issues to be examined in this unit.
You should note however that in economics, educational investment, like any other investment, is subject to diminishing returns.
A developing country like Nigeria can have too much education, and the manpower shortages of yesterday can become the surpluses of tomorrow.
This is already happening.
Can we then say that the structure and content of higher (education) could no longer meet the changing social and economic needs of the society?
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: Explain why the educational system is over producing the real manpower needs for development.
Describe the role of education in transforming various kinds of underemployment into open employment especially through rural- urban migration.
Explain how rising employment can distort wage differential.
Describe how employment, in addition to providing income, is also capable of disseminating work-related knowledge.
How/Why educational institutions should co-operate with the employers of labour in manpower training.
1033.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Demand for Education You should be familiar with some realities in the education system leading to what can be regarded as the problem of the educated unemployment.
Do not forget that in a democratic setting like what Nigeria is currently experiencing, the education system adapts to the political and economic circumstances.
Ethnic factor, federal character, federalism, etc are some issues to be considered in education as well as employment in Nigeria.
These socio-political constraints in addition to economic signals or incentives which are dominant are the primary factors that could be regarded as determinants of employment aspirations of individuals and hence the level and composition of the aggregate private demand for education.
Can you still remember the law or principle of demand and supply?
The demand for higher education influences supply.
It will also influence academic standards.
With continuous political pressure being exerted, attempt will continue to be made to further expand higher education quantitatively in order to meet with the demand for it.
If you can view the ownership of higher institutions in Nigeria today, you will discover that in addition to federal universities, polytechnics and colleges of education, many states also have theirs.
With the financial constraints faced by the federal and state governments, the private sector is already coming in to find ways of meeting the unmet educational demand.
Consequently, the output of the educational system may eventually exceed the available job opportunities.
Remember that the attempt to satisfy demand for education through expansion of public and private institutions may lead to excess output.
In other words, that the educational systems are likely to overproduce in terms of the real manpower needs of the nation.
In addition, the divergence between the output of the educational system and the number of new job opportunities (which is decreasing) is likely to grow overtime.
This scenario indicates an overproduction of the output of the educational system.
What do you think should be done to correct this situation?
Will it not be better to ensure that the educational system depend mainly on changes in economic incentives and social constraints and not on isolated initiatives taken within the educational system itself?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Why is the country finding it difficult to employ all the graduates of the educational system?
1042.
Suggest what should be done to correct this problem of educated unemployment 3.2 Education and the Modern Sector Economy In the traditional societies, it is not uncommon to see parents inducting their children in the work they do.
This is very common with the craftsmen, drummers, traders, and even farmers among others.
With the advent of a modern sector, this arrangement is no more popular though some isolated cases are still not uncommon.
Different working arrangements have been introduced like a standard working time, minimum wages (salaries) and other incentives which attract additional wages.
In addition, in the modern economy, additional or new occupational skills are often required.
So also are the effects of issues like (cid:8216)industrialised(cid:8217), (cid:8216)urban(cid:8217), (cid:8216)rural(cid:8217), (cid:8216)offshore(cid:8217), etc which have also characterised the working environment and the implication they all have on the workers.
The educational systems do respond to these needs required.
For instance, modifying the curricular to meet, for example, the needs of the urban schools or the new environment.
The consequence is a serious drift especially from the rural to urban centres.
This is common among the underemployed youths who are now seeking for more education or jobs.
Unfortunately, they are usually in excess of the available jobs and thus openly unemployed.
In other words, there is a transformation from widely dispersed rural underemployment into a serious and potentially explosive problem of open urban unemployment.
The ranks of the urban unemployed are increasingly being swelled by the more educated due to the propensity to migrate as a result of increasing educational attainment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How does the modern sector economy lead to open urban unemployment?
3.3 Educational Investment Decisions and the Rising Unemployment A lot of things are often taken into consideration when decisions are to be taken especially in investing in education.
These will help to determine the profitability or otherwise of investing in, for example, higher education vis-à-vis other types of investment.
In addition, it will also aid decision makers on future patterns of the investment.
In the Nigerian 105setting, like in many similar developing countries, political factors are dominant in government decisions with regard to the supply of educational opportunities, economic analysis of social and private rates to investment in various levels of education.
The assessment of the wisdom of educational investment decisions remains a tool of considerable potential.
The role of cost-benefit analysis in a political setting was seriously discussed by Edwards (1973) in his paper presented at IBRD conference on (cid:8220)The Economics of Education: Alternative Strategies for Investment(cid:8221).
His exposition was focussed on (cid:8220)Investment in Education in Developing Nations: Conflicts among Social, Economic and Political Signals(cid:8221).
Mostly in investment, that the rate-of-return calculations have not taken account of factors such as educational displacement, rising unemployment among the educated, the distorted wage and price signals in the economy as a whole.
This is why many manpower plans based on these calculations need to be modified especially with regards to their projections of needed quantitative expansion among the highly educated if the above factors are taken into consideration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Identify the factors to be considered when projecting for needed quantitative expansion of manpower needs.
3.4 Employers of Labour and Manpower Training In the earlier discussions you had under Forecasting Manpower Requirements, you will recall that the Employers(cid:8217) Opinion Method was regarded as the most commonly used method because it is the simplest.
The procedure adopted in its operation is quite similar to the issue at stake.
The idea is that the enterprise should be carried along in the training of the manpower needed.
You will recall that all labour enterprises require certain skills in quantity and quality.
If they co-operate with the relevant training institutions, the latter will be able to plan for the production of the required skills.
What we are saying is that, the employers of labour are expected to specify the kind of labour and the number needed within a specific time (cid:8211) say 2, 3 to 5 or more years.
The aggregate opinions of the employers are summed up and subtracting educated deaths and envisaged losses over the given period.
The mathematical operation then results in arriving at a forecast of the increase in effective demand for labour by the target year.
This information is expected to guide the training institutions (education) to plan and implement the requirements for manpower.
106This is the essence for the co-operation between the employers of labour (who need the manpower) and education (responsible for the production of the manpower) needed.
Higher education is to provide manpower in the industries and for the execution of national development plans.
If there is, however, discrepancy between the output of graduates in different specializations and the absorptive capacity of the labour market, it will lead to unemployment, underemployment and possibly to scarcity of certain types of graduates.
It is to avoid this kind of employment problem that we are advocating for a kind of symbiotic relationship between the employers of labour and the education (that is responsible for manpower training).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain why there should be a symbiotic relationship between the employers of labour and manpower training.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been demonstrated in this unit that many developing nations are facing the problem of employment.
Many of these countries have politicised the few vacancies existing and as we have seen, the output of higher institutions has even exceeded the available job opportunities.
There is no doubt that a lot of revolutions are taking place in the various establishments in order to comply with the needs of the modern economy.
The implication is that these new establishments or sectors of the economy demand for new skills to be able to absorb new entrants.
Many of the job seekers are still finding it difficult to be accommodated because of the new skills demanded which they still lack, thus, further compounding the problems of unemployment.
Various strategies are however being suggested to curb the rising unemployment.
Scholars have started focussing attention on the ways of investing in education in developing countries considering the conflicts among social, economic and political factors.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you must have observed the focus of the discussion which among others centred on why education is already overproducing the real manpower needs for development.
Unfortunately, there is still the problem of educated unemployed; where the educated citizens cannot get jobs.
Is the problem that of the economy or poor planning?
Since the developing nations are still battling for development, there is need for 107manpower planners to re-examine the problem of the nation so as to re- order its priorities.
The government should also embark on strategies that would identify the socio-political and economic needs of the nation and then plan for the education of the citizens towards the acquisition of essential skills needed for the desired development.
There is therefore the need for co-operation (a working relationship) between employers of labour and the education system to identify and produce the needed manpower.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the factors to be considered when projecting for manpower needs 2.
Explain why there should be co-operation between the employers of labour and manpower training institutions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berg, I.
(1970).
Education and Jobs: The Great Training Robbery.
New York: Praeger.
Coombs, P.H.
(1968).
The World Educational Crisis.
London: Oxford University Press.
Harbison, F.H.
(1962).
(cid:8220)Human Resources Development Planning in Modernising Economies(cid:8221).
International Labour Review.
Vol.
85, No.
5, May, 1963.
Pp.
435-438, 440-441, 456-458.
Harbison, F. and Myers, C. (1963).
Human Resources Education and Economic Growth.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Harbison, F.H.
(1967).
Educational Planning and Human Resources Development.
Paris: UNESCO/IIEP.
Harbison, F.H.
(1968).
(cid:8220)A Systems Analysis Approach to Human Resources Development Planning(cid:8221) In: Manpower Aspects of Educational Planning.
Paris: UNESCO.
Pp.
57-58, 59-64.
Harbison, F.H.
(1984).
(cid:8220)Approaches to Human Resource Development(cid:8221) in Meier, G.M.
(Ed), In: Leading Issues in Economic Development (4th Edition).
New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pp.
619- 622.
108Metcalf, J.B. (1970).
(cid:8220)Manpower Utilisation and Allocation(cid:8221) (Text of a lecture delivered at the ECA manpower seminar at the University of Lagos.
August, 1970).
Ojo, F. (1986).
(cid:8220)Nigeria(cid:8217)s Manpower Experience in Folayan Ojo, A. Aderinto and Tayo Fashoyin (eds) Manpower Development and Utilisation in Nigeria: Problems and Policies.
Lagos: University of Lagos Press.
Pp.
1-2.
Phillips, H.M. (1962).
(cid:8220)Economic and Social Aspects of the Planning of Education(cid:8221).
Inter Soc.
Sciences J. Vol.
14, No 4.
Pp 706-718.
Skorov, G. (1964).
(cid:8220)Manpower Approach to Educational Planning(cid:8221) In: Economic and Social Aspects of Educational Planning.
Paris: UNESCO.
109
