 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDT 828 COURSE TITLE: MULTIMEDIA TECHNOLOGY IN TEACHING AND LEARNINGMultimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia COURSE GUIDE EDT 828 MULTIMEDIA TECHNOLOGY IN TEACHING AND LEARNING Course Code EDT 828 Course Title Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Course Developer Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Writers Dr.
I. O. Salawu – NOUN Dr. Ayo Ajelabi – UNILAG Ms Juliet O. Inegbedion – NOUN Course Editor Dr. Ogunmakin Ronke National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-782-9 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria Table of Content Page Introduction ……………………………………………………….
1 iii Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia What you will learn in this course ………………………………… 1 Course Aims ……………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives ………………………………………………… 2 Working through this Course …………………………………….. 2 Course Materials ………………………………………………….. 2 Study Units ……………………………………………………….. 3 References ……………………………………………………….. 3 Assignment File …………………………………………………… 4 Presentation Schedule ……………………………………………... 4 Assessment ……………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor Marked Assignments ……………………………………….. 4 Final Examination and Grading …………………………………… 4 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………….. 5 How to get the most from this course …………………………….. 5-6 Tutor and Tutorials ……………………………………………….. 6-7 Summary ………………………………………………………….. 7 Introduction EDT 828: Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning.
This course is a 2 unit course designed to train the learners on how to produce and utilize multimedia technology in teaching and learning, the concepts, skills and attitudes.
The course is divided into three modules of five units each.
What you will learn in this course You will be taught the Keywords and concepts in multimedia; Multimedia Production and Evaluation of Multimedia.
A good coverage of this would enhance you the adequate competency required to practice multimedia learning and teaching.
Course Aims iv Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia There are fifteen study units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You should read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course include: (i) To introduce you to the words and concepts in multimedia (ii) To familiarize you with the peculiar characteristics multimedia (iii) To expose you to the need for and the demands multimedia in teaching and learning (iv) To prepare you for the production and implementation of multimedia in teaching and learning.
Course Objectives The objectives of this course are: i) To inculcate appropriate multimedia production skills on the learners ii) Educate learners on how to implement multimedia software in teaching and learning.
iii) Educate the learners on how to integrate multimedia iv) Enhance teaching and learning on multimedia techniques.
Working through This Course You have to work through all the study units in the course.
There are three modules and fifteen study units in all.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
CDs 5.
ATutor v Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 6.
Assignments File 6.
Presentation Schedule Study Units The breakdown of the three modules and fifteen study units are as follows: Module 1 Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia Unit 1 Definition of Terms Unit 2 Importance of Multimedia Systems Unit 3 Teachers’ Expectations in the Use of Multimedia Unit 4 Students’ Expectations in the use of Multimedia Unit 5 Multimedia Technology in the Classroom Module 2 Multimedia Production Unit 1 Introduction to Multimedia Production Unit 2 Tools Required in Multimedia Production Unit 3 Production Procedure Unit 4 Multimedia Delivery Unit 5 Problems & Solutions in Multimedia.
Module 3 Evaluation of Multimedia Unit 1 Meaning & Importance of Evaluation Unit 2 Types of Evaluation Unit 3 Issues in Evaluation Unit 4 Developmental Testing or Alpha & Beta Testing Unit 5 Evaluation as Continuous Process of Quality Improvement References and Other Resources vi Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials listed.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme vii Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In addition do the following: • Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
• Organise a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall viii Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
• Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
• Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
• Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
• Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continously available there.
• Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
• Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials ix Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Summary This course would train you on the concept of multimedia, production and utilization of it.
Wish you the best of luck as you read through this course x Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia Course Code EDT 828 Course Title Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Course Developer Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Writers Dr.
I. O. Salawu – NOUN Dr. Ayo Ajelabi – UNILAG Ms Juliet O. Inegbedion – NOUN Course Editor Dr. Ogunmakin Ronke National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Programme Leader Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xi Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-782-9 All Rights Reserved Printed by ………………………………… For National Open University of Nigeria xii Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia Table of Content Page Module 1 Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia Unit 1 Definition of Terms …………………….
1 – 7 Unit 2 Importance of Multimedia Systems …….
8 – 11 Unit 3 Teachers’ Expectations in the Use of Multimedia ……………………………… 12 – 14 Unit 4 Students’ Expectations in the use of Multimedia ……………………………… 15 – 17 Unit 5 Multimedia Technology in the Classroom 18 – 20 Module 2 Multimedia Production Unit 1 Introduction to Multimedia Production ….
21 – 40 Unit 2 Tools Required in Multimedia Production 41 – 50 Unit 3 Production Procedure ………………….. 51 – 60 Unit 4 Multimedia Delivery …………………... 61 – 64 Unit 5 Problems & Solutions in Multimedia ….. 65 – 69 Module 3 Evaluation of Multimedia Unit 1 Meaning & Importance of Evaluation … 70 – 72 Unit 2 Types of Evaluation …………………... 73 – 76 Unit 3 Issues in Evaluation …………………… 77 – 80 Unit 4 Developmental Testing or Alpha & Beta Testing …………………………….
81 – 83 Unit 5 Evaluation as Continuous Process of Quality Improvement ………………….. 84 – 86 xiii NoneMultimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia MODULE 1 KEY WORDS AND CONCEPTS IN MULTIMEDIA INTRODUCTION Multimedia is new in teaching and learning process; which has been interpreted by different people in different ways to mean different things.
Some people see multimedia as just computer based instruction.
It goes beyond this.
The name ‘multi’ in multimedia means ‘many’, this implies that many media are put together to form a single medium of instruction which is facilitated through the use of the computer.
The computer acts as the compiler.
Another word that could be used is ‘integration’ of different media to form a single medium.
This would be discussed in detail later.
In this module you would be introduced to the general concepts of multimedia.
This would be discussed under the following units: Unit 1 Definition of Terms Unit 2 Importance of Multimedia Systems Unit 3 Teachers’ Expectations in the use of Multimedia Unit 4 Students’ Expectations in the use of Multimedia Unit 5 Multimedia Technology in the Classroom UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF TERMS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Multimedia 3.2 Technology 3.3 Teaching 3.4 Learning 3.5 Multimedia Technology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References 1 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 1.0 INTRODUCTION In every discipline, there are specific terms.
The meaning of a word in one discipline may mean a different thing in another discipline for example ‘noise’ in English Language means wave of sound while in communication is means any thing that would interrupt communication, it could be light, object etc.
That is why it is very important to discuss specific terms that may be found important in a particular course or programme.
In this unit you would be introduced to such terms as well as knowing the ‘why’ of multimedia in teaching and learning.
2.0 OBJEVTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Explain the major terms in multimedia • Explain the usefulness of such terms in teaching and learning and the appropriateness of each media.
3.0 Main Content There are different terminologies you might come across in the process of studying this course.
It is therefore necessary that you are introduced to these terms and as well know the reason why multimedia is considered useful in teaching and learning.
The various terminologies are discussed below.
3.1 Multimedia It is important for you to know what is meant by the term ‘multimedia’.
For the purpose of this course, we are going to use the definitions given by CEMCA & COL 2003.
“Multimedia” is a term frequently heard and discussed among educational technologists today.
Unless clearly defined, the term can alternately mean “a judicious mix of various mass media such as print, audio and video” or it may mean the development of computer-based hardware and software packages produced on a mass scale and yet allow individualized use of learning.
In essence, multimedia merges multiple levels of learning into an educational tool that allows for diversity in curricula presentation.
“Multimedia is the exiting combination of computer hardware and software that allows you to integrate video, animation, audio, graphics, and test resources to develop effective presentations on an affordable desktop computer” (Fenrich, 1997).
2 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia “Multimedia is characterized by the presence of text, pictures, sound, animation and video; some or all of which are organized into some coherent program” (Phillips, 1997).
Today’s multimedia is a carefully woven combination of text, graphic art, sound, animation, and video elements.
When you allow an end user, i.e.
the viewer of a multimedia project, to control ‘what’ and ‘when’ and ‘how’ of the elements that are delivered and presented, it becomes interactive multimedia.
As such multimedia can be defined as an integration of multiple media elements (audio, video, graphics, text, animation etc.)
into one synergetic and symbiotic whole that results in more benefits for the end user than any one of the media element can provide individually.
“The term multimedia describes a number of diverse technologies that allow visual and audio media to be combined in new ways for the purpose of communicating.
Applications include entertainment, education and advertising.
Multimedia often refers to computer technologies.
Nearly every PC built today is capable of multimedia because they include a CD-ROM or DVD drive, and a good sound and video card (often built into the motherboard).
But the term multimedia also describes a number of dedicated media appliances, such as digital video recorders (DVRs), interactive television, MP3 players, advanced wireless devices and public video displays”.
(C:\Documents and Settings\user\Desktop\Multimedia Definition - Scala.htm) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: Having read through the definitions given above give your own definition(s) of Multimedia.
Answer: To know if you are on the right part, check for the key words in your definition(s) – audio, video, graphics, text, sound and animation.
You should also have a group discussion among your course mates to share your views.
3 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 3.2 Technology We hear people talk about technology, and sometimes we say it too.
Why is there so much stress on technology today both within and outside educational cycle?
The popularity of it means there is something peculiar with the term.
From the following discussions you may get to understand why the peculiarity.
“The word technology originates in the Greek words technologia (τεχνολογία), techne (τέχνη, which means "craft"), and logia (λογία, which is "saying" or "ordering", in the sense of arranging).” “Technology refers to all tools and procedures.
It is the state of knowledge and development at any given time of our control of our surroundings, and includes all tools (utensils, devices, machinery, inventions, and structures), all methods (skills, processes, and techniques), and all applied materials (both raw and manufactured).
In the most general sense, technology is Man's ability to control Nature.
The term can be applied generally, or to specific areas, such as in "construction technology", "computer technology", and "medical technology".
Technology generally advances over time, as people improve upon or replace the technologies that came before.
The most advanced technology in any specific area is referred to as state of the art technology.” (Wikipedia 2006) Some others see technology as “The technical means people use to improve their surroundings.
It is also knowledge of using tools and machines to do tasks efficiently.” Technology is used for different things.
The knowledge, tools, and systems used by people to make lives easier and better could be referred to as technology.
Through technology, a lot of things are better done, like better production, education, services etc.
3.3 Teaching Teaching is a term that is technically heard everyday.
The term is used both formally and informally.
But here, it would be discussed formally.
Teachers are those who help learners to learn, usually in school.
The teachers need to pass through some processes so as to be able to help the learner learn properly.
These processes which the teacher undergoes are what is referred to as ‘teaching’ that is the process of direction or impartation.
The different methods of teaching are often referred to ‘pedagogy’.
In deciding the method to use the teacher has to consider 4 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia the age, background knowledge, environment, their learning goals etc.
before embarking on a particular teaching method.
There are two basic teaching styles – Learner and Teacher Centred method.
The teacher need to know which of the method that should be used at a time.
This would help the teacher prepare an adequate lesson.
3.4 Learning Let’s look at few definitions of learning.
“Learning is the process of acquiring knowledge or skill through study, experience or teaching.
It is a process that depends on experience and leads to long-term changes in behavior potential.
Behavior potential describes the possible behavior of an individual (not actual behavior) in a given situation in order to achieve a goal”.
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning All learners should have the benefit of sophisticated use of media.
There are different ways learners learn.
Some of such learning styles are: • Active • Reflective • Sensing • Intuitive • Visual • Verbal • Sequential • Global These are the different learning types that are common in education.
It is important for the teacher to study his/her learners to know the type of learning that is common with the learners.
This would help the teacher to prepare an adequate lesson that would meet with the need of the learners and the behavioural objectives set.
You should note that each of the learning methods has its own peculiarity, which calls for specific instruction mode.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: Look through the text you have read and identify: • The similarities between learning and teaching • The differences between learning and teaching Share your views in a group discussion.
5 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 3.5 Multimedia Technology Having known what multimedia and technology are, it is also important we know what Multimedia Technology is.
AT this level the two are now integrated to form a single term.
Multimedia Technology (MMT) supports the use a computer connected to a Multimedia Projector (MMP), this allows large or small images to be projected onto a standard white board.
Multimedia Technology is very useful in the classroom environment.
This would be discussed later.
4.0 CONCLUSION Knowing the terms used in multimedia for teaching and learning would help the teacher to understand the depth of what is required in the course of production and utilization of multimedia.
It is therefore important for you as a teacher of technology to understand all the integrity involved in multimedia for teaching and learning.
5.0 SUMMARY There are various terms that need to be understood in this course, such as multimedia, technology, multimedia technology, teaching and learning.
These terms are linked when it comes to application.
It is therefore worthwhile to understand in depth what each of them meant and at what level they need to integrate failing which it may lead to confused ideas to the learners, therefore the teacher must be very careful when applying these terms in the production and utilization of multimedia for teaching and learning.
And that anything worth learning can be taught to learners in forms that are suitable to their individual requirements.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Define the following terms as used in teaching and learning: • Multimedia • Technology • Teaching • Learning • Multimedia Technology 6 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Usha V. R, Director (2003).
Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (CEMCA), New Delhi.
C:\Documents and Settings\user\Desktop\Technology - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.htm 7 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia UNIT 2 IMPORTANCE MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you have been introduced to the basic terms you would find in this course.
It may also interest you to know the importance of multimedia systems.
In this unit the importance of multimedia in teaching and learning would be explained in details.
Read carefully to note all the points.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Identify the importance of multimedia in teaching and learning • Apply the importance in instruction 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now that you have known the meaning of multimedia, it would also be useful for you to know the importance of multimedia.
The pedagogical strength of multimedia is that it uses the natural information-processing abilities that we already possess as human.
Our eyes and ears, in conjunction with out brain, form a formidable system for transforming meaningless sense data into information.
The old saying that “a picture is worth a thousand words” often understates the case especially with regard to moving images, as our eyes are highly adapted by evolution to detecting and interpreting movement.
For example, a photograph of Ganges in Varanasi, apart from being aesthetically pleasing, can contain a wealth of information relating to the culture, religion, geography, geology, climate, history, and economics of the area.
Similarly, a recording of a politician’s speech can allow us to discern significant semantic features not obvious in a written transcript.
8 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia For the student, one advantage of multimedia courseware over the text- based variety is that the application looks better.
If the courseware includes only a few images at least it gives relief from screens of text and stimulates the eye, even if the images have little pedagogical value.
More often than not, the inclusion of non-textual media into courseware adds pedagogical value to the application.
For example, a piece of courseware describing a dig at an archeological site would be more valuable to the student, if it included images of the site, such as enhanced aerial images showing features like old field boundaries, or diagrams illustrating where the digging and scanning took place.
In this respect, using the text only, even in a creative way, has obvious limitations as compared to the use of both text and pictures.
Despite the importance of Multimedia, it is equally faced with some disadvantages as discussed below.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES • Highlight the advantages of multimedia in the above text.
• Discuss your points in a group with your colleagues.
Practical Disadvantages of Multimedia Multimedia requires high-end computer systems.
Sound, images, animation, and especially video, constitute large amounts of data, which slow down, or may not even fit in a low-end computer.
It involves the culture of transforming technology skills to a simplified manner to enhance learning.
Unlike simple text files created in word processing multimedia packages require good quality computers.
A major disadvantage of writing multimedia courseware is that it may not be accessible to a large section of its intended users if they do not have access to multimedia-capable machines.
For this reason, courseware developers should think very carefully about the type of multimedia elements that need to be incorporated into applications and include only those tat have significant value.
Multimedia has other weaknesses too.
It does not teach you all things.
You must search and use sufficient time to understand its systems or networks.
While proponents of this new technology are very enthusiastic about its potential, they often leave the financial and technical issues unattended.
Development costs in multimedia are very high and the process of developing effective multimedia takes time.
Time spent on SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES developing the multimedia package requires money so that the true cost Question: of an interactive programme mounts with each delay.
• The similarities between learning and teaching • The differences between learning and teaching 9 Share your views in a group discussion.
Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia Further, if the prerequisites for using multimedia include access to computers with related software, the user must possess a minimum level of computer literacy in order to exploit the capabilities of this medium for learning.
And finally, training of the educator who is unfamiliar with the production and design of multimedia courseware or packages can be equally complicating.
The critical question, then, is: How do we overcome some of the identified barriers and begin the process of multimedia implantation alongside the instructor, textbook, and blackboard?
It is the barriers rather than the technologies which we must address before multimedia, or for that matter, any media technology becomes as accepted as the printed text or guidebook.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES • Highlight the disadvantages of multimedia in the above text.
• Discuss your points in a group with your colleagues.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, the teachers should not always consider the advantages without considering the disadvantages.
This is important because the awareness of the disadvantages would enable the teacher to know the exact areas that need to be put under control during production and utilization of multimedia in teaching and learning.
5.0 SUMMARY The usefulness of the composition of multimedia has been found to be very useful.
It gives opportunity to learners to have access to all varieties of teaching styles that appeal to learning.
See 3.4 in Unit 1 Module 1.
With this the learners are able to learn at their own pace and at their own understanding.
It also makes teaching easier for the instructor.
It gives opportunities to the teachers to inculcate ideas unto the learners with minimal difficulties.
Despite its usefulness there are demerits.
The production of multimedia is quite involving, financially and technically.
Some times implementation becomes difficult especially when large crowd is involved, this may be as a result of getting the necessary facilities to facilitate the desired action.
10 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) • State the advantages of multimedia in teaching and learning.
• State the disadvantages of multimedia in teaching and learning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Usha V. R, Director (2003).
Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (CEMCA), New Delhi.
11 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia UNIT 3 TEACHERS’ EXPECTATIONS IN THE USE OF MULTIMEDIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is good you know what is expected of teachers in using multimedia in teaching and learning.
This would help to clear the uncertainty that is held unto by some people.
The content would explain the role the teacher has to play in multimedia production and utilization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you will be able to: • Identify the role of the teacher in multimedia production and utilization.
• Explain vividly expectations of the teacher in production and utilization of multimedia in teaching and learning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Some people feel that the use of multimedia in teaching may render the teacher jobless.
This concept is contrary to the true concept of multimedia in teaching.
Multimedia has a lot of benefit to the teacher.
It enhances the job of the teacher.
At the end of the following discussion, you will know more about the relationship between multimedia and the teacher; and then know if multimedia should be encouraged in teaching or not.
• Allows Creativity.
One important benefit of multimedia to the teacher is that it gives opportunity to the teacher to become creative.
Every good teacher would always look for the best way to impart knowledge on the learner.
In the process of doing this, he/she has to 12 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia look for the best method the lesson can be achieved which may then call for integration of different media.
• Saves Time.
Since the learners would be able to have access to the lesson without the physical presence of the teacher, it then means the teacher would spend the time he/she would have used for face-to-face teaching to do more research to enhance the present knowledge.
This invariably gives more time to the teacher for more challenging topics.
• Learners Contact Time is Increased.
Learners have more time to spend on discussion because they have the opportunity of learning at their own pace and time.
They are not subdued to the compulsory attention needed at the face-to-face method of teaching and learning, because they are not subdued they therefore learn with a more relax mind and this gives opportunity to the teacher to introduce to the learners everything he/she wishes to teach without being time constrained which normally leads to course work not completed at the end of a term or session.
• Ineffective Learning Activities Are Replaced.
Since the student nor the teacher does not have opportunity of given irrelevance in between lesson like you may find in face-to-face teaching, it then becomes imperative for the teacher to direct his/her teaching effectively and qualitatively with a minimal irrelevant activities if any.
In addition to the above, teachers do not need to be programmers before they can design a multimedia package.
There are different types of elements which have been prepared for this purpose like ‘Micromedia Flash’.
All that is required of the teacher is to learn how to use the tools to accomplish his/her teaching.
Teachers should know when and how media should be selected and the appropriate time for integration if need be.
Teachers should know how to use multimedia to achieve their behavioral objective be it commercially produced or self made software.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: From the text, list the expectations of teachers in multimedia.
Answer: Share your answers in a group discussion.
13 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 4.0 CONCLUSION The role of the teacher in the use of multimedia in teaching and learning is very vital and broad in scope.
They are the major determinant of the success of implementation.
Some times they could be skipped at the production level by giving their functions to those who are not in the field.
This happens in most commercial productions which usually hamper the final product.
But one thing is spectacular, whether it is commercially produced or not, they serve as the final implementers.
They are to decide what should be used and what should be presented before the learners being it learner or teacher centred.
5.0 SUMMARY The use of multimedia is very important to teachers in different ways which allows creativity, saves time, learners contact time is increased and ineffective learning activities are replaced.
These make the use of multimedia by teachers more appreciable.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Critically examine the importance of multimedia to the teacher in teaching and learning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Usha V. R, Director (2003).
Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (CEMCA), New Delhi.
14 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia UNIT 4 STUDENTS’ EXPECTATION IN THE USE OF MULTIMEDIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION Just as there are teachers’ expectation in the use of multimedia in teaching and learning, so also there are students’ expectations.
This unit would expose you to such expectations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you will be able to: • Analyse the expectations of students in the use of multimedia in teaching and learning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Before using multimedia in learning, one may want to know its usefulness.
Question like ‘why’ and ‘how’ may arise.
You want to know why multimedia should be used in learning.
Does it have advantage over the traditional method?
And if the conviction is made of why it should be used; then how would it be used?
Answers to these questions are best got from learners’ response; which is derived from the benefits gained by the learners.
Benefits to Learners • The use of multimedia gives opportunity to learners to learn at their own pace.
This means that learners are able to learn according to their learning abilities, in terms of time and rate of assimilation.
Different learners have different best time for learning, in the same way different levels of assimilation, where we talk about fast and slow learners.
In the previous discussion we talk about learning styles 15 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia and it is known that in a group of learners they would not all have same learning style.
This calls for differentiation, which is a problem that is difficult to solve with the use of face-to-face method.
With the use of multimedia, these differences are taken care of.
• With the use of multimedia in learning, learners are delivered from the hands of impatient teachers as well as vacuum created where there is frequent exit of teachers.
Once the software is well packaged, the student may not need the physical presence of the teacher to understand what is to be taught.
• Learners have the opportunity of pursuing learning actively and receiving the desired feedback.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: From the text, list the expectations of learners in multimedia.
Answer: Share your answers in a group discussion.
4.0 CONCLUSION The learners are usually the major focus in the production process of multimedia.
They are the determinants of what should be produced this make them to have full benefit of the software.
This opportunity allows learners to enjoy full freedom of study without studying under forceful environment and time.
5.0 SUMMARY The use of multimedia is quite beneficial to learners.
They are able to learn at their own pace, takes care of learners differences, learn as desired, and pursue learning activities.
These benefits help to enhance academic performance of learners.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Examine the role of learners in multimedia for teaching and learning.
16 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Usha V. R, Director (2003).
Commonwealth Educational Media Centre or Asia (CEMCA), New Delhi.
17 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia UNIT 5 MULTIMEDIA TECHNOLOGY IN THE CLASSROOM CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION Haven known the teachers and learners expectations of multimedia; it is important to discuss the utilization of it in the class room.
With this you will be able to expatiate on why the need of multimedia in the classroom.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Identify a multimedia class room • Explain in details, the importance of multimedia classroom 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Why is Multimedia Technology used in the classroom?
When a computer is connected to a multimedia projector, it: • gives opportunity for whole class delivery of information • allows equality access of information • enables the use of multimedia files to enhance understanding of ideas and concepts such as text, pictures, animations, graphs, sound and video files.
• supports a high level of interactive lesson with supportive lesson materials.
• enhance the delivery of differentiated learning opportunities through the extended activities.
In addition to knowing why Multimedia Technology is used in the classroom; it is also important that you know How Multimedia Technology can be used in the Classroom.
18 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia There are different ways Multimedia Technology can be used in the classroom; it all depends on the learning intention or behavioural objectives of the lesson.
It is the class teacher that need to decide how best to support the lesson.
Supportive media are available in the form of text, ‘files’, held on CDs, the Internet and floppy disk.
The use of any of these depends on the class requirement.
Whereby the teacher is using commercially produced software, he/she may choose to use the learners own work to support the learning intention.
In order to allow the class teacher to deliver an interactive lesson, the chosen media need to be in a format that will allow it to be adapted or customized by the class teacher, that is to say that the prepared lesson material runs in a parallel with the media being displayed.
The following shows the various ways in which files could be selected: • Text files – this could be in form of explanations, descriptions, opinions, reports, instructional, fictional etc.
They could also be used to support other lessons in the classroom.
• Sound files – these are pre-recorded sound snippets; which could be in the form of speeches, songs, teaching especially in languages etc.
• Animation files – these types of files are very good for illustrations.
They could be in the form of moving pictures with text and sometimes with sound.
• Pictures/Maps/Charts and Video files – these could be used purely for illustrative purpose or to support the daily learning objectives.
• File Integration – sometimes files could be integrated to enhanced teaching and learning.
This means two or more files could be used at the same time.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: List the importance of Multimedia.
Answer: Share your answers in a group discussion.
19 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Keywords & Concepts in Multimedia 4.0 CONCLUSION In using these files, the teacher needs to have a very good grasp of each as well as the course content.
This would enhance appropriate integration of both the topic and the media to be used.
Also the teacher should not loose sight of the learners’ needs and expectations.
5.0 SUMMARY There are different ways of using multimedia technology in the classroom.
It could be through the integration of two or more of text files, sound files, animation files pictures/maps/charts and video files.
One important thing is that teacher must know when and how to use each of this.
A poor usage could lead to distorted or haphazard instruction.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Explain the procedure you would take in setting a multimedia classroom.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dorin, H., Demmin, P. E., Gabel, D. (1990).
Chemistry: The study of matter.
(3rd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc. Good, T. L., Brophy, J. E. (1990).
Educational psychology: A realistic approach.
(4th ed.).
White Plains, NY: Longman.
Mergel, B.
(1998).
Instructional Design & Learning Theory.
(On-line).
Available: http://www.learningtheoriesofinstructional design.htm Saettler, P. (1990).
The evolution of American educational technology.
Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc. 20 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production MODULE 2 MULTIMEDIA PRODUCTION INTRODUCTION This module would teach you the procedure required in the production of multimedia in teaching and learning.
It is important that you study each unit carefully so as to attain the desired knowledge.
Before you go on to the production process, it is important you reflect your mind to the definitions once more – “Multimedia is the exciting combination of computer hardware and software that allow you to integrate video, animation, audio, graphics, and test resources to develop effective presentations on an affordable desktop computer” (Frenrich, 1997).
It enable the learner to participate skillfully in the production process, and generating a dependable product of acceptability and quality.
“Multimedia is characterized by the presence of text, pictures, sound, animation and video; some or all of which are organized into some coherent program” (Phillips, 1997) The module is grouped into five units as follows: Unit 1 Introduction to Multimedia Production Unit 2 Tools Required in Multimedia Production Unit 3 Production Procedure Unit 4 Multimedia Delivery Unit 5 Problems and Solutions in Multimedia UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION TO MULTIMEDIA PRODUCTION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Multimedia Content 3.1.1 The Lesson Topic 3.1.2 Behavioural Objectives 3.1.3 The Audience 21 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 3.1.4 Resources 3.1.5 Cost 3.1.6 Theories and Models 3.2 The Script 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Fallow Land A man clearing the bush for planting Preparing ridges cassava farm 22  for cassava Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Cassava roots before (A) and after peeling (B) A heap of dried peels from the cassava root discarded in the bush Peeled roots are grated in mechanical arrangements The mash resulting from the grated roots are squeezed free of liquor in a press.
To eliminate the nuisance the liquor is led by a pipe (arrow) into a 23 pit Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production The final Product ‘Garri’ sold in the market What can you observe from the pictures above?
If you look closely you may observe that a process is represented, which is that of the production of garri.
‘Garri’ is one of the stable foods in Nigeria, but before the final product is brought to the market it needs to pass through a process.
Before embarking on a process, the final consumers are considered because they stand to accept or reject the product.
Therefore, they stand as the major focus of the producers.
This brings about competition among the producers considering consumers’ taste which may be in terms of the colour, taste, texture, and neatness in garri production.
Each producer of garri would therefore consider this criterion and then select the best resources and mechanism that would help to achieve the consumers demand.
Brainstorming: Brainstorm on any process of production around you.
Take cognizance of the stages attained before the final product is realised.
Were you able to come up with a process?
Good, you did try.
Now write down all that were involved in the process before the attainment of the final product.
Now that you have been able to do this, have you be involved in any process of production?
If yes, what was your role.
In every production there is a process that must be attained.
This brings us to the Production Process in Multimedia.
Remember in the garri 24 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production production, the producers were conscious of the final consumers, so it is in the production of multimedia.
Going by the early history of instructional design, Aristotle, Socrates and Plato were the first scholars known to have contributed in cognitive basis of learning and memory.
In 13 century Thomas Aquinas, a great th philosopher has his own contribution to design.
He sees the perception of teaching in terms of free will.
400 years later, John Locke emphasized that knowledge could come from experience, in line with Aristotle’s notion.
In 20 century, anther philosopher – John Dewey present his th tenets – that learning occurs best when married with doing rather than rote regurgitation of facts.
This short history makes us to know that design and production of instructional materials is not a new idea but an idea that has been on for several years.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: (cid:1) Identify multimedia content (cid:1) Write a simple multimedia script 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Multimedia Content To produce a good multimedia for teaching and learning, there are certain things that must be put into consideration failing which a good result might not be attained.
These include the lesson topic, behavioural objectives, audience, resources, theories and models.
3.1.1.
The Lesson Topic The first thing that needs to be considered in the production of multimedia for teaching and learning is the topic.
What do you want to teach?
What knowledge do you want to pass on to the learners?
How would you pass on the knowledge?
These are questions that must be answered before embarking on production process.
The topic may have been a structured topic i.e.
selected from the school scheme of work for the term or semester.
In this case you are not to decide the topic.
However, there are few instances where you have to decide the topic.
In this instance, you need to consider the need of the learner and the environment where he/she lives.
25 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production The topic also includes the depth of what the teacher wants to teach i.e.
the desired knowledge to be learnt in the topic.
The topic acts as a guide for the producer.
3.1.2 Behavioural Objectives What do you want the learners to achieve at the end of the lesson?
In this unit there are stated behavioural objectives.
See stated objectives above in 2.0.
What behaviour do you expect from the learners after they have been exposed to the new knowledge?
Behavioural objectives state learning objectives in “specified, quantifiable, terminal behaviours” (Saettler 1990).
Successful learning is always demonstrable by programme of some observable indicator behaviour which may begin as low-level cognitive learning such as knowledge, re-call of information, ideas and concepts – leading to intermediate and High level learning.
For example: At the end of this unit the student will be able to name correctly 90% of the basic theories of learning.
• A – Audience – the student • B – Behaviour – name correctly • C – Condition – at the end of the unit • D – Degree – 90% correct To develop behavioural objectives a learning task must be broken down into smaller components through analysis into specific measurable tasks.
The learning success may be measured by tests developed to measure each objective.
The advent of behavioural objectives can be traced back to the Elder Sophists of ancient Greece, Cicero, Herbart and Spencer, but Franklin Bobbitt developed the modern concept of behavioural objectives in the early 1900s (Saettler 1990 in Mergel 1998).
The behavioural objectives are stated to elicit a desired behaviour from the topic in question.
Well stated behavioural objectives give further guide to the producer.
The producer at each stage in the production process would always ask the questions ‘Would the learner achieve the desired behaviour through this process?
what method would make the learners attain the desired behaviour?’.
The producer considers the set objectives each time a new idea is to be incorporated into the process of production.
Further to this, let’s look at the Taxonomy of Learning Objectives.
26 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Taxonomic Analysis of Learning Behaviours • Bloom’s Taxonomy of Learning – in 1956 Bloom and his colleagues began the development of a taxonomy in the cognitive, attitudinal (affective) and psychomotor domains.
Many people are familiar with Bloom’s Cognitive taxonomy: - knowledge - comprehension - application - analysis - synthesis - evaluation • Gagne’s Taxonomy of Learning – Robert Gagne developed his taxonomy of learning in 1972.
Gagne’s taxonomy was comprised of five categories: - verbal information - intellectual skill - cognitive strategy - attitude - motor skill • Gagne’s and Brigg’s Model - Action - Object - Situation - Tools and Constraints - Capability to be Learned By the late 1960’s most teachers were writing and using behavioural objectives.
There were, of course, people who questioned the breaking down of subject material into small parts, believing that it would lead away from an understanding of the “whole” (Saettler 1990 in Mergel 1998).
A well stated behavioural objective would serve as a guide through out the process of designing an instruction.
3.1.3 The Audience In teaching and learning the audience are usually the learners.
It should be noted that the learners are not of the same age and academic abilities.
27 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production A topic for example ‘Parts of Speech’ may be taught to different grade of students.
It does not mean that because it is the same topic then it must be taught the same way to the learners in spite of their age and academic differences.
The knowledge has to be passed on in such a way to meet with the learners’ age and abilities.
Pictures of different age group of learners The pictures above show learners in different age group.
One may want to know which is most important in production, is it the biological age or the level of academic attainment.
Both are important.
Findings attained from great researchers show that learning goes with age.
Certain age groups have certain level of intelligent quotient that is why in teaching and learning the rule of ‘moving from simple to complex’ is encouraged.
That does not mean there are no exceptions.
There are learners whose biological ages are 16 years but reason and behave like 4 or 5 year old child.
Another criterion to be considered is the learners’ previous knowledge.
What has the learner learnt to do in relation to the new knowledge to be learnt?
This goes with the rule of moving from the known to the unknown which makes learning much easier.
Another question of thought is ‘how to relate the previous knowledge to the new knowledge?’ Create a link of the previous and the new knowledge during production.
This would make the new knowledge more meaningful to the learner.
It may also interest us to know that that the criteria are not limited to only the age and previous knowledge but, inclusive of: • Health • Environment • Culture • Religion • Language • The Law • Economy 28 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Each of this has its role to play in the production of multimedia.
3.1.4 Resources This includes both personnel and material resources required in the production of multimedia in teaching and learning.
Examples of such resources are – programmers, video editors, digital cameras, scanners etc.
The producer needs to ensure that he has the required personnel and material resources in the production in line with the stated objectives.
Where a lack is noticed, an alternative could be made.
The producer needs to identify the actual competency required from the personnel and define the level of commencement and termination of a task.
A lack in the appropriate resources could lead to poor production.
Where the producer is not the script writer, the knowledge of an expert in the field of study is required to ensure the content required for the course.
3.1.5 Theories and Models A good production must have a guide from basic theories and models.
It is therefore important for us to know what theories and models are as well as their implications for Instructional Design.
• What is theory?
- A theory provides a general explanation for observations made over time.
- A theory explains and predicts behaviour.
- A theory can never be established beyond all doubt.
- A theory may be modified.
- Theories seldom have to be thrown out completely if thoroughly tested but sometimes a theory may be widely accepted for a long time and later disproved.
(Dorin, Demmin & Gabel, 1990) • What is a model?
- A model is a mental picture that helps us understand something we cannot see or experience directly.
(Dorin, Demmin & Gabel, 1990) A theory provides a general explanation for observations and explains the behaviour whereas a model is a mental picture that helps us to understand something that we cannot see or experience directly (Dorin, Demmin and Gabel, 1990).
29 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Reigeluth (1999) states four major characteristics that all instruction design theories have in common.
These are: • Design orientation, • Identification of methods of instruction and situations, • Methods of instruction that can be broken into more detailed component methods, and • Choice of probabilistic Methods, • Methods that best facilitate learning under different situations, • Learning tool features that best allow an array of alternative methods to be made available to learners, • System features that best allow an instructional design team to design quality learning tools.
(Adopted from COL 2003) Here are some of the theories which are commonly used in instructional design: Behaviourists – believes a change in behaviour as the outcome of learning.
Their principle of reinforcement, retention and transfer of learning are important in instructional design.
Another area of importance is the behavioural objectives which allow the learners to know specifically when they have achieved their objective.
In this way they are able to monitor their progress.
Cognitive psychologists – sees learning as an internal process that cannot be observed directly.
They emphasize memory in connection on how the human mind works.
The implication of this design on instructional design is that it encourages the use of different techniques for storing and retrieving information as well as practice exercises in self-learning material.
Constructivists – believes in an open ended learning experience.
In this instance methods and results of learning are not easily measured and are different for each learner.
Constructivists implication on instructional design is that the learners should attach themselves to the content domains also they believe that learning occurs when it is situated, contextual, problem based, social and authentic.
In conclusion: • Behavioural approach can effectively facilitate mastery of the content, • Cognitive strategies are useful in teaching problem solving tactics, and 30 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production • Constructivist strategies are suited for dealing with ill defined problems.
(COL 2003) (COL 2003) Models of Instructional Design 31 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production (COL 2006) 3.2 The Script Before discussing script writing, it is important you know what is required in Instructional Design for Multimedia.
This is shown in the table below: 32 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production (COL 2003) What is a script?
Who is to write the script?
To get the answers to the above questions read the following carefully.
The passage is adopted from the Commonwealth of Learning (2003) The script – sometimes also called a storyboard – is the basic building block of multimedia courseware development.
The storyboard is a sequence of simply drawn pictures that visually depict a programme.
In preparing interactive multimedia, normally the script is a storyboard.
At such, both the terms – script and storyboard – are used interchangeably, though they have their differences.
The differences being that a script can also be written without visuals at all, whereas a storyboard is always a visually illustrated script.
In this section we will describe a process for developing visual scripts or storyboard for multimedia.
The script in practice becomes the blueprint for action.
We present to you in this section a simple method for representing hypermedia-based information in 2-dimensional format.
33 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Visual Thinking Preparation for a multimedia script is a process of visual thinking or visualization.
The dictum is – “Think Visually”.
In order to think visually, you need to create an overall conceptual design of the programme that you are planning to make.
Creation of mind maps of the content area is a good first step.
However, the words in the mind map must synchronize graphically.
When you have an idea, consider relating it to some graphics and see how the idea can be represented graphically.
The process of visualization is basically section, creation, and editing of images into a meaningful sequence.
In reality it takes a lot of practice to “see” the programmes to be developed successfully.
Scriptwriting Process The scriptwriting process has the following stages: v) Programme idea: The programme idea needs to be discussed vis-à-vis the strength of multimedia.
You must ask at this stage: why is it necessary to have a multimedia programme for this particular idea?
ii) Programme brief: At this stage, the programme ides needs to be expanded to include the title, target audience, objectives of the programme, content outline, etc.
A rationale for the multimedia programme and project beneficiaries is useful, if included in the programme brief.
iii) Research: Planning and carrying out a thorough research on the topic of the programme idea and the target audience will be useful in designing the multimedia.
Identifying relevant graphics content and experts on the programme will be useful to consult and select appropriate content.
iv) Identify and select content elements: Having done the research, it is appropriate to develop the best way or a sequence to deliver the message.
Though multimedia provides the user with a hypermedia navigation opportunity, it is important to have a ‘default’ sequence.
The content elements can be visualized in terms of text, audio, video, graphics animation, etc.
v) Interface design and layout: The interface design is one of the most creative stages of scripting for multimedia.
Here, the look and feel of the programme needs to be decided.
While deciding 34 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production on this, it is important to keep in mind the target audience’s choice and the nature of the topic.
There can be so many ways of designing the interface depending on the creativity of the designer.
However, it is essential to decide on one layout design in the beginning and stick to that for uniformity and also for the reason that the learners will not appreciate a different layout for all different screens of the multimedia programme.
vi) Preparing the storyboard: The storyboard is a detailed shot-by- shot or screen-by-screen description of the programme on a sheet of paper or card.
The storyboard forces the scriptwriter to think in terms of multiple media use in a multimedia programme.
It is also a blueprint for action that can be given to a multimedia designer to execute as depicted in the storyboard.
It allows working of different groups of people in the same project developing different components of it with similar design and compatibility.
We will now present to you a systematic approach to prepare storyboard for multimedia.
Though we recommended the systematic approach suggested in this section, it is important to say here that it is one of the many way of preparing multimedia storyboard, and therefore, we would not like to be very prescriptive.
Examples of Layout Designs 35 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 36 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 37 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 38 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Questions: 1.
State the tenet of a good behavioural objective.
2.
State the basic theories in learning.
3.
State in a sentence each, the view of each theory.
Answers: .
1.
A good behavioural objective must be stated in specific, quantifiable, and terminal behaviours.
2.
The main basic theories in learning are: • Behaviourism traced back to Aristotle, Pavlov, Thorndike, Watson and Skinner.
• Cognitivism is associated with Edward Tolman • Constructivism is associated with Bartlett as the pioneer of this approach.
3.
Behaviourism focuses on a new behavioural pattern being repeated until it becomes automatic.
With Cognitivism, changes in behaviour are observed and used as indicators as to what is happening inside the learner’s mind.
Constructivism focuses on preparing the learner to problem solve in ambiguous situations.
4.0 CONCLUSION A good multimedia production would have a basic of a good content which leads to the writing of a good script.
It is therefore important that a multimedia producer considers the in-depth of the course content before final production, failing which an amateur type of production may be arrived at.
5.0 SUMMARY In multimedia production process, the content and the script are the first to be considered so as to achieve a meaningful production.
The content contains the topic, behavioural objectives, audience, resources and the theories/models.
The practical application of theories and models are 39 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production suggested.
It should be noted that there is no one best theory for production, rather the theory or theories used is determined by the type of knowledge that is to be passed on to the learners.
Therefore one or more theories could be applicable.
A good organisation of the content leads to script writing, which is written by the subject teacher or someone who is an authority in the discipline.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Choose a topic and develop a good content for multimedia production.
2.
Write a simple script on the above.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1 Dorin, H., Demmin, P. E., Gabel, D. (1990).
Chemistry: The study of matter.
(3 ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc. rd Good, T. L., Brophy, J. E. (1990).
Educational psychology: A realistic approach.
(4th ed.).
White Plains, NY: Longman.
Mergel, B.
(1998).
Instructional Design & Learning Theory.
(On-line).
Available: http://www.learningtheoriesofinstructional design.htm Saettler, P. (1990).
The evolution of American educational technology.
Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc. 40 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production UNIT 2 TOOLS REQUIRED IN MULTIMEDIA PRODUCTION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Like in the ‘garri’ production illustrated above, certain tools like cutlass, hoe, digger etc were used by the producer in the process of production before the final product was achieved.
It is important to know the right tools required in a particular production process if the desired end product is to be attained.
A default in the tools used may lead to a change in the desired end product therefore ensure that the tools selected are the right tools needed to attain the set behavioural objectives.
This is also applicable in multimedia production.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Identify the tools required in multimedia production.
• Explain the important of each tool in production process 3.0 MAIN BODY In multimedia production, the tools required are usually of two types – human and equipment often times they are referred to as a project team.
A multimedia project team consists of a number of people; each specialises in different areas within the multimedia industry.
This shows that a good multimedia production can not be accomplished by just one person.
41 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Human Clients/Subject Matter Exerts (SMEs): • participate in the content and needs analysis phases; • develop content; • assist in the design of the overall project; • participate in the final testing procedure.
The Project Manager: • liases with clients; • prepares agreements, sign-offs and timeliness; • manages project teams; • keeps projects on time and on budget; • keeps track of all project documentation; • manages the external testing procedures if required; and • manages the replication process.
Production Manager: • develops, documents and implements effective production processes; • manages and/or undertakes significant internal projects, as identified by the Head, TEDI, ER; and • supervises specific production staff.
The production team can also include: • a video production unit (external); • a video digitising unit (external); • a sound production unit (external); 42 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production • voice or video talent (external); • data entry staff (internal or external, dependent upon needs); and/or a • software testing house (external).
Instructional Designers: • scope and quote on projects; • provide advice on the educational aspects of the project; • ensure that the final design and final project are educationally sound; • work closely with the project team, including the client, throughout the design and development phases; • provide content advice and ensure that the content provided by the client is formatted in a way that is useful to the project team; • prepare all project documentation (with the exception of timelines, agreements and signoffs which are the responsibility of the project manager, and technical and graphic design specs, which are done in close combination with other members of the project team); • carry out internal testing; • write the help files/inserts/instructions for users; and • assist with the evaluation processes.
Graphic Designers: • scope and quote on projects; • design and develop the major interface artwork; • design and develop global interface items (e.g.
buttons, scrollbars, dialogue boxes); • design and develop additional interface items (e.g.
notepad, glossary, file folder, library book, title screen, credits screens, help screens etc.
); and 43 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production • prepare graphic design specifications documentation in conjunction with the instructional designer.
• Prepare CD-face artwork, insert artwork (the booklet in the front of a CD case) and inlay artwork (at the bottom of a CD case); • scan and optimise images; • create content illustrations, diagrams and figures; and • create animations (3-D or 2-D, complex or simple).
• carry out internal testing and graphics Programmer/Software Developers: • scope and quote on projects; • do program analysis and design; • select, adapt and design algorithms; • design databases and data structures; • design databases and data structures; • design fine-grained interface layout and behaviour; and • prepare technical specifications; • program (using Lingo, Visual Basic, C++, Ms Access, CGI, ASP, etc.
); • author (using Lingo, Visual Basic, C++, MS Access, CGI, ASP, etc.
); • document code; • incorporate all interface graphics; • incorporate all content (including diagrams, animations, text, video, sound, images, etc.
); do incremental testing of code modules; and • burn gold master CDs.
• Carry out internal testing, debugging and editing.
Elements Developers: 44 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Elements such as WebCT and ATutor.
There are about 150 such elements which give opportunity to multimedia users to upload their Instruction into the Web.
Which ever one that is used, the following are important.
• quote on a project; • develop the HTML components; • implement and configure WebCT tools; • customise the interface; • carry out internal testing; and • support clients via the WebCT Help Desk.
Prepared by Lara J. Ross TEDI, 1999 It may also interest you to know that it is not all the time you need an Element Designer.
Some are free such as the ATutor.
All that is required in this instance is to be taught how to upload your instructional material into the ATutor.
Where does the teacher come in?
The teacher is the Instructional Designer.
He oversees every other aspect in the production process to ensure that the desired educational goal is attained.
The teacher as the instructional designer features in all the process of production.
He acts as a bridge between the team workers and the client (learners).
It is important that the teacher is familiar with at least one Element, he/she does not need to be the producer but a user.
It should be noted that most times Educational Multimedia Production is usually meant for mass education and therefore involves the entire human resources mentioned above.
Sometimes, they may not all be involved if the production is meant for a small group.
For example there may be no need for a programmer or a Element designer if all that is required is to give a straight teaching to the learners using CD-ROM or to use already existing Element.
Note: The functions of each team is stated underneath each sub-heading 45 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Equipment For Multimedia Development The major equipments used are grouped into Hardware and Software.
From previous discussions you were told that the computer – hardware combines sound, images and motion together for multimedia purpose.
Let us look at the different distinctions – Hardware Software Yourself Computer Tools for developing Conceptual Multimedia understanding and skills Concentration will be on Microsoft windows platform.
There are other platforms, such as Apple Macintosh, Silicon Graphics, Sun Microsystems and Mainframes.
Anther important aspect of multimedia production is the Operating System.
An operating system is the program that is responsible to manage all other programs in a computer e.g.
Linux and Windows 2000, while example of an application program is Ms-Word.
Examples of hardware and software are shown below: Hardware 1.
System devices 2.
Memory and Storage devices 3.
Input devices 4.
Output devices 5.
Communication devices System Devices • Microprocessor • Motherboard and memory Memory and Storage Devices 46 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production • Hard disk • Floppy disk Input Devices • Keyboard • Mouse • Microphone • A digital camera (for still and motion pictures) Output Devices • Printer • Amplifier (today, speakers have inbuilt amplifiers) Communication Devices A modem modulates digital signals going out from a computer or other digital device to analog signals for telephone line and demodulates the analog signal to convert it to a digital signal to be inputted in a computer.
In addition, the following are also part of hardware to be considered: • Video capture (need a video capture card).
For example for a full motion video, the card must be capable of capturing about 35 frames per second.
• Sound Card e.g.
creative Lab’s Sound Blaster is a standard sound card.
Multimedia Design Software • Painting and Drawing Tools – e.g.
Corel Draw • 3 – D Modeling and Animation tools – e.g.
3D studio Max, is applicable in web pages, designing adverts, making cartoons films and in creating multimedia based instructions • Image Editing tools – e.g.
Adobe Photoshop and paint shop • Sound Editing Tools – e.g.
Cool Edit (with this you can cut, copy and paste).
It can also be used to record your own music, voice or any other audio.
Sound Forge is another professional quality sound editing tool.
47 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production • Animation Video and Digital Movie Tools e.g.
Adobe Premiere and media shop pro.
It can edit video and multimedia movies in AVI as well as MPEG format.
Media studio pro also gives you the most complete set of advanced video editing.
For creating animations Macromedia Flash is the industry standard.
A file created in Flash is called a movie.
A movie in flash occupies very less file size that is why is very popular for web.
Multimedia authoring tools are which organize and edit your multimedia project.
They are used to design the user interface for presenting the project to the learner i.e.
used to assemble various elements to make a single presentation.
The major type of authoring tools are: 1.
Page based tools e.g.
Visual Basic, Tool book 2.
Icon based authoring tools e.g.
Author ware 3.
Time based authoring tools e.g.
Macromedia Director 4.
Object Oriented tools e.g.
media forge In choosing software for multimedia purpose, consider: • Usability • Animations • Smoothness and • Integration These should be considered in line with the topic and objectives set.
48 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Questions: 1.
Name the different types of human resources required in the production of multimedia.
2.
List the various types of equipment required in multimedia production.
Answers 1.
- Client/Subject matter experts - Project Managers - Production Managers - Instructional Designers - Graphic Designers - Programmer/Software Developers - WebCT Developers 2.
- personal computer; - scanner; - video camera; - digital camera; - server - multimedia projector; - authoring tools e.g.
macromedia flash.
Etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION Educational multimedia production could either be specific or general.
It is specific when it is meant for a certain group of persons and general when it is meant for mass education.
When it is general, all the tools listed above need to be involved in the production process but when it is specific, it may not be necessary to use all the tools rather the selection of the tools would be suggested by the targeted audience and the content.
5.0 SUMMARY Educational multimedia tools are grouped into human and non-human.
The human comprises the clients/subject matter experts, project manager, production manager, instructional designers, graphic designers, programmer/software developers and WebCT developers.
They all 49 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production perform different functions in the course of development.
The non- human is the equipments required for production.
They are – personal computer, scanner, video camera, digital camera, multimedia projector, authoring tools etc.
It is not compulsory that they must all be used in every production.
The audience and the content determines what tool to use.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
What is the role of a teacher in multimedia production?
2.
Carefully explain the relationship of Client/Subject Matter Experts and Instructional Designers.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lara J. Ross (1999), Teaching and Educational Development Institute.
The University of Queensland.
UNIT 3 PRODUCTION PROCEDURE 50 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Like we saw in unit one in the production of garri, there are specific procedures in the production cycle of every product in which multimedia production is not different.
This unit would therefore take us through the various stages of multimedia production cycle.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Explain the various stages in the production of multimedia.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Multimedia technology is becoming increasingly popular in the field of education.
Interactive multimedia courseware in particular, developed on a CD is adding a new and interesting dimension to both teaching and learning.
This new approach can effectively complement the conventional methods of learning and teaching.
The multi-sensory input of this media provide possibilities for higher performance ratings and higher retention.
With effective feedback, this method makes learning and teaching more meaningful.
Students with different learning abilities can work at their own place, time and pace; and with interactivity and self-assessment it can make learning a highly personalized, independent and a rewarding experience.
The learner can also set her/his own “view” of the information available to him/her.
A significant aspect of multimedia in education is related to authoring or developing multimedia.
Multimedia authoring as a form of computing has made it possible for students and teachers to construct knowledge and discover worlds which do not exist in conventional methods of learning or teaching.
Above all, the new experience has defined a new concept for edutainment – a combination of education and entertainment.
51 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production In this section, we will discuss some aspects of the ‘how’ of developing the multimedia, especially the components of multimedia, and the good practices in preparing text, graphics, audio, video, graphics, etc.
for including in a multimedia programme.
52 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 53 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 54 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 55 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production The compelling, immediate problem in graphic production is to locate a source of visual imaging or to create one.
56 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 57 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 58 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Share yourselves into a group of five each.
Get a multimedia product, using the text above, critique the product and discuss your points.
4.0 CONCLUSION Multimedia production process has its own procedure though some times there might be variations, which may not be totally different from the above but rather has some additions or little skipping.
59 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 5.0 SUMMARY In multimedia production, there are basic interest which include text, audio, sound and animation.
Each of these requires editing which demands proficiency.
This then means in multimedia production, qualified personnel must be used if one is to achieve the desired result.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Itemise the functions of graphics in multimedia.
2.
State the work of editors in multimedia production.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1 Dorin, H., Demmin, P. E., Gabel, D. (1990).
Chemistry: The study of matter.
(3rd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc. Good, T. L., Brophy, J. E. (1990).
Educational psychology: A realistic approach.
(4th ed.).
White Plains, NY: Longman.
60 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production UNIT 4 MULTIMEDIA DELIVERY CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Now you have known how multimedia products are produced for teaching and learning.
It is important that you also know that multimedia in teaching and learning does not stop at the production level, but has to get to the final consumers who are the learners.
Not until it gets to the learners and well utilised it cannot be said that such product has meant its need or target.
This makes delivery mode imperative.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Select an appropriate multimedia delivery mode • Create a good multimedia delivery mode 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 61 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 62 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production (Adopted from Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia.
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher-Developers 2003) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
List the different delivery mode used in multimedia 2.
State the advantages of a good delivery mode Answers: Form a group of five persons and discuss your answers using the text.
.
63 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 4.0 CONCLUSION To choose an adequate delivery mode, there are certain criteria to be considered.
Such criteria as the social and physical constraints of the learners; availability of the necessary equipment and cost of production.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the different delivery modes that are available in multimedia for teaching and learning.
Multimedia can be delivered through CD-based, Web-based and blended delivery.
The teacher is in the right position to determine what delivery mode to use for the learner by working with the set objectives in line with the availability of needed equipment.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Carefully analyse multimedia delivery mode in teaching and learning.
2.
Write short notes on: a. CD-based b. Web-based c. Blended Delivery Strategy 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1 64 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production UNIT 5 PROBLEMS AND SOLUTION IN MULTIMEDIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Multimedia 3.2 Solutions to the Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As much as the use of multimedia has been found useful in teaching and learning; there are some problems associates with the usage.
To achieve the maximum advantage one should not loose sight of these problems and possibly look for a way of solving the problems.
This unit would discuss these problems and also proffer solutions to the problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Identify the problems associated with multimedia in teaching and learning.
• Explain the possible solutions in solving multimedia problems • Adequately apply the solutions in solving multimedia problems 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PROBLEMS IN MULTIMEDIA Multimedia production faces some problems especially during production.
Some of these problems negate the academic procedure in multimedia production because most productions are carried out by non academic company for commercial purpose.
Other constraints are imposed on the process of making multimedia for instruction by non professionals, usually at the policy level.
They are broad in scope and are seldom defined in depth.
65 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production The following are some of such problems: • Lack of proper procedures and documentation.
In multimedia production, there are procedures to be followed if one is to attain the desired purpose.
These procedures have some criteria to be considered like setting of behavioural objectives.
Also there is no proper outlining of what should be done or how it should be done.
• Poor Scripting.
It has also be observed that the method of scripting does not allow for pure academic scrutiny.
• Lack of Clear Roles and Responsibilities.
There are conflict of roles and responsibilities in the design structure; which causes problem during production.
• Inappropriate Feasibility Studies.
It has been observed that sometimes the software produced does not exactly meet the need of the users.
This is because; an appropriate situation analysis was not carried out before embarking on production, therefore leads to distortion or deviation from the need of the users.
• Lack of Quality Control.
One way to assure quality is by having several tests on the product.
But most times, production is commercial and therefore, does not give much attention to sufficient testing before sending them out for use; which then create lack on corrections that would have been effected before final use.
• Deviation From the Actual Design.
During production, producers sometimes deviate from the actual design.
This have great effect on the objectives which have been drawn and on the long run may not meet the need of the users.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: List the problems associated with the use of multimedia.
Answer: Compare your answers with those stated in the text .
3.2 SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEMS There are no problems without solution.
As well as we have known there are problems, some scholars have worked on how these problems could be solved or minimised.
66 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production Barker and Giller suggest that when the following procedures are adopted in multimedia production, there will be more positive results than when it is solely left in the hands of the commercials.
• Project Life Cycle.
Divided into two major parts – Interactive Process and Dissemination.
The interactive process includes the preparation, design and development phases.
At this phase, there is an interaction among the phases; the interaction depends upon the values of time and cost variables for a project.
The fourth phase, which is dissemination, can be repeated but not in an interactive nature except when the product need to be revised or modified in some way between releases.
• Analysis of Requirements.
Multimedia learning products are relatively new in teaching and learning, and not many clients know the advantages and disadvantages of the method of instruction which have an impact on the end-product.
It is important to state all the benefits as well as the non-benefits of the intended products before going into production, this helps to assure quality at the end of production.
• Design Specification.
“A design specification is a referral document that provides a detailed description of the program requirements.
It incorporates essential information such as the font sizes to be used, the colour palettes, file formats and flow charts outlining the proposed content.
This document should be available to all members of the development team.” • Resource Production.
Multimedia products are made up of a series of ‘pages’ containing text, graphics, audio, video and animation.
The establishment of appropriate parameters for each of these at the outset of the project avoids inconsistencies within the final product.
• Delivery Medium.
There are different medium of delivery multimedia products – CD-ROM, Internet or Local network.
Each of the delivery modes has its own merit and demerit, which need to be known before choosing a medium for delivery.
The merit and demerit has to be considered in line with the need for which the product is produced.
• Program Integration.
Integration takes place when all the individual multimedia elements are complete.
All the elements are integrated into one product, which is the final product.
A proper integration can only be achieved through the availability of a comprehensive script and detailed flowcharts to assist the 67 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production programmers and resource producers.
In addition, it is essential to have a good file naming strategy in order to avoid chaos when integrating resource files into the final program.
• Human-Computer Interface (HCI).
This include human controlled interface of the computer, such as the screen layouts, navigation controls, user interaction and the various metaphors that are embedded within the courseware.
• Quality Control and Evaluation.
Ideally, testing and quality control should occur at all stages of the development process.
Testing should not be kept until the end of production, so as to allow corrections to be effected.
Both formative and summative evaluation strategies must be identified during the planning stage.
It is important to stress that evaluation and product testing should be regarded as continuous processes both during and after the development of a product.
• Documentation.
It is important to have good documentation of a project life cycle, this include the project proposal, design specifications, scripts and storyboards, quality control and testing strategies, and progress reports.
• Dissemination.
This stage involves all the processes necessary to package the product and make it available to customers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: 1.
State solutions that could help alleviate the problems associated with multimedia.
2.
Group yourselves into five and: a.
Try to identify other problems different from the one stated in the text.
b. Proffer solutions to these problems Answers: 1.
Cross check your answers with the one stated in the text.
2a.
& b Pilot test your suggestions and draw your final conclusions based on the findings.
68 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Multimedia Production 4.0 CONCLUSION The teacher should not loose sight of the problems connected with the use of multimedia.
In the process of production, evaluation should be continuous to help detect and proffer solutions to the detected problems.
One should not wait until the production process is completed.
Also evaluation should be continuous during implementation.
This is important because there are some problems that could be detected during this stage.
Though it may not be easy to make quick amends but such amends could be done during review.
5.0 SUMMARY From researches and observations it has been discovered that most educational multimedia courseware are faced with the following problems – poor scripting, lack of proper documentation, lack of clear roles and responsibilities, inappropriate feasibility studies and lack of quality control.
Some others are true constraints arise from ambiguity, uncertainty and sometimes lack of criteria for knowing the limits of mediocrity and the excellence of success.
To alleviate these problems the following solutions were proffered – to have a good plan of project life cycle, analysis of requirements, design specification, consider a good delivery mode and good resource production.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. a.
Critically examine the problems faced with the use of multimedia for teaching and learning.
b.
How would you proffer solutions to those problems?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dorin, H., Demmin, P. E., Gabel, D. (1990).
Chemistry: The study of matter.
(3 ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc. rd Good, T. L., Brophy, J. E. (1990).
Educational psychology: A realistic approach.
(4 ed.).
White Plains, NY: Longman.
th Mergel, B.
(1998).
Instructional Design & Learning Theory.
(On-line).
Available: http://www.learningtheoriesofinstructional design.htm Saettler, P. (1990).
The evolution of American educational technology.
Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc. 69 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia MODULE 3 EVALUATION OF MULTIMEDIA INTRODUCTION Evaluation is the only process by which we can ascertain if a particular multimedia product was fully utilised or not when evaluation is properly carried out.
In this module, evaluation would be discussed in detail under the following units: Unit 1 Meaning and Importance of Evaluation Unit 2 Types of Evaluation Unit 3 Issues in Evaluation Unit 4 Developmental Testing or Alpha and Beta Testing Unit 5 Evaluation as Continuous Process of Quality Improvement UNIT 1 MEANING AND IMPORTANCE OF EVALUATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you would be taught the meaning and importance of evaluation.
A careful study of this unit would enable you understand the depth of evaluation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Define Evaluation • State the importance of evaluation • Carry out at least simple evaluation on multimedia products Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia 3.0 MAIN CONTENT MEANING Like in every other aspect of teaching and learning, multimedia in teaching and learning also requires evaluation.
It is only through this means it could be known if the purpose of the multimedia was achieved.
This calls for the assessment of the software from production to utilization stage.
There are different ways this could be done.
The types of objectives set are determinants of the type of evaluation that would be required.
This would be discussed later.
“Evaluation is testing whether a multimedia programme fulfils the objectives set, and suggesting improvements it requires to make the programme useful for its target audience”.
“Evaluation involve testing of the content it transacts vis-à-vis the target learners, keeping in view the prime objective of the expected learning which may take place in the learners after they go through the programme” (COL 2003).
Normally, evaluation of programme should be done at two levels – at the level of content and at the level of technology employed.
Technology plays the role of only the means to attain the identified objectives.
Optimal use of technology is desirable and in evaluating multimedia software it needs to be kept in mind that the technology itself should not become too cumbersome for the users, because the competence level of individuals using technology varies a lot.
IMPORTANCE • Understanding Learning and Learner.
Every learner has his/her own way of learning.
There is a variation in the pace, timing and habits.
These variations are taken care of by the computer, given opportunity to individuals to learn at their own pace and need.
So while developing multimedia software, it should be paramount in our minds that learners should be able to interact in with the programme with ease.
The suitability of this can only be verified through evaluation.
A major tenet of multimedia education is the acceptance of the fact that no single method or medium is appropriate and perfect for all individuals.
Every individual has his/her own preferred methods of information reception and processing.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES From the definition given in the text, identify the main words in the definition and discuss them in a group of five.
.
Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia 4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of Evaluation cannot be over emphasized.
Evaluation is the only means through which lapses can be discovered in a programme or process.
Any programme or process without evaluation cannot grow or meet societal needs and standard.
It is always important you know the outcome of a programme or process you are involved in, through which you would be able to find areas of improvement.
5.0 SUMMARY Evaluation has been defined in different ways by different people.
But what is most pertinent is that a good evaluation view the multimedia to ascertain if it meant with the purpose for which it was made, and if not ‘why’ and ‘how’ can it be remedy.
Evaluation process should always be in the subconscious mind of the teacher when planning a multimedia class.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Using your own words, define Evaluation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia UNIT 2 TYPES OF EVALUATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit the definition of Evaluation was given telling us that Evaluation is testing whether a multimedia programme has been fulfilled.
Now that you know what Evaluation is, it is equally important you know how Evaluation is carried out.
This unit would discuss the major ways Evaluation could be achieved in a programme.
Such Evaluative process is contrived for both general and specific purposes that can be used for value judgement.
For the purpose of this course, we are going to adopt a write up from CEMCA & COL 2003.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Describe both formative and summative evaluation of multimedia; 3.0 Main Content Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Choose a partner and make a role play of Formative and Summative Evaluation, stating your roles and when such roles are found useful during evaluation.
.
4.0 CONCLUSION Evaluation is a continuous process which must be carried out at each stage of a programme.
It is therefore important for the teacher to consider the mode of evaluation at each stage of multimedia programme.
A good Multimedia Evaluation would help improve its success.
Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia 5.0 SUMMARY There are two types of Evaluation – Formative and Summative.
Formative Evaluation is done during developmental process and even before the development starts while Summative Evaluation is carried out at the end of project evaluation.
Both should be conducted at each stage of the project.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Critically examine the mode of evaluation in multimedia.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia UNIT 3 ISSUES IN EVALUATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the first two units of this module, you have been taught the meaning, importance and types of evaluation.
Apart from these there are other pertinent issues that need to be discussed.
These issues are vital in the production and utilisation of multimedia products therefore, these issues would be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Examine different issues in multimedia 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia • Are there sound policies to back up the philosophies of using media techniques for educational effectiveness?
Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia • Is the space large enough to accommodate the viewer, who is at same measurable distance?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES In a group of five, assess a multimedia product using these issues.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is vital that a teacher considers these issues raised if he/she is to succeed in the use of multimedia for teaching.
Also these issues should be connected with the objectives set.
Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia 5.0 SUMMARY There are some major issues that cannot be over looked in production and utilisation of multimedia.
Such issues as educational effectiveness, entertainment value, user friendliness of technology and the design features of the multimedia product.
These issues must be considered during the production stage so as to meet the desired goal.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Explain the procedure that could be taken to ascertain quality control of educational multimedia products.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENTAL TESTING OR ALPHA AND BETA TESTING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In every discipline there are peculiarities in which multimedia is one.
There are some kinds of testing which are peculiar to multimedia software developers.
These peculiarities would be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Analyse the different types of testing in software development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES In a group of five, assess a multimedia product on the type of developmental testing used.
Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia 4.0 CONCLUSION So far you have been taught the two major of software testing which is Alpha and Beta Testing.
You should read through your test once more if you do not fully understand and make sure you note the misconception of the two tests.
5.0 SUMMARY There are two major types of software testing – Alpha and Beta Testing.
Alpha testing is very relevant when a number of developers are involved in developing various modules which are integrated while Beta testing is very important for eliminating defect as soon as they are detected.
Developers are usually happy to add new ideas.
Both testing are useful to the developers.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) As an educational technologist, advise commercial developers on the use of software testing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1 Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia UNIT 5 EVALUATION AS CONTINUOUS PROCESS OF QUALITY IMPROVEMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, it was mentioned that Evaluation is a continuous process.
It is not only a continuous process but serve a vital role in assuring the quality in multimedia.
This unit would therefore discuss extensively on how Evaluation can assure quality control.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Use appropriate evaluation methods and techniques; • Build a case for continuous evaluation for product improvement; • Undertake evaluation of prototype lessons.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Question: How would you improve on educational multimedia?
Answer: Cross check your answers from the text.
Multimedia Technology in Teaching and Learning Evaluation of Multimedia 4.0 CONCLUSION Evaluation should not wait till the end of programme.
But should be done often so as to be able to detect the defects and adjust to meet the needs and demands of the learners and the general society.
5.0 SUMMARY Evaluation of multimedia software does not only arise as a result of defect detected but also as a result of change in technology, which may call for a change in the general setting.
This often times affect the users because there will be the need of training them on how to use the incorporated skills.
This is why is sometimes said that a multimedia software that is highly rated today may be poorly rated tomorrow if it fails to update.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain why it is necessary to continually carry out an update on multimedia software?
3.
How would you use evaluation to enhance quality control?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS The Commonwealth of Learning – Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia (2003).
Educational Multimedia: A Handbook for Teacher Developers Version 1.1
