 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDT 812 COURSE TITLE: Management of Educational Resource Centre i  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE GUIDE TITLE: EDT 812 Management of Educational Resource Centres Course Developer Dr I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Course Writers Dr I. O Salawu National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
& Dr (Rev) A.O Afolabi Emmanuels Alayande College of Education, Oyo Course Editor Prof. D.F.
Elaturoti Abadina Media Resource Centre University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Programme Leader Dr. I.O Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahamadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Course Coordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Ms) School of Education National Open University of Nigeria 11/16 Ahamdu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos ii  INTRODUCTION This course EDT 812 - Management of Educational Resource Centre is a three credit unit course.
It is one of the courses designed for students at the Master’s level.
It is a one semester course available at the second semester to all students pursuing M.Ed.
Educational Technology programme of the National Open University of Nigeria.The first module which is on management principles and allied aspect has its content adopted from a related course in the school of Business and Human Resources Management of the University.
The course consists of 15 units.
They are compressed in 3 modules: Module 1 – Theories of Management Module 2 – The Concept and Management of Educational Resource Centre Module 3 – Historical Trends, Administrative Principles, Concept of Information Storage, Retrieval and Classification, Administrative Structures and Revision Notes This course guide tells you briefly about the course itself, how you can work your way through the course material, suggestions and guidelines on the time to spend on each unit and on your tutor marked assignment in order to be highly successful in the course.
There are regular tutorial classes that are provided on this course in your study centre.
You are advised to attend these tutorial sessions.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of EDT 812: Management of Educational Resource Centres is to provide you an opportunity to prepare yourself for the managerial role you would play in the future if you are appointed Manager/Director of an Educational Resource Centre.
The knowledge so acquired will be found not only useful but highly rewarding.
COURSE AIM This course aims at giving you an understanding of the theoretical managerial basis for successful operation of educational resource centres.
As overall aims of the course therefore, the under listed are typical: • possession of sound knowledge of management theories and principles.
• understanding evolvement of management as a field of study and discipline.
• production of capable hands to manage school media centres.
• understanding and readiness to organise resources in an orderly and scientific manner.
• familiarisation with the different groups of personnel expected to function in an educational resource centres.
• appreciate the problems and prospects of educational resource centres.
COURSE OBJECTIVES There are some overall objectives set out to achieve the aims of this course.
Every unit has specific objectives in addition.
The unit objectives are stated in achievable terms at the beginning of each of the units.
They are meant for you to read before you start working through the unit.
You can also refer to them as you start working through the unit.
You can also refer to them as you work through the course unit to check how far you are progressing.
At the end of the unit, try to refer to the objectives again to ensure you have achieved them.
In this way you make sure that you have done what you are required to do.
The wider objectives are given below.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: (i) Explain the term “management”.
(ii) Discuss the term “human resources management”.
(iii) Narrate the historical development of management.
(iv) Discuss the contributions of “motivation” in an organisation.
(v) Explain the need for having effective leadership in an organisation.
(vi) Differentiate between such concepts like “management” and “administration”.
iii  (vii) Explain the term “Educational Resource Centre” (viii) Discuss the functions of Educational Resource Centres.
(ix) Classify books and non-book materials using Dewey Decimal Classification Scheme.
(x) Catalogue at least ten various non-book materials following some established cataloguing rules.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE In order to complete this course without hitch, you are required to work through the course units, read the reference books or any other book(s) found useful.
In reading the course material you are enjoined to be patient and steady.
There are some exercise at the end of the units, don’t gloss over them.
Do them and discuss your answers with your colleagues.
The exercises are purposely integrated to help you further grasp the import of the content.
At some scheduled dates or points, you will be required to attempt and submit your tutor-marked assignments for assessment purpose; please do not fail in complying with the instructions.
At the end of the course or semester, you will be required to sit for a final examination in the course on-line.
This will require you to interact with the computer.
You do not need to be scared.
If you have little or no knowledge of the computer, you need to learn it.
The course is supposed to take you about 16 weeks to complete.
You will have to allocate your time to span all the units before the examinations come.
COURSE MATERIALS The major components of this course are: (i) The course guide (ii) The course units or study units.
(iii) Reference books (iv) Assignments file (on-line).
(v) Presentation schedule STUDY UNITS There are 15 study units in the 3 modules.
These are: Unit 1 - The Concept of Management Unit 2 - The Nature of Human Resources Management Unit 3 - Models of Human Resources Management Unit 4 - Motivation Unit 5 - Leadership Unit 6 - Meaning and Nomenclatures of Educational Resource Centers Unit 7 - Functions of Educational Resource Centres Unit 8 - Organization of Educational Resource Centres Unit 9 - Architectural Layout of Educational Resource Centres Unit 10 - Problems and Prospect of Educational Resource Centres Unit 11 - Historical Trends and Administrative Functions in Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria Unit 12 - Principles of Managing in Educational Resource Centres Unit 13 - The Concept of Information Storage, Retrieval and Classification Schemes Unit 14 - Cataloguing of Non-Book Resources Unit 15 - General Revisional Notes You will observe that the first 5 units discuss issues in the aspect of management followed by the next 5 units that concentrate on issues on educational resources centres while the last 5 units discuss majorly the concepts of organisation and maintenance of learning resources.
Some of the units are wide in scope while iv  some are relatively short.
You will find reading through the units quite interesting.
SET TEXT BOOKS There are no compulsory set books.
The course material is self-contained.
But you are free to consult any text(s) considered relevant and useful, if that will further help you.
ASSIGNMENT FILE The assignment file will be given to you on registration, with the course material.
The marks you obtain from the assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain in this course.
You will require to submit four assignments, out of which three will be used for the final grade in the course.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The schedule for the presentation of your assignment and the examination will be made available to you at your study centre.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should try not to fall behind in your work.
ASSESSMENT Assessment in this course will comprise the tutor-marked assignments and examination which comes at the end of the semester.
For the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques which you have gained from the course.
These assignments should be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated or given to you.
The assignments will count for 20% of your total course work.
At the end of the course or semester, you are required to sit for a final written examination that will be of three hours duration.
The examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMAs) Each unit has a tutor marked assignment.
This implies that there are at least 15 TMAs in all.
You are required to submit four out of which three will be graded and used as part of your total score.
However, you are encouraged to have all the assignments treated.
When you have completed any assignment; sent in your assignment folder or file to your tutor.
Make sure that the assignments get to your tutor on or before the deadline given to you in the presentation schedule.
If for any reason, you cannot submit your work on time, contact your tutor before the due date to discuss the possibility of extension of time.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING In this course EDT 708: The final examination will be of three hours duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
Questions for the examination will reflect the types of self-testing activities, examples and tutor marked assignments.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-test activities, tutor-marked assignments and.
comments on them before the examination.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME The table below shows clearly ho\v the actual marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment Four assignments submitted, best three graded at 10% each to v  give 30% Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks vi  HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In Open and Distance Education, we have self-learning materials which are designed in units.
They are designed in such a way that they replace the lecturer in the University system.
In other words, the duties of the lecturer are in-built into the self-learning materials.
This implies that you can study or read or work through these units at your own time, own pace, own place and own convenience.
Again, in the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, give you in-class exercises or assignments, the study units provide you with the content to read, reference books to refer and activities to help you get on well.
Each of these units follows a common format.
The first item after the content is the introduction, this is followed by the objectives which let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
This is followed by the main body of the unit which guides you through the required reading.
Activities are interspersed through out the units.
Working through these activities will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should therefore work through each activity as you come to it in the study units.
Work through the examples too as you come to them.
The following practical tips will help you work through the course without any hitch.
But if you run into any difficulty, do not waste time to telephone your tutor or post the question to the course co-ordinator - School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN), Lagos or through our web address – www.noun.edu.ng.
Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
Do not hesitate to call and ask him to provide help when you need it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Plan and organize a study schedule or a time table.
Creating time for your reading, tutorial, discussion etc.
3.
Do everything you canto stick to your study schedule, this is because students fail not because they do not have the ability but because they get behind with their work.
If you have problems with your work, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Start with unit I. read the introduction and objectives.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Remember to have your calculator and statistical table on your desk.
6.
Work through the units.
The contents arc arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
7.
Keep in touch with the Study Centre for information.
8.
Do your assignments and submit before or on the due date.
You will learn al lot by doing the assignments.
9. Review the objectives for each unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure of any, review the study unit or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are sure that you have achieved a unit's objectives, go to the next unit.
Pace your study but keep to your schedule.
11.
When you have submitted your assignment to your tutor, do not wait till it is returned.
Start another unit.
Keep to your schedule.
12.
When you have completed the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives and the course objectives.
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are tutorial sessions provided in support of this course.
You will be informed of the dates, time and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor form the Study Centre.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignment.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulty you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must submit your assignments before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by phone, e-mail or at the Study Centre.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units.
vii  • You have difficulty with the self-test or activities.
• You have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor's comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Try to attend the tutorial sessions.
This is the only face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask answers are given.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain maximum benefit from the tutorials prepare a question list before attending the tutorials.
SUMMARY This course EDT 708 is intended to introduce you to the knowledge and skills that you need to function and fit well as a director of an educational resource centre.
On the completion of this course, you should be able to answer such questions as: • What is management?
• What is administration?
• How can you successfully operate a media resource centre?
We wish you well in the course TITLE: EDT 812 Management of Educational Resource Centres Course Developer Dr I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Course Writers Dr I. O Salawu National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
& Dr (Rev) A.O Afolabi Emmanuels Alayande College of Education, Oyo Course Editor Prof. D.F.
Elaturoti Abadina Media Resource Centre University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Programme Leader Dr. I.O Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahamadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Course Coordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Ms) School of Education National Open University of Nigeria viii  11/16 Ahamdu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos ix  TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE MODULE 1 1 Unit 1 The Concept of Management 1 Unit 2 The Nature of Human Resources Management 36 Unit 3 Models of Human Resources Management 42 Unit 4 Motivation 51 Unit 5 Leadership 63 MODULE 2 75 Unit 1 The Concept and Management of Educational Resource Centers 75 Unit 2 Functions of Educational Resource Centres Unit 3 Organizational Structures and Functions of Key Officers in Educational Resource Centres 91 Unit 4 The Architectural Layout of Educational Resource 97 Centres Unit 5 Problems and Prospect of Educational Resource 1 00 Centres 113 MODULE 3 Unit 1 Historical Trends and Administrative Functions in 113 Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria Unit 2 Principles of Managing in Educational Resource 120 Centres Unit 3 The Concept of Information Storage, Retrieval 128 and Classification Schemes Unit 4 Cataloguing of Non-Book Resources/Materials 142 (Books) Unit 5 General Notes on the Management of Educational 155 Resources Centre x  MODULE 1: THEORIES OF MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 CONCEPT OF MANAGEMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Management 3.2 Meaning of Administration 3.3 Definition, Nature and Purpose of Management 3.4 History of Management 3.5 Values of Management 3.6 Management and Administration 3.7 Classification of Management – Is Management an Art of a Science?
3.8 Schools of Management Thoughts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Before we give the definition of management, it is necessary to point out that one of the most important activities of human beings is managing.
The idea of managing the resources of a group stated ever since human beings started coming together and working in groups.
This is essential so that the objectives of the group can be attained through proper linking of the various activities being performed by the group members.
As organisations, particularly formal organisations like businesses, ministries, schools, including universities become large, the task of the manager starts getting bigger and more complex.
In all these, the aim of the manager is to promote excellence.
Imaging an army with no general, a team with no coach, or a nation with no government.
How could the army beat the enemy?
How could the team win games?
How could the 1  nation avoid complete anarchy?
They could not.
And an organisation cannot succeed without a manager.
Managers make sure that an organisation stays well.
Organising and directing the work of others is the work of the manger.
This unit is the foundation unit to this course and it would expose you to the basic concepts that are commonly used in a discourse where the main subject is Management.
A second look at the title of this course as it were subjects that “management” occupies a central focus.
It then behoves on us to attempt a thorough discussion of some terms to serve as a good way of establishing a well grasp of the course.
We should inform you that this is a unit in which your previous knowledge on general application of management principles and skills would be highly required.
You are therefore enjoined to take the best advantage of this to maximize your understanding of the content therein this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) define the concept of management (ii) discuss the concept of Administration; (iii) highlight the functions of a manager/administrator; (iv) differentiate between the concepts – administration and management.
(v) nature, definition and purpose of management; (vi) trace the history and explain the historical developments of management; (vii) enumerate the salient values of management; (viii) differentiate between management and administration; (ix) classify management as an art or a science; (x) discuss the schools of management thought.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Management 2  Management, as a concept, has been defined variedly by various people, according to what they perceive it to mean.
Mark (2007) attempted a compilation of the definitions of some authors and provided the following: • The guidance and control of action required to execute a program (www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA/evaluation/glossary/glossary.m.htm.
According to this definition, for management to be effective, there needs to be some type of defined approach or system in place.
The system, therefore, becomes the plan and management is guiding others in that plan.
The outcome of this interpretation of management is that managers themselves do not have a plan and as a result, their actions seem random to the people they are managing.
This arrangement could lead to confusion and disappointment.
It is, therefore, necessary for an organisation to have a well-structured and detailed manual detailing the roles and expectations of individuals in an organisation as this will guide the manager in his/her day-to-day functions.
• Another definition is that provided by home.earthlink.net/-ddstuhtman/definl.htm - “Management is the organisational process that includes strategic planning, setting objectives, managing resources, deploying the human and financial assets needed to achieve objectives, and measuring results”.
Management also includes recording and storing facts and information for later use or for others within an organisation.
Management functions are not limited to managers and supervisors.
Every member of the organisation has some management and reporting functions as part of their job.
A critical analysis of this definition reveals that it consists of three primary activities (Mark, 2007).
These are: first, management establishes a plan.
This plan becomes the road map for what work is going to be done.
Second, management allocates resources to implement the plan.
Third, measures the results to see how the end product compares with what was originally envisioned.
3  Most management feelings can be attributed to insufficient effort occurring in one of these tripartised areas.
• Yet, wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/213/218150/glossary/html defines management as: “the activity of getting things done with the aid of people and other resources.
This definition of management focuses on management as the process of accomplishing work through the effort of others.
The definition recognises the limitations of the manager by recognizing the need for the manager to designate to carry along the subordinates in accomplishing the predetermined objectives of an organisation.
• The www.ecbp.org/glossary.htm in its own wisdom, defines “Management” as “effective utilisation and coordination of resources such as capital, plant, materials and labour to achieve defined objectives with maximum efficiency”.
This definition of management is unique in many ways.
It looks at not only the people, but the entire range of resources necessary to follow a plan.
It also emphasises “efficiency”.
Thus, management should not be concerned with getting from point B to C, but getting there must be as a result of choosing the best possible alternatives/options/paths.
• According to www.booksites.net/download/chadwickbeech/glossary.htm, management is the process of planning, leading, organising, and controlling people within a group in order to achieve goals.
This definition of management aligns with that of ps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/213/218150/glossary.html as it also affects the use of other people in the accomplishment of a task.
In addition it stresses the activities that are necessary for reaching particular goals.
• The www.ucs.mun.ca/2rsixty/buisness1000/glossary/M.htm defines management as “the process of achieving the objectives of the business organisation by bringing together human, physical and financial resources in an 4  optimum combination and making the best decision for an organisation; while taking into consideration its operating environment.
This definition talks about the different components that managers need to control in order to achieve objectives.
One major differentiator of this definition is the way it considers the operating environment as part of what a manager must understand.
Self Assessment Exercise 1: 3.2 Meaning of Administration It has been a major difficulty on some people to differentiate between management and administration.
It is because of this, and perhaps you are one of those in this group, that our attention in this sub-head shall be focused on the provision of information that will enable you differentiate between management and administration.
Earlier, the meanings of management have been provided.
Now you want to ask – what is administration and what difference, if any, is there between management and administration.
Self Assessment Exercise 2: (a) Define administration in your own words.
(b) Compare your definition with the one provided in this unit.
Administration is a social process concerned with identifying, maintaining, motivating, controlling, and unifying formally and informally organised human and material resources within an integrate system designed specifically to achieve predetermined objectives (Ayanniyi, 2006).
According to Enaohwo and Eferakeya (1989), administration can be defined as the process by which goals are achieved through collective and cooperative human efforts in a suitable environment.
Yet administration is basically the concern of the management.
In other words, management, at any level; family, community, state, federal, organisations etc.
is to administer in a way that the predetermined objectives become achievable.
5  3.2.1 Difference between Administration and Management There are many factors according to which administration can be differentiated from management.
These are as follows, as put forward by nausley.sand/er.com/content: ASPECT ADMINISTRATION MANAGEMENT Nature of work It is concerned about the I t puts into action the determination of objectives p olicies and plans laid down and major policies of an by the administration organisation.
Type of function It is a determinative function.
It is an executive function.
Scope It takes major decisions of an It takes decisions within the enterprise as a whole.
framework set by the administration.
Level of Authority It is a top level activity.
It is a middle level activity.
Nature of Status It consists of owners It is a group of managerial who personnel who used their invest capital in and specialised knowledge to receive fulfill the objectives of an profits from an enterprise.
enterprise.
Nature of Usage It is used in business enterprises.
It is popular with government, military, Decision Making educational, and religious Its decisions are influenced organisations.
by the values, opinions and Its decisions are beliefs of the managers.
influenced Main Functions by the public opinion, Motivating and controlling government policies, social f unctions are involved in it.
and religious factors.
Planning and organising are involved in it.
Abilities It needs administrative rather It requires technical than technical abilities.
abilities.
Function Handles the business aspects Handles the employers.
such as finance.
3.3 Nature, Definition and Purpose of Management This topic will be discussed under the following sub-topics.
3.3.1 Nature of Management Management is a word used by different people with varying meanings.
The noun management is used as a collective noun to refer to all those who manage within a particular organisation.
That is why in an organisation, there are different people occupying different positions and seeing to it that the resources of such organisations are put into effective use.
There are also those managers that assist other managers to perform their functions.
They are all managers.
The word management can also be used to separate a special class of people in an organisation from other classes.
You should have heard such statement as, “the management of organisation has taken a decision concerning the demand of the workers for higher pay’.
Such statement is making reference to those people that take decisions, whether it is a temporal or a final decision.
In trying to give a precise definition of management, it is always faced with problems.
This is because of the interest and background of the person giving such definition.
The accountant will like to see management in terms of cash flow: how much the organisation is expending in order to get revenue or returns, as well as the timing of such expenditure and revenue.
The marketing manager sees management in terms of analyzing the consumer needs with a view to bringing out a product or service capable of satisfying the needs and at a profit to that organisation.
The personnel manager, on his own interest, will regard management as employing suitably qualified candidates to fill existing vacancies and motivating them to work as a team towards the attainment of organisational objectives.
We can go on and on.
7  3.3.2 Definition and Purpose of Management – Two Definitions and their Analyses First Definition of Management: Weihrich and Koontz (1983) say that management as a process “is designing and maintaining an environment in which individuals, working together in groups, efficiently accomplish selected aims”.
This is a basic definition which needs to be expanded in the following ways: (a) As managers, people carry out some functions, and they are employed to carry out these specific functions.
These functions are commonly referred to as managerial functions.
We shall be looking at these managerial functions one after the other in subsequent units of this course.
These functions are planning, organising, staffing, leading and controlling among others.
(b) Management applies to any kind of organisation.
This is another nature and purpose of management.
Management is not restricted to any particular organisation like the Nigeria Bottling Company Plc.
Any organisation, as long as human and other resources are there calls for management.
Consequently, management is needed in a philanthropic organisation, in the church, in the mosque, in the Lion’s Club, in a football team among others.
(c) Management is important to any level in an organisation.
In other words, whatever position you find yourself in an organisation, you will feel the presence of management.
Those that practice management by carrying out the functions of management are called managers.
Management is also of importance to them.
They need to understand it and appreciate it so that they can have depth of what they are doing.
Without this, their efforts become shallow and haphazard.
(d) The aim of all managers, whether a senior manager or a junior one is the same.
It is to make surplus or what some people called profit.
Making surplus demands that the right decisions are made so that the resources available to an organisation 8  are used without wastage.
All resources have values and the values are always expressed in monetary terms; Naira and Kobo.
Consequently, when you are making use of organisational resources, you are spending money.
But the money is being spent because you want to get revenue which is also expressed in naira and kobo.
However, the manager needs to find out whether the amount he is receiving is more than the amount of money that he is spending.
If this is the case, then, there is surplus.
If contrary is the case, it means that the organisation is making loss.
This is dangerous because such organisation may not be able to pay salaries and wages of workers, buy raw materials with which to make goods or provide services, pay for its electricity and water charges/bills among other demands.
In a non-profit organisation, efficiency in the use of resources is also demanded.
Remember, we have earlier agreed that management is practiced both in profit and non-profit making organisations.
Even though profit/surplus is not supposed to be emphasised in a non-profit making organisation, they should at least break- even.
By break-even, we simply mean that it is a point where revenue is equal to the amount of money being spent.
All non-profit making organisations should aim at this point since by the nature of their operation, they are not supposed to charge their customers so much in order to realise surplus.
(e) Managing is concerned with productivity.
This demand creating something that is of value to the customers.
But the higher the volume of production, the better for the organisation.
This is because with increased volume, the unit cost of the product is going to be lower.
This is so because there are two main types of cost.
The fixed cost and what is known as variable cost.
The fixed costs are the initial business costs such as the cost you pay for machine, erecting buildings etc.
All these costs are there, whether you are producing just one unit of a product or you are producing million units of the product.
9  The variable cost, as the name implies, vary with the quantity that you are producing.
If you are to produce few units, you pay less compared to a situation when you produce higher volume.
It is the addition of the fixed cost plus the variable cost that give you total cost.
When you have increased productivity, this means that this number will divide the total cost and what you get is the unit cost.
That is, the cost for one unit of the product.
This cost will be smaller than the one that will arise if you are producing a smaller quantity.
This is because the smaller quantity will again divide the total cost.
The manager, therefore, always looks at the situations where he will produce more so that the unit cost will always be smaller.
Second Definition of Management: A second definition of management is necessary at this stage so as to bring out clearer the nature and purpose of management.
Sir Reynolds defined management as “getting things done through the efforts of others”.
You may have heard of this definition.
It is popular and simple to recollect and is quite emphatic in conveying the nature and purpose of management.
Examining the definition, it brings out the following: (a) The manager is different from other employees.
The definition conveys the distinction between the manager and other organisational members.
The manager has a group of subordinates or the doers of operatives reporting to him.
They are the ones that perform the routine, day-to-day activities while the manager performs the managerial functions.
(b) Management permeates the entire organisation.
The definition has established a criterion through which one can determine who is a manager.
The criterion is that anybody that has a group of workers reporting to him automatically qualifies as a manager.
He may be a top level manager, or a middle level manager or simple a 10  supervisor.
It does not matter, he qualifies as a manager, and the qualification is that a group of persons report to him.
Self Assessment Exercise 1: 1.
You are required to study your environment.
List five profit making organisations and another five non-profit making organisations where management is practiced.
2.
From our discussions, so far, take sheet of paper and write two statements.
One statement showing the nature of management and the other statement showing the purpose of management.
3.4 History and Historical Development of Management It is good that in every discipline that one is studying, one should have a good depth of that discipline.
That is to say you must be firmly rooted into that discipline.
For that to happen, you must possess a good knowledge at any level of what you are studying.
Cooperative is a form of business organisation.
That is why management concepts, techniques, principles and theories must be brought to bar in the administration and management of cooperative.
Consequently, the amount of knowledge needed to manage other forms of businesses is the same, if not more, in the case of managing a cooperative organisation.
This is because cooperative resources are modest.
This places the burden on the management to use the resources in such a manner that the objectives are satisfied.
It is for this reason that you should be grounded in the principles and practice of management.
By the time you finish your degree programme, you would have been well grounded to manage a business outfit successfully.
It is for the above reason that we shall be considering the history of management so that you have further depth of management and this should be rooted in your mind.
This is important so that you can further appreciate the principles and theories and the necessity to fall back on them in your practice as a manager.
11  People talk about management in a loose way, they do not understand it and that is why they cannot apply the principles, because their intellectual understanding is not enough.
It is just a show of good memory.
But a good memory is only useful when what has been memorized can be called forth and applied to give solution to problems.
This is intelligence.
Bear this in mind.
We shall be tracing the history of management from the period of antiquity, i.e., the ancient time to the modern time.
Important features of management came into being during the periods.
We shall examine them within the scope of this course.
3.4.1 The Need to Handle Human Efforts The development of management thought goes back to the days when people started to accomplish goals by working together in groups.
However, the urge to the development of management as a body of organised knowledge has come in the past more than half a century.
This is as a result of the recognition that one missing link in the attainment of an effective organisation system is the effective handling of human efforts.
It has been recognised that human beings play key roles in making not just the organisation to work, but to work as a system.
This means that an organisation consists of different parts such as: the production department, marketing department, finance department, personnel department among other parts.
Each of the areas does not operate in isolation.
It must cooperative and work in harmony with other parts.
As a result, if one part is not working well, it will affect other parts.
Also, the decision of one part will also affect the other parts.
As an example, the marketing department notices that there is greater demand for the products of an organisation.
But to increase production is not the job of the marketing department.
The production department may request for more workers so as to be able to cope with additional volume of work.
The personnel department is called forth to assist in employing extra hands.
These extra workers will have to be compensated by paying them salaries or wages.
The finance department will look into this.
You can see then 12  that the simple decision of meeting the increase in demand has affected the whole departments in the organisation.
This is the typical nature of a system.
And it is only human beings that make the organisation to work like this, who must be handled in special ways to make the work better.
3.4.2 The Effects of the Second World War In addition to the need to handle human efforts so that an organisation can work properly as a system, the Second World War and the effects it created also stressed the importance of management started during the Second World War.
The effects of this war are important to management development in several ways.
The war created the need for big programmes necessary to fight the war successfully.
Such programmes involved the maintenance of weapons of mass destruction as well as space programmes.
The atomic bomb, you might have read or heard, was produced during the war.
The emphasis for these programmes was on production with least cost.
It is only through proper management that this could happen.
The importance of management after the war was further increased.
It was noticed that many young men were sent to the war fronts.
This created a shortage of manpower, which required sound management to get the best from them.
Again, the technical advances which were made during the war must be properly managed.
To do this required solid management knowledge.
Another factor was the emergence of big and complex organisations which require thorough management principles and theories.
3.4.3 The Emergence of Stiff Competition The stiff competition among companies and the rivalry for markets, power and prestige necessitated good management to sustain.
The competition has arisen because of: 13  The worldwide spread of knowledge concerning areas of the world which were not known before the World War.
This made business organisations to utilise the new knowledge as a basis for greater market share.
There was also the spread of technical knowledge.
As soon as the war was over, the technical knowledge on improved method of production started gaining application in industries and commerce.
There was the freeing of trade because barriers to stop international trade such as tariffs were reduced.
Tariffs are the money paid to import or export something from or to another country.
Due to improved ways of production and distribution, there were so many goods which consumers can choose from.
Buyers have wide array of goods from different organisations to buy and the organisations must compete for their patronage.
All the above factors have placed heavy burden on management.
And the burden keeps on increasing since the Second World War.
3.4.4 Management in Antiquity If management did not start during the Second World War, then when did it start?
We have already stated that the history of management started when people started working in groups.
This means that management started in ancient time.
3.4.4.1 Management in Early Egypt History tells us that civilisation started in Egypt.
This was as far back as 1300 B.C.
Some historians have made interpretations of Egyptian papyri (plural); the singular is papyrus which is the form of writing of ancient Egyptians.
The interpretations showed the recognition of the importance of organisation and administration in Egypt.
This necessitated the use of formal rules and procedures to accomplish objectives.
Such 14  objectives included the construction of the big Egyptian pyramids which are still standing till today.
3.4.4.2 Management in Ancient China The analysis of ancient philosophers’ parables indicates the existence of practical management in China.
Confucius, for example (a Chinese sage), made parables.
These parables include practical suggestions for public administrations.
There are also guides in form of admonitions to choose honest, unselfish, and capable officers.
All these still find relevance in modern personnel management.
They have bearing on recruitment, selection and placement which are important duties concerning staffing.
3.4.4.3 Management in Greece In ancient Greece, there existed the Athenian common wealth.
The common wealth consisted of councils, popular courts, administrative officials and board of general.
Each of these had its set of functions to perform, and to be able to carry out these duties required management planning.
So also are organising and other management functions.
Socrates, a Greek philosopher, gave the definition of management as a skill to be practiced which is different from technical skill and experience.
This definition is remarkably close to our current understanding of management.
Can you still recall our second definition of management?
Can you see how close it is to Socrates’ definition, made several thousands of years ago?
3.4.4.4 Management in Ancient Rome The details of administrative job in ancient Rome demanded considerable management techniques.
There was the existence of the Roman magistrates.
These magistrates had functional areas, i.e.
each magistrate had its specialised cases to treat.
Beside their functional areas, they had degrees of authority.
This means that not all the magistrates have equal authority.
There were those with lower authority and also those with higher authority.
All these were shown in the type of cases 15  being treated/handled.
All these fantastic arrangements took place in the ancient time, and we have similar system in our judicial system.
Self Assessment Exercise 2: We have looked, though briefly, the administrative arrangements in ancient Rome.
What do you call this in modern management function?
Can you see the relationship?
Can you compare the arrangement with the judicial system in Nigeria?
3.4.4.5 Management of the Roman Catholic Church The most effective formal organisation in the history of western civilisation has been the Roman Catholic Church which is said to be the oldest church in the world.
It has a long organisational life which is due not so much to its objectives but to the effectiveness of its organisation and management techniques.
Examples of these techniques are the development of the hierarchy of authority, the departmentation according to territory, the specialisation of authentic along definite functions, the use of staff device among others.
3.4.4.6 Management in the Military Finally, the practice of management has been emphasised in the military right from the ancient time till now.
In fact, important principles and practices of modern business principles and practices of modern business management may be traced to military organisation.
These include the following: (1) Authority Relationships: This can hardly be over-emphasised in the military as the junior in rank report to the senior officers for directives, and the directives must be complied with.
Also, levels or hierarchies have been created for the purpose of ensuring smooth authority relationships.
All these have made it possible to carry out military assignments.
16  (2) Techniques of Leadership: The military has a variety of stages and techniques of leadership depending on the circumstances and situation.
These include autocratic style which means barking out orders and the men must comply by implementing and following the orders.
Participating leadership techniques which involve some elements of consultation with the subordinates that is the officer consulting the men before taking the final decision, and the style which involves a combination of autocracy and participating techniques.
All these styles/techniques are still being applied in present organisations.
(3) The Use of Staff Device: This practice is common in the military as well as in civilian business organisation.
It is a technique which ensures that the line commanders should be busy prosecuting the battles while concerns for uniform, caps, boots, medicine, treatment for the injured, accommodation, logistics supplies should be in the hands of specialists.
Some of these specialists also offer valuable information concerning war efforts.
Self Assessment Exercise 3: 1.
We have treated line and staff relationships when we were considering the management function of organising.
2.
Can you see the relationship in organising the staff device of the military?
3.
List areas that staff will be needed in an organisation and the types of services they can provide.
3.5 Values of Management 17  Management has values.
A value is the importance we attach to something.
This means that something is of importance to us simply because we have places some values on it.
The same consideration goes to management.
Management has importance because there are core values associated with it.
These values constitute the reasons why we bother to study management.
3.5.1 To Keep Pace with the Environment To keep pace with the environment is one of the values of management.
The environment of management is a dynamic one; that is, it is always undergoing changes.
It is never static; the practice of yesterday becoming obsolete today.
To be abreast with these changes demands, thorough planning, plan execution, control and evaluation.
All these and more demand careful thinking and analysis so that we may not make mistakes in our decisions.
Every economic activity must be directed towards ensuring that the desired goods and services are produced and made available to the consumers at a profit too to the organisation.
Committing mistakes along the line in the process of taking decisions can be fatal.
This is because every business decision or any management decision necessitates the expenditure of organisation resources.
To spend organisation’s resources on unprofitable projects does not indicate sound management practice.
It has to be avoided at all cost.
3.5.2 Combining the Factors of Production Beyond the desire not to make mistakes in management decisions, another value of management is to be able to combine the right proportion of the factors of production or simply the resources of an organisation to achieve a given output.
The resources of any organisation include: finance, material and human, information and time resources.
Management has to work out the portion from each of these resources and combine them technically in the desirable proportion in order to get an output.
There should be no wastage.
It should be noted that the need for management is not only for effectiveness but also for efficiency.
Consequently, efficiency in the productive use of organisation’s 18  resources is one of the strong values of management.
Related to this is the fact that the resources of an organisation are inert.
That is to say they do not have consciousness except, of course; the human resources.
As a result, the usefulness of the resources can only be seen in the manner in which they have been combined in order to get result through the output.
All these demand tools and relevant techniques which we can get through management principles and theories plus some supporting courses.
3.5.3 To Get the Best from Human Resources We have already emphasised that human resources are among the resources available to an organisation.
Of all the resources, only the human resources have consciousness.
But human beings are unpredictable.
No one knows what is going on in the mind of another person; only God knows.
This is so because the mind of man is like a black box.
Nobody sees what is going on there.
The physical appearances and expressions can be deceptive.
We will be smiling outwardly, but what is going on inside is an accumulation of venom, to be spat on the same person we are smiling at.
However, these same human beings whose behaviours we cannot predict play important roles in an organisation.
As managers, they are creative and problem solvers, taking vital decisions necessary for the survival of the organisation.
As subordinates, they perform the routine tasks necessary to get the products and/or services for the customers.
To get the best from them, either as employees or managers calls for sound human relations through the practice of management.
The workers must be blended harmoniously and made them to work as a team.
The rough edges in their personalities must be smoothened, and that is the work of management.
3.6 Management and Administration Confusion sometimes arises between the use of the words, “Management and Administration”.
These words are used by different people and often by the same persons as if they are synonymous.
There are differences at least in concept.
3.6.1 Administration 19  The word “Administration” concerns the laying down of policies, and this is done at the top level, i.e.
the level of the Board of Directors and the Managing Director which we regard as the first layer in the structure of an organisation.
A policy is a guide to action and provides the direction that all organisational efforts will follow.
Associated with the laying down of policies is the need to provide broad plans and programmes through which the laid down policies can be effectively implemented.
Equally, there is the need to provide a yardstick through which performance can be measured.
What we are saying is that it is important to work out performance standards which can be measured against actual performance.
This is to find out whether the policy guidelines have been followed.
If it has not been followed, then there is a deviation.
The Administrator needs to find out and investigate the reasons for the deviation and make the necessary correction.
This is to avoid future occurrence of such negative incident.
Consequently, as a process, administration determines aims and objectives for which the organisation operates.
3.6.2 Management Management, on the other hand, does not only concerns itself with policy formulation, creating standards for performance evaluation, determining aims and objectives, but goes further than that.
Remember in the first section when we were looking at the nature and purpose of management, we saw that management runs across the entire organisation.
That is why there are top level management which also carries out administration through strategic management.
We can then say that top level management is the same thing as administration.
There are also other levels such as: the middle and low or supervisory levels.
Consequently, as one descends down the organisation line, what one is going to find is no longer the question of laying down policy and performance standards as well as strategies for implementation, but execution of the policies.
You cannot be formulating policy and at the same time be the one to execute it.
The executive officers can be regarded as the middle level managers and supervisors and not the administrators or top level managers.
From all these, administration is at the top which is the same as top level management, 20  but as we find other levels of management below, we do not find administration.
Management is consequently more embracing and pervasive.
3.6.3 What Happens in Practice?
We have analysed the relationship between management and administration.
However, what happens in practice is that it is difficult to separate the thinking (i.e.
top level management and administration) from the doing aspects.
Actually, every manager or whatever designation that is used, discharges both administrative and executive functions.
You may be the Chief Executive of an organisation, which means that you are a top level manager or an administrator.
However, you may find yourself in some day typing your own letter, a task that is supposed to be performed by your secretary who occupies a low level position.
In this circumstance, rather than performing your top level management job, you are now executing.
There is need to point out that though every manager discharges both administrative and executive functions, the extent of such performances generally varies with the management level that an officer finds himself.
At the top level, managers spend more time on planning and organising (administration).
Leading the subordinates in the process of executing what has been planned takes a great deal of time of low level managers (supervisors).
Middle level managers devote equal time to planning, organising and leading, that is, equal time to administration and execution.
We shall be taking the functions of management in Unit 2 of this Module for better understanding of this concept.
Self Assessment Exercise 4: Outline the major relationships between Management and Administration.
3.7 Classification of Management – Is Management an Art of a Science?
Argument sometimes arises as to whether management can be classified as an art or science.
To address this issue, we need to know the features of science so that we can 21  eventually ask ourselves whether management has these features.
Thereafter, we also need to consider what an art is and then find out whether management has any bearing in being called an ‘art’.
3.7.1 Characteristics of Science The essential characteristic of science is that knowledge is based not on emotions or sentiments, but on systematic measurement and objectivity.
This has arisen through the application of scientific method to such an extent that whoever follows the same method will ultimately arrive at the same conclusion.
The scientific method itself concerns the determination of facts, which is carried out through the observation of events or things.
It is not just enough to observe things, the events or what is being observed must be verified.
The verification becomes necessary so as to establish the accuracy of the facts.
Consequently, continuous observation of the events is necessary for a period of time.
After a period of continuous observation, the next stage is to classify the facts so as to be able to analyse them objectively.
When the facts have been classified and analysed, scientists then look at them so as to find some cause and effects which they believe to be true.
That is, for something to happen there must be a cause; for there is no smoke without fire.
It is the fire which is the cause that produces the smoke.
This is true.
This is generalisation which scientist called hypothesis.
The hypothesis must be tested further for accuracy.
When this is done and the hypothesis is found to be true, that is, it is capable of explaining a reality, it therefore possesses value of predicting what will happen in similar circumstances then, it is no longer hypothesis but a principle.
And a group of principles explaining some realities is what is called a theory.
A theory which has not been rejected or refuted over a long period of time becomes a law, such as the law of gravity.
The above scientific procedure of making principles and theories is applicable to management.
In other words, management principles and theories are also derived through similar manner.
To this extent, it is safe to say that management belongs to the 22  realm of science.
But with a qualification, and the qualification is that it is not an exact science like mathematical or physics.
It is a social science and managers, that is, those who practice management, are known together with management scholars as social scientists.
3.7.2 What is an Art?
The application of principles is what is referred to as art.
And this is common to many professions.
The doctor has been trained scientifically for many years in the university and in so many areas.
A sick patient before him has to receive treatment, but in treating him, the doctor needs to ask him some relevant questions.
Further probing may necessitates asking the patient to go for laboratory tests.
The answers for all these will make the doctor to fall back on his training.
He has learnt the causes and treatments of ailment and the responses from the patient and outcome of the laboratory tests will make the doctor to isolate the cause of the ailment and on that basis, makes his prescription.
When prescribing, he is carrying out the art nature of his profession.
For further example, the civil engineer constructing a bridge has to fall back on the body of scientific knowledge he has learnt.
He knows that the concrete he is pouring or the slabs he is making will expand when heated by the sun.
He has to create space if he is to avoid people calling him a quack engineer.
The spaces he creates are the expansion gaps.
You might have seen them in bridges.
They are necessary so that when the concrete is heated, instead o f the bridge cracking and collapsing, the expansion gaps accommodates the lengthening.
In creating the expansion, the engineer is merely relying on the scientific knowledge he has acquired.
In the same manner as above, the manager also draws from the body of knowledge which has been accumulated scientifically when solving management problems.
As a result, a person who is managing without the body of knowledge is trusting on luck or intuition or is simply practicing witchcraft.
He is shallow, but with scientific knowledge behind him in addition to his intelligence, imagination and foresight, he could be an excellent manager.
From what we have been discussing, we can safely conclude that management 23  is both an art and a science.
It is in the realm of science because there exists a body of knowledge which has been scientifically determined.
And the application of the knowledge in giving viable solution to management problems in organisations brings out the art nature of management.
Self Assessment Exercise 5: There are many professions that have the twin nature of art and science.
List five of such professions which are commonly found in Nigeria.
3.8 Schools of Management Thoughts We are still digging more depth in our quest and understanding of management.
In the last section, we were able to trace though briefly the history of management.
We saw that concepts and techniques of management were applied by peoples of ancient time.
We saw this demonstrated in places like the ancient Egypt, ancient China, ancient Greece and ancient Rome.
Socrates, one of the ancient Greek philosophers looked at management and declared that the skill needed for management practice is different from technical skill.
When compared to Sir Reynolds’ definition, which we had in the very first section of Unit 1 of this course, we saw how close they are.
This is because Sir Reynolds defined management as getting things done through the efforts of others.
We further analysed this definition so as to get the real meanings.
In this section, we are going to add more to our house of knowledge.
We are going to look at the various schools that contributed to the body of knowledge called management.
Remember, that in the last section, the urge to develop this body of knowledge became more pronounced during and immediately after the Second World War.
And we gave reasons for this.
Many schools of thoughts contributed to the development of management.
Such schools include: The empirical/case study school, the interpersonal behaviour school, the group behaviour school, the decision theory school and the communication centre school.
Others are the mathematical or management 24  science school and finally, the operational school.
We shall look at these schools and their contributions.
We will also like to see their relative advantages and limitations.
3.8.1 The Empirical or Case Study School This approach analyses management by a study of experience.
That is, what one has been able to do and did it successfully now becomes experience.
It is the belief of the members of this school of thought that such an experience will be a means of transferring knowledge to a student.
What we are saying is that the student will be made to study the experience and see what lesson(s) or techniques he may learn.
Such analysis will enable the students to be acquainted with the lessons in such a way that in future he may be able to apply the lessons learnt in similar circumstance.
Typical of this school are those who teach management policy or what is sometimes referred to as strategic management by the study and analyses of cases.
Argument of the School: The argument of this school is based on the assumption that through the study of managers’ successes and mistakes in individual case, and if their attempts at solving some specific problems were successful, students and practitioners of management will be able to somehow understand and learn to apply effective techniques in comparable situations.
The emphasis here is that those who believe in this approach look at the distilled thoughts of managers in terms of what they have been able to do rightly or wrongly, the circumstances surrounding each case, how they were able to analyse the case and eventually took the decisions.
Thereafter, the outcome would then be looked into to find out whether it contributed to organisational success, or the opposite was the case.
Advantages: The major advantage of this approach to management is in its practical nature.
Management is a profession which has to be practiced.
Any method that will make this to be realised and effective should be encouraged.
The case study approach because of 25  its practical utility has the attraction of being useful in the study and practice of management.
Limitation: The drawback in the case study or empirical approach is that unlike law, management is not a science that is based on precedent, and future situations looking exactly like the past ones may not occur.
Another limitation is that a technique that was found to be right in the past may be far from an exact for a somewhat similar situation in the future.
Even though it is sometimes said that history repeats itself, management is not history.
3.8.2 The School of Interpersonal Behaviour This school is of the conviction that management is getting things done with and through the efforts of people.
As a result of this, the study of management should be centred on interpersonal relations.
This is necessary because when people meet, certain behaviours must be shown reflecting the different backgrounds of the individuals involved.
Some of the behaviours are necessary for the attainment of organisational goals; others do not contribute positively to realizing the objectives of the organisation.
Management should look at both forms of behaviour and encourage the positive ones while efforts should be put in place to curtail the negative ones so that they will not affect adversely the organisation.
This school of management can sometimes be called “human relations”, or “leadership” or “behavioural sciences” school.
They possess existing theories, methods and techniques of the relevant social sciences on the study of intra and inter-personal behaviours.
These behaviours range from the various ways an individual behaves to the cultural influences that shape and affect the behaviours of others.
26  The Major Forms: The major forms of interpersonal behaviour approach is that it concentrates on the human aspect of management and the principle that when people work together to realise some group objective, they should understand themselves.
People should know why the individual is behaving the way he does.
This means that the focus is on the individual and his or her motivations as a human being.
Human relation is seen as an art which the manager has to practice.
This school also focuses attention on the manager as a leader.
As a leader, he guides, influences, and teaches those he manages.
Here, management is being regarded as leadership.
Advantage: The approach has been able to point out the need to recognise individuals in an organization and properly motivate them.
Without them, nothing happens in an organisation.
The approach also recognises the importance of leadership to good management.
A person who cannot demonstrate leadership quality should not be placed in charge of others as a manager.
The Limitation: Even though interpersonal behaviour is important to management, it can hardly be said that it covers the entire field of management.
There are still other important areas which this school of thought has not covered.
3.8.3 The Group Behaviour School The group behaviour approach is closely related to the interpersonal behaviour approach.
Sometimes, the two approaches are confused.
This school of thought on management has those who look on management as first and foremost a study of group behaviours.
It 27  does not matter whether it is a small group with their ways of doing things or large groups like departments in organisations.
Contribution: The group behaviour approach has made many worthy contributions to management.
One of the areas of contributions is the recognition of the organised enterprise as a social organism, and not just buildings, plants and machines.
The social organism, which is an organisation, is in turn made up of many other smaller social organisms existing as departments, units or sections.
The big social organism and the smaller social organisms existing in the big one are all subject to the attitudes, habits, pressures and conflicts of the cultural environment of the people.
This is important because no business organisation or any organisation can exist or do business outside the culture of the people.
Another area of contribution is in recognition of the informal groups which exist in the former.
We need to emphasise the influence of informal groups, seeing the importance of furnishing or providing incentives to get members of the group to contribute efforts towards group objectives.
All these and more underscore the importance of sociological understanding to the meaning of management practices which this approach is emphasising.
Limitation: It must be pointed out, however, that basic sociology, i.e.
the analysis of social and group behaviours in social systems is not all that there is in management.
This is because management is still much more than sociology.
Self Assessment Exercise 6: Take an organisation of your choice.
Such an organisation can be a school, church, mosque, ministry or business organisation.
The organisation is referred to, according to the group behaviour school as a social organism.
This school of thought also says that there are smaller social organisms existing within the big organism.
Enumerate these smaller organisms.
What roles do they play to realise the overall objectives of the big social organism?
28  3.8.4 The Cooperative Social System School The two schools of though which we recently discussed (the interpersonal behaviour and group behaviour) have approaches to the study and practice of management.
These approaches increasingly focused on human relationships as cooperative social system.
The Major Focus: The major focus of the cooperative social system lies in the limitations of human beings and by implication an organisation.
Since an organisation is a social system consisting of human beings, it is also limited.
Because human beings and organisations are limited, there is the need to cooperate.
What one person cannot achieve, through cooperative efforts, much more can be achieved.
The cooperative spirit is not only out, the formal organisation has also within it.
Consequently, management as a process is based on cooperation.
What the production department does, finance department may not be able to do it.
Similarly, what marketing department can accomplish, personnel department may not be able to attempt it and so on.
Within the respective department too, cooperation should be emphasised because of, again, the limitations of the employees.
All efforts must be brought to together and limited, each action complementing and supporting the other.
Limitation: There is no doubt that the cooperative social system approach does have real value to management, but the fact remains that we do not have managers in all kinds of cooperative efforts.
For instance, hijacking students’ demonstration and unleashing terrors to the public cannot be said to have a manager.
Let us take another example.
The motorists driving along the Abuja – Lokoja highway may decide to cooperate and share a part of the highway because another part of it is bad.
No manager is appointed and paid to do this, but what you have is cooperation.
We can therefore conclude that this school of thought is broader than management.
Also in practice, it tends to overlook many management concepts, principles and techniques that are important to practicing managers.
29  Self Assessment Exercise 7: I want you to think further for some minutes.
Write out some incidents where people cooperated among themselves without a manager.
3.8.5 The Socio-Technical System School The major emphasis of this school is that to solve social problems, it is not enough to look only at the cooperative social system, which has arisen because of the limitation of human beings but to look at the technical system and how it affects and is affected by the cooperative social system.
The technical system consists of methods of work and machines.
While the cooperative social system will influence the type of method to use to get the job done and also the machines that will be necessary, the social system itself is being influenced by the methods, by work and machines as well.
In other words, personal attitudes, habits, belief system etc.
and group behaviours are influenced by the technical system in which people work.
The approach views an organisation from two areas, namely: the technical system on one side and the social system at the end; and the two must interact.
While managing, the individuals in the group and their cultural background should be noted.
Equally important is the way the work is being done and the type of machines or equipments they are using because they affect them as well.
Limitation: The socio-technical system is an important area for inquiry and research underlying the practice of managing, but again, it is certainly not all that there is to the field of management.
3.8.6 The Decision Theory School The approach concentrates on rational decision.
You should note that the management function of planning entail that a manager is always making decisions.
In rational decision making, the manager has to make the selection from among possible alternatives of a course of action.
As a result, making a decision involves conscious choice of action.
30  And to choose means that there are alternatives to choose from; otherwise choice is not possible.
The decision theories, i.e.
those that study the art of decision making may study the decision itself.
They try to evaluate decisions with the purpose of finding out whether they are the right one or not.
They may also study the individual or organised group making the decision to find out whether the mental ability is there and the effect of the environment under which a decision is made.
The theorists, as a further area of interest, may study the decision process.
The decision process consists of steps that need to be followed in order to make a rational decision.
In looking at these areas of interests, what the theorists do are: to look at the economic rationale of the decision such as to increase sales output; to make more profit among others; to regard principles of decision making as useful for analysing the psychological and sociological factors surrounding the decision maker and his environment, i.e.
the mental state and the behaviour of the decision maker as well as the culture of where he comes from because it influences him as well.
Usefulness of the Approach: There is usefulness of business organisations which exist to make profit among other objectives.
However, profit can only be made when there are sales which are the same thing as revenue.
The sales are made because the consumers have decided to buy, i.e.
exchanging their money with the organisation’s products and/or services.
In other words, the consumers make conscious choice of what is sometimes referred to as rationale choice in choosing from among products of competing organisations.
There are factors that are responsible for the consumers/customers’ choices such as: economic factors, family factor, advertisement and cultural factors.
All these factors are usually analysed by the decision theorists and they help in sales management, which is important because without sales the business organisation can never remain in business.
31  The decision theory school is therefore regarded as an outgrowth of the theory of consumers choices in the market and most members of this school are economic theorists.
These theorists, we must point out, make the content of the theory on decision through the construction of model and through mathematics.
Self Assessment Exercise 8: I want you to reflect on your purchase decisions for the past one year.
You are going to stretch your power of memory a little bit by recollecting major purchases you made and some minor ones.
On a sheet of paper, write out the major purchases, on another sheet, write down the minor purchases.
For each of the items, write the factors that influenced the purchases.
These factors may include: the product class, the money available because others are using the product among other reasons.
Also indicate the length of time taken to make the purchase decision.
It could be from a few minutes to days.
3.8.7 The Communication-Centre School In this school of thought, the manager is looked on as the communication centre.
This means that activities concerning the nature and practice of management are all centred on the need to have an effective communication system where the manager is at the centre of that system.
The knowledge and skills of managing are within the flow of information.
Without the inflow of information freely in an organisation, management will be handicapped.
The manager receives the information; he has to process the information in order to find out how necessary and relevant it is to managing.
After the processing, the ones he requires to use immediately are utilised while the other ones that he may not use now are stored.
When required in the future, the stored information are quickly taken from the storage for the purpose of being used.
Using the information also demands dissemination to other individuals and groups that may need it to do their job.
32  This approach therefore emphasises the role of communication in managing as well as the central importance of decision making in the practice of management.
We have to understand that mathematics can be applied in any of the schools of management we have previously studied.
But this approach is seen by those management theorists who see management as a system of mathematical models and processes.
The most popular theorists along this line are operations researchers or operations scientists who called themselves management scientists.
The belief of these theorists is that if management and the practice of it is a logical process, it can be expressed in mathematical symbols and relationships.
The major focus of the school is the model.
It is through the model that the device or problem involving the attention of the manager can be expressed in its basic relationships and in terms of selected goals.
It focuses on the need for logical process in giving solution to the problem such as: the definition of the problems, using symbols for unknown data, and through logical methodology developed over the years of scientific application, a power tool for solving or simplifying complex problems has emerged.
Limitation: Though mathematics is useful in solving management problems, it is hard to see mathematics as a separate school of management theory any more than it can be considered as a separate school in physics, chemistry or engineering.
Since these other disciplines have mathematics as component of their theories and not separate, why is it that in management, it should not be regarded as just a part of it.
3.8.8 The Operational School This school of thought brings together all the approaches to management that we have studied or considered, to those elements of each which relate to actual managing.
That is, those elements which can be useful to management practitioners in understanding their job and performing more efficiently and effectively.
33  The Focus: The major focus of this school is that it recognises that there is a central core of knowledge about managing which exists only in management.
This core of knowledge includes such areas as line relationship, staff relationship, forms of department, span of management, managerial appraisal, and various managerial techniques in controlling.
All these and many more involve concepts, techniques and principles as well as the underlying science which can only be found because managers are involved.
In other words, if managers are not there, then these principles become irrelevant.
This approach also recognises the many elements which are denied from the other fields.
These include the application of motivation and leadership principles, techniques of decision making, principles of group behaviour among others.
The operational approach sees management as a body of knowledge that can be applied at all levels of managing and in all types of enterprises.
Also, the approach recgonises that the actual problems that managers face and the environment in which they manage may vary between organisations and levels.
Theory is looked on as a way of organising knowledge and experience so that practice can be improved on through research, testing the techniques and principles out of practice and the teaching of fundamentals.
4.0 CONCLUSION Having successfully grasped the import of each of the topics treated in this unit, you should consider yourself versed in the theoretical aspects of management and administration.
You would by now, be in a better position to discuss the art and science of management.
You are however encouraged to note that your understanding of management in this way is not to be regarded as an end in itself, rather, see it as a means to an end as you would one day have an opportunity if you have not gotten it already when you would be saddled with the responsibility of administering learning resource centre.
34  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that management is an important aspect in any organisation where tasks are to be performed by the human resources therein.
Also, the need for proper organisation of non-human resources in an organistaion has been stressed.
Your roles as an administrator/manager have been stressed.
You have also been adequately informed about the controversy that usually generates when the concept of management is being discussed.
Your position on this issue could better be placed by if need be going over some of the points raised for or against the topical issue.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
What do you understand by the term management?
b. Differentiate clearly between management and administration.
c. What roles would you ascribe to management in an organisation?
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Koontz, H. and O’Donnell, C. (1978).
Management: A System and Contingency Analysis of Management Functions.
McGraw-Hill International Kogaknsha, Japan.
Koontz, H. and O’Donnell, C. (1983).
Management: A System and Contingency Analysis of Management Functions.
McGraw-Hill International, NJ: USA.
Mark, Sheud (2007).
Definition of Management in Leaderhip 501.
Goggle Search.
November 7, 2009.
35  UNIT 2: THE NATURE OF HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT.
Introduction Objectives Main Content 3.1 Definition of Human Resource Management 3.2 Definition of Management 3.3 The Issues in Human Resource Management Conclusion Summary Tutor marked Assignment Reference 1.0 Introduction This course is related to the nature and scope of Human Resource Management.
This unit focuses specifically on the nature of human resource management.
The unit is a guide to the filed of human resource management.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the Unit objectives below: 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: Describe the nature of human resource management.
Identify what human resources are Define management.
Main Content 3.1 Definition of Human Resource Management The term ‘human resource management’ (HRM) has been subjected to considerable debate.
The concept is shrouded in managerial hype and its 8underlying philosophy and character is highly controversial because it lacks precise formulation and agreement as to 36  its significance.
Nonetheless, definition of the subject matter is given according to Bratton and Gold (1999:11) as: “That part of the management process that specialized in the management of people in work organizations.
HRM emphasizes that employees are critical to achieving sustainable competitive advantage, that human resources practice specialists help organizational controllers to meet both efficiency and equity objectives” Naturally, the definition of human resource management would be incomplete without further explaining what the terms, “human resources” and “management” are.
First and foremost, people in work organizations, endowed with a range of abilities, talents and attitudes, influence productivity, quality and profitability.
People set overall strategies and goals, design work systems, produce goods and services, monitor quality, allocate financial resources, and market the products and services.
Individuals, therefore, become ‘Human resources’ by virtue of the roles they assume in the work organization.
Employment roles are defines and described in a manner designed to minimize particular employees’ contributions to achieving organizational objectives.
In theory, the management of people is not different from the management of other resources of organizations.
In practice, what makes it different is the nature of the resource, people.
One set of perspective views the human being as potentially a creative and complex resource whole behavior is surrounded by many diverse factors originating from either the individual or the surrounding environment.
Organizational behaviour theories, for example, suggest that the behavior and performance of the ‘ human resource ‘ is a function of at least four variable: ability motivation role, perception and situation contingencies.
Another set of perspectives emphasizes the problematic nature of employment relations: (Watson.
1986).
The human resources differ from other resources the employer uses, partly because individuals are endowed with varying levels of ability (including aptitudes, skills and knowledge), with personality traiats gender, role perception and differences in experience, and partly as a result of differences in motivation and commitment.
In other words, employees differ from other resources 37  because of their ability to evaluate and to question management’s actions and their commitment and co-operation always has to be won.
In addition, employees have the capacity to form groups and trade unions to defend or further their economic interest.
Human resource is often referred to as personnel, staff or workers.
Definition of Management The term ‘management’ may be applied to either a social group or a process.
The term; ‘management’ when applied to a process, conjures up in the mind a variety of images of managerial work.
Management may be seen as a science or as an art.
The image of management as a science is based on the view that experts have accumulated a distinct body of knowledge about management which, if studied and applied, can enhance organizational effectiveness.
This view assumed that people can be effective managers.
Classical management theorists set out to develop a science of management’, in which management is defined in terms of planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating and controlling’ in this classical conception, management is regarded as primarily concerned with internal affairs.
Another set of perceptive on the roles of management emphasizes that an organization in all work organizations.
By power it means the capacity of an individual to influence others who are in a state of dependence.
Organizational politics refers to those activities that are not required as part of a manager’s formal role, but which influence, or attempt to influence, the distribution of resources for the purpose of promoting personal objectives.
Politics in organization is simply a fact of life.
Those who fail to acknowledge political behaviour ignore the reality that organizations are political systems.
An alternative image of managerial activity is to view management as art.
This implies that managerial ability and success depends upon traits such as intelligence, charisma, decisiveness, enthusiasm, integrity, dominance and self – confidence.
The practical implications of this view are quite different from the ‘management as science’ approach.
If management is equated with specific traits associated with successful styles of leadership, it would provide a basis for selecting the ‘right’ individual for managerial positions in the organization.
Managerial skills can be development but cannot be 38  acquired by attending ‘business schools’.
In other words, if management is an art, managers are born.
The science – versus – art discourse is not an arid academic debate, given public and private expenditure on management education and training.
The theme of control in organizations provides yet another view of the role of management.
From this perceptive, managerial control is the central focus of management activity.
According to this approach, manager seek to control the labour process by disk killing workers using scientific management techniques and new technology.
In searching for the meaning of management, Watson’s (1994) ethnography study focuses attention on how managers shape both themselves and their subordinates through communicating values to be shared throughout the organization.
He argues that management is inherently a social and moral activity; a human social craft.
It requires the ability to interpret the thoughts and wants of others – be these employees, customers, competitors or whatever – and the facility to shape meanings; values and human commitments.
Perhaps the most sensible way to approach the debate of what management is, is byh recognizing that management is indeed both an art and a science and that, at the same time, it is involved in both political behaviour and control.
3.3 The issues in Human Resource Management Every educational system at every level depends heavily on teachers for the execution of its programmes.
Maintaining and improving educational standards is only possible through teachers.
The teacher, therefore, is the most indispensable entity in the school.
He is the greatest aid to learning.
Thus as far as possible, he should be thoroughly trained and supported in his work.
Human resource management deals with the establishment of procedures for the employment and payment of workers or staff.
It is the arrangement of condition which make possible greater self direction by staff in the performance of their duties.
It is, therefore, an important function in the general context of all administrative responsibility 39  of managing staff.
However, in Nigeria, the Ministries of Education Teaching Service Commission are very much involve in a number of policies affecting teachers.
Areas of such involvement, for example, include recruitment, staff development, transfers and promotions, staff evaluation, dismissal and general discipline, salaries and pensions.
Thus, the life of the school teacher is affected by the activities officials in the Ministries of Education or their agencies Consequently, the interaction of the two becomes essential if teaching is to become effective.
It should also be remembered that the major presime of staff or human resource management in schools is that the end results of the educative process will be determined by the effectiveness of the school teachers.
In dealing with staff or human resource management in schools, we are essentially concerned with three major issues namely: assessing, the need for staff, satisfying the need for staff and maintaining and improving staff services.
These will be discussed in later units.
Exercise 1 .
1 Define the term human resource management.
Answer Kit Human resource refers to the personnel, staff or workers in an organization.
Management means the methods by which the leader utilizes material and human resources to achieve predetermined organizational goals.
Thus, human resource and function in an organization.
Conclusion Human resource management has been defined as the methods of integrating and maintaining workers in an organization so that the organization can achieve the purpose and meet then goals for which it was established.
It is the coordination of the activities and efforts of the workers in an organization so that organizational goals are achieved.
In other words human resource management is the process of motivating workers in the organization so as to obtain maximum output from them.
40  5.0 Summary In this unit you have been introduced to the concepts of ‘human resource’ and management’.
You have seen that human resource management and personnel administration (management) refer to the same thing.
Let us now turn our attention to unit 2 where we shall treat the functions and activities of human resource management.
Tutor Marked Assignment Describe the nature of human resource management References Bratton, John and God, Jeffrey (1999) Human Resource Management – Theory and practice.
– London, Macmillan Press Ltd. Watson.
T. (1986) Management, Organization and Employment Strategy.
London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Musaazi, J.C.S.
(1982) The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London, Macmillan Press Ltd. 41  UNIT 3: MODELS OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT Introduction Objectives The Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM 3.1 The Harvard Model of HRM 3.2 The Warwick Model of HRM 3.3 The Storey Model of HRM Conclusion Summary Tutor Marked Assignment References 1.0 Introduction This Unit is related to various models of human resource management.
It focuses specifically on Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM, the Harvard Model of HRM, the Warwick Model of HRM and the Storey Model of HRM.
The unit guides you through model application to increase organizational effectiveness.
Let us look at what you should learn in this, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to : Apply each model to improve on your skill in managing your staff in the school organization Explain the strengths and weakness of each model.
The Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM The early HRM model developed by Fombrun et al (1984) emphasizes the interrelatedness and the coherence of human resource management activities.
(The human resource management cycle in their model consists of four key constituent 42  component selection, appraisal, development and rewards (Figure 1)These four human resource activities aim to increase organizational performance.
The weakness of the Fombrun, et al.
model is its apparent prescription nature with its focus on four key HRM practices.
It also ignores different stakeholder interests, situational factors and the notion of management’s strategic choice.
The strength of the model however, is that it expresses the coherence of internal HRM policies and practices the organization’s external business strategy.
The HRM cycle is also a simple that serves as a pedagogical framework for explaining the nature and significance key HRM practices and the interactions among the factors making up the complete fields of human resource management.
Human resource development Selection Performance Appraisal Rewards Figure 1: The Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna model of HRM 3.1 The Harvard Model of HRM The analytical framework of the ‘Harvard model’ consists of six basic components.
Situation factors Stakeholders interests Human Resource Management policy Choice HRM outcome Long-term consequences A feedback loop through which the outputs flow.
43  The Harvard model for HRM is shown in Figure 2 Stakeholder Interests Shareholders Management Employee groups Government Community Unions HRM policy HR outcomes Long term Choices Commitment Consequences Employee influence Competence Individual well Human Resource Congruence Being Situation facors flow Cost effectiveness Organizational Orkforce Reward Systems Effectiveness Characteristics Work Systems Societal well being Business strategy and conditions Management Philosophy Labour market Unions Task Technology Laws and societal values Figure 2 The Harvard Model of HRM The situational factors influence management’s choice of HRM strategy.
This normative model incorporates workforce characteristics, management philosophy, labour market, regulations, societal values and patterns of unionization, and suggests a merging of both ‘product market’ and ‘socio – cultural logics’.
Analytically, both HRM scholars and practitioners will be more comfortable with contextual variables included in the model because it conforms to the reality of what they know: ‘the employment relationship entails a blending of business and societal expectations’ The stakeholder interests recognize the importance of ‘trade-offs’, either explicitly, between the interests of owners and those of employees and their organizations, the unions.
Although the model is still vulnerable to the charge of ‘unitarism’.
It is much more pluralist frame of reference than that found in later models.
Human resource management policy choices emphasize that management decisions and actions in HRM can be appreciated fully if it is recognized that the result from an 44  interaction between constraints and choices.
The model depict management as a real actor, capable of making at least some degree of unique contribution within environmental and organizational parameters and or influencing those parameters itself over time.
The human resource outcomes are high employee commitment to organization goals and high individual performance leading to cost effective products or services.
The underlying assumption here is that employees have talents that are rarely fully utilized at work, and they show a desire to experience through work.
Thus the HRM model takes the view that organizations should be designed on the basis of these assumptions inherits to McGregor’s Theory Y.
The long term consequences distinguish between three levels: individual organizational and societal.
At the individual employee level the long-term output comprise the psychological rewards workers receive in exchange for efforts.
At this organizational level increased effectiveness ensures the survival of the organizational.
In turn, at the societal level, as a result of fully utilizing people at work, some society’s goal (for example, employment and growth)are obtained.
A strength the Harvard model is the classification of inputs and outcomes at both organization and societal level, creating the basis for a critique of comparative HRM (Boxall 1992).
A weakness of the model is the absence of a coherent theoretical basis measuring the relationship between HRM inputs, outcomes and performance.
The sixth component of the Harvard model is the feedback loop.
As we have discussed, the situational factors influence HRM policy and choices.
Conversely however, long-term outputs can influence the situational factors, stakeholder interests and HRM policies.
The feedback loop in figure 2 reflects this two ward relationship.
There is no doubting the attractiveness of the Harvard model.
It clearly provides a useful analytical basis for the study of HRM.
The model also contain elements that are analytical (that is, situational factors, stakeholders, strategic choice levels) and prescriptive (that is, notions of commitment, competence and so on (Boxall; 1992) 45  Social economic Technical Political legal Competitive Inner Content Culture Structure Politics / leadership Task technology Business Outputs HRM Context Business Strategy Content Role Definition Objectives Organization Product market HR Outputs Strategy and tactics HRM content HR Flows Work Sytems Reward systems Employee relations Figure 3: The Warwick Model of HRM Exercise 1.1 What is the significance of a model to HRM?
Answer Kit It serves as a guide to practice.
It assists to set framework upon which the principles of HRM could be applied for better results.
46  3.2.
The Warwick Model of HRM This model emanates form the Center for Corporate Strategy and Chanage at the university of Warwick and with two particular researchers, Hendry and Pettigrew (1990).
The Warwick model draws heavily from the Harvard framework to extend the analysis of HRM and has five elements: Outer context Inner Context business strategy content HRM Context HRM content (figure 3) The model takes congnisance of HRM business strategy and HRM practices, the external and internal context in which these activities take place, and the process by which such change takes place, including interactions between changes in both context and content.
The strength of the model is that it identifies and classifies important environment influence on HRM.
Hendry and Pettigrew’s research focused on mapping the context, identifying an inner (organizational) context and an external (wider environment) context and exploring how HRM adapted to changes in context.
The Storey Model of HRM The ‘storey Model’ is derived from the speculative accounts of what the HRM paradigm might consist of and from the literature on the ‘standard modems’.
The model demonstrate the difference between what Storey termed the ‘personnel and industrial’ and the HRM paradigm.
His model also has four parts: Beliefs and Assumptions Strategic aspects Line Management Key levers (see Figure 4) 47  PIR and HRM the difference Figure 4 The Storey model of HRM Dimension Personnel and IR HRM Beliefs and assumptions Careful delineation of Aim to go beyond contract Contract written contracts Can do outlook; impatience Rules importance of devising clear With rules Guide to management action rules / mutuality Business Behaviour referent procedures / consistency Need/ flexibility/commitment Managerial task vis a vis control Values/mission Labour norms/custom and practice Nurturing Nature of relations monitoring Conflict Unitarist Standardization pluralist De-emphasized Strategic aspects institutionalized Low (for example ‘party’) Key relations high (for example ‘parity an issue) Not seen as relevant Initiatives Corporate Plan labour – management Business – customer Speed of decision piecemeal Integrated Line Management marginal to Central to Fast Management role slow Key managers Transformational leadership Prized management skills transactional General/business/line Key levers personnel / IR specialists Managers Foci of attention for Facilitation Interventions negotiation Selection Wide ranging cultural Pay personnel procedures Structural and personnel Condition Strategies Labour separates marginal task Integrated, key task Management job evaluation; multiple Performance – related; few if Thrust of relations with fixed grades Any grades Stewards separately negotiated Harmonization Communication collective bargaining Towards individual contracts Job design contracts Conflict handling regularized through Marginalized (with exceptions of some Training and development facilities and training bargaining for change models) Increased flow/direct restricted flow/indirect Teamwork division of labour Manage climate and culture reach temporary truces Learning companies.
controlled accesses to courses According to the stereotypes depicted in Figure 4, HRM attempts to increase trust and employee commitment and aims to go ‘beyond the contract’.
The strategic aspects of Storey’s model shows HRM central to corporate planning.
The third component, line management, gives HRM specialists a ‘transformational leadership’ role in the 48  organization.
Evidence from core companies suggest that general managers and line managers have emerge in almost all cases as the players on HRM issues.
The key levers are shown.
On the lower portion of Storey’s model and are issue and technique strongly featured, explicitly or implicitly, in discussion of HRM.
Storey found considerable unevenness in the adoption of these key levers (performance – related pay, harmonization of conditions and the learning company).
This model, argue Hendry and Pettigrew, provides better descriptions of structures and strategy-making in complex organizations and or frameworks for understanding them (which)are an essential underpinning for analyzing HRM.
While the implication is that those organizations achieving and alignment between the external and internal contexts will experience superior performance; this in actual fact is the main weakness of the model.
Exercise 1.2 What are the basic principles of the Storey Model of HRM as shown in Figure 4?
Answer Kit The storey Model of HRM has 4 parts namely (1) beliefs and assumptions (2) Strategic Aspects (3) line management and (4) key levers.
The model is built on the following principles.
Increase the trust and commitment of employee Corporate planning Transformational leadership role of the head Harmonization of conditions, performance must be relate to pay 4.0 Conclusion The model described in this unit have strengths which the school head can effectively draw upon to achieve the goals of the organization.
The weaknesses of the model, however, can be avoided by the school head in order to succeed 49  5.0 Summary This unit has focused on four main models of human resource management which the school head can apply to achieve maximum success with his staff.
The models are: (1) The Fmbrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM (2) The Harvard Model of HRM (3) The Wardwick Model of HRM and (4) The Storey Model of HRM The main principles of each model were described; the strengths and weaknesses of each were also highlighted for caution in the application by the school head.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Pick any 2 models.
Described the main features of each and outline the main strengths.
What are their implications for effective performance by staff in the school system.
7.0 References Boxall, P. (1992) “Strategic Human Resource Management: Beginning of a new theoretical sophistication” Human Resource Management Journal 2 (3): 60 – 76 Fombrun, C, Tichy, N.M. and Devanna, M.A.
(eds) (1984).
Strategic Human Resource Management.
New York.
Wiley Hendry, C. Pettigrew, A.
(1990) “Human Resource Management.
An Agenda for 1990s” international Journal of Human Resource Management.
1 (1): 17 – 44 50  UNIT 4: MOTIVATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Motivation 3.2 Principle of Motivation 3.3 Theories of Human Needs – Abrahan Maslow’s Need Theory 3.4 Theory X and Theory Y 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit is related to Human Resource Management.
It focuses specifically on issues of motivation and performance in Organization, The unit gives you an insight into the significant role motivation and morale play in the progress of an organization.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to : • Define the concepts of motivation • Explain the influence of motivation on staff performance.
• Describe how staff morale can be booted by the media centre Director.
3.0 Motivation and performance in Organizations Government and organization may build and equip all schools with the best science and technical equipment, provide all the basic educational materials, renovate and rehabilitate all old schools; provide library and other necessary facilities as well as the best qualified staff, yet the problem confronting educational administration would be half solved.
51  Teachers who are the bedrock of any educational system need to be treated fairly well in terms of prompt settlement of their entitlements and enjoyment of other benefits enjoyed by other public servants.
So until the human needs of the teachers are satisfied the desire of the government, parents and society for an improved educational system will be a hopeless dream and at best a nightmare; and investment in education will not be very beneficial to society in the final analysis.
3.1.
Motivation Motivation is the inner drive which prompt people to act in a certain way (Musaazi, 1992).
Motivation is also an urge or drive within or outside an individual which makes him to take action.
It could be aroused by a tangible physical need, an emotion or an idea.
To ensure that an organization functions efficiently and effectively in attaining its goals, there is every need to motivate its works force to avoid deviation from the standard operating procedures.
For any organization like a school to function effectively, money, physical facilities, well thought out policies, equipment and human input are very essential.
Human resources are the life-blood of an institution.
Thus, the success of any school system, therefore, depends to a large extent, on the quality of those who perform its tasks leading to the set objectives, as well as conditions, which affect their mental and physical health.
Against the above background setting, maintaining and retaining efficient and effective school staff is one of the most essential tasks of school authorities.
This task is not an easy one because each staff within the school system exhibits his or her personality traits, need, hopes and aspirations which are not always compatible with the demands of the set up.
However, the extent to which these individual need dispositions are integrated to achieve organizational goals determines the success of an administrator.
This makes the disposition more meaning to those in the system than he himself can imagine.
Although the provision of material benefits in form of remuneration, advancement and fringe benefits are not entirely within the powers of the school head, he nevertheless, has 52  power to initiate them.
The school head can do a lot by filling staff confidential report form as at when due, recommending deserving staff for promotion and further studies, recommending their annual leave and pursuing their leave bonus for them, getting staff salaries for them on time, rectifying abnormalities in the payment vouchers like omission or pay shortages and so on.
All these are motivation factors that can stimulate staff to react positively to the school system leading to the achievement of organization goals.
There are three basic types of behaviour, which are essential for an organization to function effectively namely: • People should be induced to enter and remain within the system • They must carry out their role assignments in a dependable fashion • They must be involved in innovative and spontaneous activity in achieving organizational objectives.
There is embedded in the three the need do motivate the staff towards a common goal.
Staff motivation, therefore has to do with how our staff in our educational institutions perceive their work and how they have towards their work.
It is clear that a person will always know that what h has great enthusiasm in doing is that which will give him or her maximum satisfaction, or at least some contentment will be derived from it either to himself or to the institutions, which he belongs.
Motivation, therefore, is not bribery, and it is not about manipulation.
It is but understanding the needs of workers and providing ways to help them attain or satisfy those needs through the organization.
Theories have been postulated to help us understand the role of motivation in human organization.
Abraham maslow in 1943 formulated his theory of needs.
He explained motivation as a contingent ‘’series of ascending urges’’ from the basic physical needs through safety and social needs to self esteem and self-actualization.
The significance of maslow theory of hierarchy of needs is that the behaviour of any person is donated by the lowest group of needs, which remain unsatisfied, but once the needs have been satisfied they cease to play an active role.
The next higher need in the pyramid will be pursued.
School principle are duty bound to see that the teacher under them are motivated and their interest are always high.
Challenging situation should be provided so that teachers find themselves moving towards self actuation.
53  According to Frederick herberg {1959}, the hygiene factors, which are in the work environment, are sources of dissatisfaction in woke5rs.
Manager are to be aware of them and rectify them.. these factors include workers ‘ pay ,fringe benefits, working conditions, quality supervision and administrative policies.
On the other hand, there are motivators which management should undertake to encourage the workers.
These are needs for recognition, advancement, achievement, personal growth and self-fulfillment.
It is pertinent to note that needs are inc ontinuum.
The Herberg model lends itself very much to school authorities’ practice, despite its value loaded connotations.
When a teach is denied his salaries, deprived of fringe benefits and kept outside the decision-making process in the school, we shall expect nothing but low performance and sometimes antagonism from such a teacher.
The downing of chalk by teachers in many States of this country is an indicator of the dissatisfaction of teachers with their environment.
It has been argued that men are led to behave sensibly and to do the right thing by a variety of stimulations, inducements and the organization of the work environment.
The working environment of teachers should be improved.
The staff will feel happy if after teaching for some periods they come to the staff room and find water to wash their chalky hands, can have some cold water to drink and above all some tea or coffee to refresh themselves.
School principals, can take the lead in making the working environment conducive for teachers to stay and for motivation to thrive.
Of course, school heads have their own handicaps in boosting morale and motivation among their fellow teachers.
For example, it is beyond the powers of a school principal to provide housing accommodation for teachers without building grants from the government or school proprietors.
Teachers however, enjoy rent subsidy but report late to school and or forfeit some vital school activities owing to immobility.
It is not the principal but the Ministry of Education or Teaching Service Board / Commission that are supposed to advance vehicle and housing loans to teachers.
Prospects for promotion motivation staff to work harder to achieve school goals Promotion makes an individual see a concrete sign of his worth and recognition for his past performance.
He is ignited to work harder to justify the confidence reposed on him.
54  Promotion should be purely on merit and not by any kind of favoritism.
Favoritism is a negative impetus towards staff motivation.
It is unfortunate that in most of our Ministries of Education, promotion issues are not treated fairly.
Some teachers are known to have been stagnated on one grade level for many years without promotion.
Such teachers are killed professionally as they continue to grudge and lose his mates and contemporaries promoted over him.
The Ministry of Education has a great role to play in motivating staff.
Lack of effective coordination by the Ministry leaves us with a bizarre situation in the schools.
The Ministry is in a letter position to improve conditions of service to boost the image and morale of the teacher in the society Thus, personnel in school setting need high morale and motivation for their social economic and psychological satisfaction.
The urge to belong should be encouraged and developed in the staff.
It is the contention that unless the human factor is treated carefully, and seen to be important as the productive system, the organization may not succeed.
Human beings crave for love and recognition, their worth should be appreciated and rewarded to cement their ego and this can be done through proper morale and motivational processes.
Exercise 1.1 • What is morale?
• What is Motivation?
• What is the relationship between the two concepts?
Answer Kit • Moral is the emotional reaction of a person to his job.
Elements of morale are courage, zeal, discipline and enthusiasm • Motivation is the process a leader devises to get the best out of his staff.
It is the way he uses to get the best of people.
Thus motivation is concerned with the cause of workers behaviour.
55  • There is a positive relationship between the term morale and motivation.
Morale is the foundation on which motivation is based and motivation is related to morale in that a person who is motivated would not only be enthusiasm in his job but would also ask for extra work and undertake other functions on his own initiative.
The higher the level of morale and motivation, the higher the quality of workers’ contribution to the achievement of the organizational goal will tend to be.
3.4.
Principles of Motivation Motivation is concerned with the cause of behaviour: why people act, speak or think the way they do.
It is part of good leadership for school heads to know how to motivate.
In a school the school head needs to get results through people.
This is best done of the school head helps staff experience job satisfaction.
This is known as “intrinsic motivation” which comes from within rather than “extrinsic motivation” which is too often based on fear.
The best, motivation is the one which comes directly from within the individual worker.
The following are the principle of motivation: 1.
Principle of Participation The staff is involved in decision making and in matters which affect them directly.
The more the stand become involved, the more they are prompted to help in achieving the objectives.
If a school head involves the stand in decision making, he nevertheless remains accountable for taking the final decisions and for results.
2.
Principle of Communication If the staff are informed about the objectives and the results achieved, they are inclined to cooperate more and feel that they are part (members) of the staff (group).
But if the staff do not know what they are supposed to be achieving, they will show little interest and have little motivation.
Staff should not be only be informed about results but also changes and progress.
56  3.
Principle of Recognition If a staff member receives the necessary recognition and work satisfaction, he is inclined to work harder.
Earner recognition brings a feeling of satisfaction and should not be leveled immediately after giving positive recognition.
Recognition should be given to the staff member as a person and not just as a human resource.
4.
Principal of Delegated Authority A school head should be prepared to delegate authority to capable people.
In this way a person’s post is enhanced, and this serves as means of personnel development.
Delegated authority also means that more people will be allowed to make decisions themselves in connection with their work within set guidelines.
These principles of motivation outlined above indicate that certain factors determine individual work motivation.
Motivation factors can be grouped into four namely: personal need, work characteristics, the social system and management methods.
In other words, for successful motivation, the head of the school should not only have some knowledge of the staff, but should also bear certain factors in mind which can enhance or weaken the effect of motivation.
These are factors that are inherent in human beings, factors in the work situation, management factors and community factors.
3.1 Theory of Human Needs According to Abraham Maslow, human need occurs in hierarchy, that is in graded levels of importance.
The basic human need essential to susteain life are physiological need such as , food, shelter and clothing.
Until these basic need are satisfied to a considerable degree, the majority of a person’s activities will tend to be at this level and the other levels will provide him with little motivation.
As soon as the physiological needs are satisfied, other levels of need become important and these motivate and dominate the behaviour of the individual.
When 57  these needs are somewhat satisfied, other needs emerge, and so will the need with highest strength become as shown in figure 1 below: Self – actualization (maximum self-development) Esteem (self respect, ego and status needs) Social (associations with others, belonging to group, giving and receiving friendship and affection) Security (protection against danger, threat, and deprivation) Physiological (hunger, thirst, shelter clothing) Figure 1: Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs.
While these levels in the need hierarchy can be separated for analysis and understanding, they are probably all active in actual behaviour patterns.
The lower level needs are never completely satisfied – they recur periodically – if their satisfaction is deprived for any period of time, they become extremely strong as motivator of behavior.
Esteem and self actualization needs are rarely satisfied;’ each individual seeks indefinitely for more satisfaction of them once they become important for a person.
Yet they are usually not significant until physiological security and social needs are reasonably well satisfied.
Furthermore, a need does not have to be hundred per cen satisfied before the next level of need becomes strong.
Needs change as an individual develops psychologically; for instance, physiological and security needs are dominant early in life, while social, esteem and self actualization needs become relatively more important as a person 58  matures.
The explanation above indicates mere general tendencies and averages; an approximation of understanding human motivation and in predicting behaviour.
There are significant individual differences that the school head must recognize in the school setting in interpreting the behaviour displayed by the people with whom he works.
Exercise 1.1 How can you help teachers in your school to meet their needs for self actualization?
Answer Kit You may consider the following means: 1.
Give them opportunities to attend courses/training programmes that can help to advance them.
2.
Make provisions for them to attend seminars, workshops and conferences in their area of specialization.
3.5 Theory X and Theory Y The proponent of this theory is Douglas Mcgregor.
Under Theory X he has the following assumptions: 1.
Average human being is by nature indolent, he works as little as possible.
He has an inherent dislike of work and will avoid it if he can 2.
The average human being must be coerced controlled or threatened with punishment before he works.
3.
The average human being lacks ambition, dislikes responsibility, lack initiative and prefers to be led by others.
4.
The average human being is by nature self centered, indifferent to organizational needs, and is just concerned about security and nothing else.
59  5.
The average human is by nature resistant to change.
He prefers to sick ot he status quo or simply leave the sleeping dog alone.
6.
The average human being is gullible, dull not intelligent, or a sort of moron.
7. in view of his responsibility to organize the elements of productive enterprise which include both human and material resource, a manager has to direct the efforts of the workers, control their actions and modify their behaviour to match the needs of the organization.
Nevertheless, management under theory X has been criticized from various quarters for being too repressive and it is like trying to make water run uprill.
Of course, such managers are reminded that it is easier to take a horse to the stream than to force it to drink from its water.
Such management style is ineffective because it runs contrary to human nature.
It tends to breed more rather than solve existing industrial conflicts, as the experiences of the post war period have shown.
Thus, instead of sitting down and blaming every worker or the “average human being” for being lazy, stupid or un- cooperative, management should endeavour to find out why workers behave the way they do, and make necessary adjustment in the management style in order to ensure effective management and integration.
In meeting this requirement, a new style of management known as Theory Y, has been developed, based on the knowledge obtained from the studies in the social science for almost half a century.
Under theory Y, the following basic assumptions have been made: 1.
The expenditure of physical and mental effort in work is as natural as play or rest.
In other words, it is wrong to assume that a worker, be he “above average” or an “average” human being, does not dislike work naturally.
Instead, work is regarded by him as play or rest.
2.
Secondly, it is wrong to assume that the worker must be coerced or punished before he works.
Because the worker is committed to his job and organization is prepared to put in his best for both his personal and organizational objectives.
60  3.
Thirdly, it is wrong to assume that the worker lacks ambition, avoid responsibility, lack initiative and prefers self control and self direction; he is naturally ambitious, seeks responsibility and would prefer to be allowed to use his initiative instead of subjecting himself to other workers or supervisors directives all the time.
4.
Fourthly, it is wrong to assume that the average human being or the worker is self centered and naturally indifferent to the organization’s objectives, because the worker gives his loyalty to his organization and is consciously concerned about the progress or achievements of the organization.
5.
Fifthly, it is wrong to assume, that the average human being has inherent resistance to change, because, change itself is a social phenomenon which influence the behaviour of the individual.
No individual can resist the influence of social change.
6. sixthly, it is wrong to assume that the average human being is gullible, dull, not intelligent or a sort of moron, because the issue of intelligence is a cross cultural phenomenon as recent psychological tests have shown (see for example, the results of the 1987 “Gifted Children Test” in the US where Nigerian gifted children are placed among the best 10 in the world).
In other words, intelligence is not a monopoly of any race or class or group of people.
It is a natural phenomenon which cuts across racial, class, and community boundaries.
What management needs to do is to try and develop individual’s potentiality for the benefit of the organization in particular and the society in general.
4.0 Conclusion We would like to conclude by saying that much as the work to be performed in a school is important, the mood of the man to perform the job is equally important.
For high productivity and maximum goal attainment, the school head must ensures comfort and happiness of the worker about everything else.
61  5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been introduced to the principles and theories of motivation.
The implications of motivation for staff performance in the school setting was highlighted 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment As a school head, what are those practices you would engage in to motivate teachers in your school?
7.0 References Out D.O.
(1998) educational Leadership in the Primary School Samaru – Zuria S. Asekome & Co. Publishers Federal Ministry of Education (1993) Better Schools Management: Teacher Education and Resource Material Lagos F.M.E.
62  UNIT 5: LEADERSHIP 1.0 Introduction This unit discusses the particular important of leadership in institute ional administration because of its far reaching effect on the accomplishment of institution programs, objective.
And the attainment of goals.
You will learn the theories of leadership and various kinds of leadership as we will as their styles.
Equally, you will be intimated with the major roles of an administrator as a leader.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Describe a leader and leadership • Explain the theories of leadership • State the kinds and styles of leadership • Identify the various roles and responsibilities of an administrator as a leader.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is leadership?
Leadership is a complex content.
In spite of the numerous studies and writing on the subject , there is yet to emerge a universally accepted definition.
As pointed out by Stogdill (1974) in his survey of leadership theories and researches, ‘’there are almost as many different definitions of leadership as there are person who have attended to define the concept’’.
However, a look at these various definitions will show that the concept of influence is often emphasized.
Leadership is considered as a relationship between two parties in which a super- ordinate ensure a significant influence on behaviors of the toward achievers a common goal.
Davies (1967} stated that ‘leadership is a part of management but not al of it is the ability to persuade others to seek define objective enthusiastically.
He considers leadership as the human factors , which binds a group 63  togetherness and toward goals.
Szilalgy (1981) considered leader ship as a process involving two or more people in which one attempt to influence the other’s behaviors toward the accomplish of some goals .in the word of liphan {1964} leadership is the initiation of a new structure or procedure for accomplishing an organization ‘s goals and objectives.
this implies that leadership means a frame of reference by which goals and objective are achieved.
In another sense, leadership is seen as a process.
According to Stogdill{1950} leadership is a process of influencing the activities of an organized group toward goal setting and goal achievement.
Also, hodgetts; and Altman (1979) vied leadership as the process of influencing people to direct their efforts towards the achievement of some particular goals.
Morphet, john and Reller (1992) define leadership as the influencing of the actions, belief and goals of one actor being influenced.
This definition emphasizes social order between the leaders and the follower.
Adepoju (1998)conceived leadership in two ways: (i) as an organization position, and or (ii) as an influence process according to him, leadership as an organizational position refers to an individual who has been placed in ma leadership or decision making role by government.
According to this view, all managers are leaders by definition.
The other emphasized that a leader inspire other to follow.
It suggests the dynamics of leadership; that is leadership as a process of influencing others towards the achievement of the organizational goals.
Meanwhile, Burns(1964) in his opinion stated that ‘leadership’ induces followers to act for certain goods that represent the values and the motivation –the want and needs, the aspirations and the expectations of both leaders and followers.
The implication of this definition is that, unlike naked power-wielding, leadership is inseparable from followers’ needs and goals.
From the foregoing discussion of leadership, the following could be inferred.
64  Leadership involves other people, followers or subordinates.
There can be no leader without followers, therefore leadership is relational involves the use of influence to induce behavioural or effect changes.
Leadership is s process that encompasses the connection of certain activities.
The leadership process involves an unequal distribution of power among leaders and group members.
Leadership focuses on the accomplishment of goals.
In summary therefore, you should understand that it is difficult to pin down the definition of leadership to a particular point.
This could be attributed to a number of factors among which are the conceptualizing leadership as : 1.
An attribute of an office or position 2. a characteristics of a person 3. a category of actual behavioural 4. the personal characteristics of the leader and 5. the nature of task and the character of the social context in which leadership is to be exercised.
Halpin (1969) also stated that this dilemma of definition emerges from the fact that we have incorporations into the term leadership both ‘descriptive’ and evaluative components, and have thus burdened this single word with two connotations.
One refers to a role and the behavior of a person in this role, and the other is an evaluation of the individuals performance in the role.
Having attempted the concept of leadership from the definition angle, we need to describe a leader and the characteristics or qualities that describe him.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 How would you conceptualize leadership as a social concept?
Give the basis upon which your view is built.
65  3.3 Who is a Leader?
At the close or our discussion on leadership, we see the need to examine who a leader is and the attribute of a good leader, this forms the basis of this discussion.
A leader is the one that leads a group of people towards achieving a set of goals.
It is common to all human organization to have someone or few individuals who are charged with the responsibility of championing the course of the group action towards achieving the goals.
This is the leader (or leaders) Hicks and Gullet (1976) while differentiating leader from manager emphasized that leaders have more influence over the followers than managers.
They pointed out that leader is more related to informal system while manager is common to informal system.
According to Sandra (1989) the concept of leader and leadership has attracted many scholars and thus had been viewed differently.
She said that some theorist see leadership as the process of influencing the activities of an organized group towards goal setting and goal achievement; others view it as “the ability to persuade others to get things done.
However, a leader is therefore considered as the force that initiates action among people, guide activities in a given direction; maintains such activities and unifies efforts towards common goals”.
This implies that, a leader is the one who influences people to direct their efforts towards the achievement of some specific goals.
A god leader displays certain characters.
A leader should possess some of the attributes listed below.
(1) He must be intelligent and knowledgeable (2) He must be well confident and firm (3) He must be academically and professionally sound (4) He must be sociable and posses good communication skill.
(5) He must be accessible to his subordinate and people (6) He must be possess good human relation (7) He must be well disciplined, morally and ethically upright (8) He must be humane and modest at all times (9) He must have a well developed intuition.
66  (10) He must have a stable character to make sound and raional judgment.
(11) He must have consideration for others.
Etc.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 1. Who is a Leader?
2. define the concept of Leadership 3.
Identify some qualities that an effective leader must possess Theories of Leadership The theories and approaches relating to leadership had been broadly classified into three.
These include the trait theories, the personality behavioral theories and the situational or contingency theories.
The major propositions of the proponents of each of these theories are discussed below.
3.3.1 The Trait theory This theory inbuilt on the premise that leaders are “born and not made” this among other things implies that some attributes are naturally endowed in political leaders at birth, which are not acquired or got by any other means.
It is also referred to as the “great man theory of leadership Scholars at one time one time or the other had embarked on one study ot the other in an attempt to identify and compare the leadership traits, which distinguish leaders form the followers.
Efforts were also directed towards drawing the line of difference between the characteristics of effective leadership and the ineffective ones; although most researchers were not so keen on this latter aspect.
Most studies on leadership traits focused extensively on identifying intellectual, emotional, and physical characteristics of successful leaders, let us consider some of their resolutions ” a.
Intelligence Stogdill ( 1974) in a review of thirty three (33) studies found that there is a general trend, which indicated that leaders are more intelligent than followers may be dysfunctional.
This implies that leader’s intelligence should be close to that of their followers.
Stogdill emphasized that the average person who occupies a position of 67  leadership exceeds the average member of his group in the followership category in respect of 1.
Social activities 2.
Scholarship 3.
Dependability 4.
Responsibility 5.
Social activity, 6.
High originality and 7.
Socio economic status.
He therefore concludes that “a person does not become a leader by virtue of the possession of some combination of traits, but the pattern of personal relationship to the characteristics, activities, and goals of the followers” Thus leadership must be conceived in terms of the interactions of variables, which are in constant flux and change: b.
Personality: Personality trait such as: alertness, integrity, originality and self-confidence are associated with effective leadership.
(Argyris, 1955).
Ghiselli (1963) also found that initiative, ability to act and initiate action independently and self assurance are associated with effective leaders.
c. Personal Characteristics Physical characteristics such as age, weight, physical stature, height and appearance that Have been studied provided contradictory results in terms of their relationship to effective leadership.
To this end, we may not associate personal characteristics as determinants of effective leadership.
d. Supervisory Ability Using leader’s performance rating scale, Ghiselli (1963) found a positive relationship between a person’s supervisory ability and his or her leadership effectiveness.
Supervision is another major role of a leader apart from leading and directing.
A leader oversees the activities of his followers and he delegates towards achieving common 68  goals.
He corrects any errors detected and aligns all derailments.
However, as much as trait theory could have been so applauded in the study of effective leadership, contemporary studies had unraveled that innumerable traits of successful and effective leadership are yet to be discovered even after several new ones.
Aside, some leaders who possessed the attributes earlier discovered have not been effective whereas, others without those variables have been effective.
All these bring about confusion to scholars on the qualities of an effective leadership (Base, 1982).
Also, Cartwright and Zander (1968) emphasized that effective leadership does not depend on a particular trait but how well the traits match the requirements of the situation he or she is facing.
In the same vein, Szilagyi (1981) opined that some of the identified trait in leadership studies may have been learned, while performing a leadership role.
Also, this approach undermines the significant effect of the subordinates on the job accomplishment of a leader .
In conclusion, an effective leadership does not depend on the number of trait combined but rather on what the leader does and how well he / she adapts to the varying requirements of different situations.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 1.
Examine the major propositions of the trait theory of leadership.
3.3.2 Kinds of Leadership There are divergent views on the concept and theory of leadership and consequently, there are various ways by which leaders are classified.
However, three types of leadership describe by Knerich (1975) shall be discussed in this study.
The three kinds of leadership are the: (1) Charismatic (2) Formal / situational leadership and (3) Functional Leadership (1) The Charismatic Leadership: The leader, also known as symbolic leader is an individual who is endowed with natural capacity and personality traits or qualities to lead.
He stimulated and unifies the activities of others along 69  certain paths because of the way he looks and his personality.
They are said to be born or natural “great men” and thus become leaders because of the innate personality qualities such as ambition, patience, pride, humility, wisdom, friendliness, dependability, force and endurance.
Jesus Christ Muhammed, Hiltler, Nkrumah, Obafemi Awolowo, Nnamdi Azikwe, among others are examples of charismatic leaders (2) Formal or Situational Leadership: a formal leader is one who occupies a position recognized in the formal organizational chart as a leadership post.
It is an achieved title assumed by achieving certain abilities or qualifications considered essential for the culture of the group.
Examples of formal leaders are the king, Emirs, Chief, Obis, Obas etc.
also, head of Institution, Organizations and formal groups are formal leaders.
Meanwhile, the criterion for formal leadership is essentially situational relative.
This implies that the criteria for selection of leaders in one group may to satisfy the criteria for another group or different situations.
(3) Functional Leadership: this kind of leadership is concerned with the role performed within an organized group.
Leaders is chosen or elected by virtue of his certain technical, social, political or economic competencies considered Essential for the survival of the group or necessary for the achievement of the goals of the organization.
Such leader is likely to be nominated, appointed, selected or accredited from among equals 3.4 Leadership Style Leadership style simply can be described as the manner by which a leader presents him or her before the followers.
It describes the kind of relationship, which exists between the leader and the followers usually in decision making and flow of communication.
The principal leadership styles a leader may adopt is as follows: i.
Democratic Leadership ii.
Autocratic Leadership style iii.
Laissez – Faire Leadership Style 70  iv.
Transactional Leadership and v. Psedodemocratic leadership style.
3.5.1 Democratic Leadership Style This type of leadership involves the full participation of people (subordinate) in the organizational administration, decision making and policy formulation, in this process, self expression, creativity and group interaction are allowed.
It emphasized both nomothetic and idiographic dimensions of the organization; therefore it is both person and task oriented.
It is also referred to as participative style because, decision are made after due consultations with the staff.
This styles is more effective in more enlighten institutions only that decision making process could take more time and at times it may not apply to any state of emergency.
3.5.2 Autocratic Leadership Style This is otherwise known as one man rule or authoritarian styles of leadership where an individual leader takes decisions without any consultation.
It is characterized by: a.
The dictation of all policies and procedures by the leader with little or no group participation in decision making process; b.
The imposition of task and methods on subordinates c. An absence of effective communication between the leader and the group and d. Nagging and suspicious brooding on the part of the leadership (Edem, 1982) An autocratic leader is task oriented and he give no attention to his subordinates.
He does not allow any group inspired decisions.
This types of leadership hinders interpersonal relationship between the head and subordinates and also between the different administrative structures.
The leader decrees what to do and does not delegate authority or permit subordinate involvement in policy matters.
71  3.5.3.
Laissez – Faire Leadership Style This leadership styles allows complete freedom to the group and individuals in the organization to do their wishes.
It is character by indecision, vacillation and indifference about his responsibilities (as leader and supervisor).
To achieve organizational goals and objectives with a loose leadership style is often difficult if it is possible at all.
It is devoid of rules and regulation but the leader supplies materials 3.5.4.
Transactional Leadership Style This leadership is aware of both the organizational needs and the needs and expectations of the group.
He therefore finds means of integrating or reconciling the two.
He is a dynamic leader in the sense that, at one time his orientation is directed towards the welfare of the members and at another time he is production oriented.
3.5.5.
Psedo – Democratic Leadership Style This kind of leadership demonstrated democratic rules to the group but realistically, he displays autocratic rules.
The leader asks for suggestion and opinion of members but, never utilizes them.
He is more or autocratic than democratic.
The subordinates only play a supportive role rather than participatory.
Self Assessment Exercise Examine the various style of leadership you know and in your own opinion, which one do you considered most effective?
Give reasons for your answer.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt in this unit that every human organization requires an effective leadership so as to be able to achieve the present goals and objectives.
The emergence of leaders varies and thus the characteristics of leader depend solely on the kind of situations and problems at hand.
With this various theories postulated by 72  scholars in order to identify the best kind of leadership.
In al, it was concluded that no single best kind of leadership bur rather, a combination of leadership styles would be more favorable to any organization.
You equally learned that an administrator has some leadership roles and responsibilities to observe within and outside the organization; the extent to which he s effective in the discharge of these roles will determine his level of effectiveness and efficiency.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have seen that leadership is taking a position of authority to influence others behaviour towards achievement of organizational goals.
We have also examined various theories of leadership; such as the trait theory, the behavioral theory, the situational / contingency theory, path goal theory.
Various kinds of leadership and styles are available: democratic, Autocratic, Laissez-fiare, Transactional or Pseudo democratic.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuses briefly the three basis leadership theories.
Enumerate the strength and weakness of each 2.
Using suitable diagram, explain concisely either Ohio State university studies or Michigan state leadership studies.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING Adepoju T.L (1998).
Fundamentals of school Administration, planning and Supervision in Nigeria, Alafas Nig.
Company.
Adesina S. (1980).
Some Aspects of Social Management, IBADAN: Boards publication limited.
Bass.
B.M.
(1982).
Stogdill’s Handbook of leadership, New York Free Press.
Blake, R and Mouton, JS.
(1978).
The New Managerial Grid.
Houston: Gulf Publishing.
(Peretonmode V.F (2003) Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective.
Lagos.
Joja Educational Research and Publishers Limited.
73  Halphin A.W.
(1969).
“How Leaders Behave” in Freed D. and Thomas J. Sergiovanni, (eds.
)Organizations and Human Behavioral of School Superintendents, Columbus: College of Education, Ohio State University.
Obilade, S. (1989) An Introduction to Educational Administration, Ibadan: Odusote Bookstore Ltd. Liphan J (1964).
Leadership and Administration in Griffiths, D.R (ed).
Behavioral Science and Educational Administration.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Morphet, E.L., Johns, R.L., and Reller T.L.
(1982).
Educational Organization and Administration: Concepts Practices and Issue Eagle Wood Cliffs: Prentice – Hall Inc. Stogdill R.M.
Handbook of Leadership: A survey of Theory and research.
New York: Free Press.
Tannenbaum, R. and Schmidt, W.H.
(1973).
How to choose a Leadership Pattern, Harvard Business Review (May June).
Vroom.
V.H.
(1973).
A new Look of Managerial Decision making; Organizational Dynamic, Vol.
1.
Knezevich, S.J (1975).
Administration of Public education, New York: Harper and Row Public.
74  MODULE 2: THE CONCEPT AND MANAGEMENT OF EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRE UNIT 1 WHAT ARE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Educational Resources Centre 3.1.1 Education: As a Concept 3.1.2 Resources 3.1.3 Centers 3.1.4 Educational Resources Centers 3.2 3.2.1 Forms of Resource Centres 3.2.2 Detailed Description of Educational Resources Centres 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The emergent of educational technology as a discipline having much to do with how to improve the quality of educational practice come with it some new innovations of which educational resource center is one.
There have been several notions and views about what should be an appropriate meaning of the “term educational resource centers”.
There 75  is therefore the need to expose you to the different nomenclatures used when reference is made to the concept “educational resource centers”.
You need to acquaint yourself with correct information on almost every aspect of a field you want to be regarded as a specialist or what do you think?
In this unit, therefore, we shall shed light on the meaning of the concept “Educational Resource Centers” in order to enable you have a clearer understanding of the concept.
Again, you need to possess adequate knowledge and acquire managerial competent skill that will enable you to organize educational resource center in a name that will make it perform its traditional roles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define Educational Resource Centres.
• Differentiate between educational resource centre and libraries.
• Differentiate between libraries and laboratories.
• Describe types of educational resource centre • Mention the different nomenclatures used to describe resource centres at various levels in Nigeria.
• Identify the names of resource centres with the relevant institution where they are found.
• Trace the source of the names given to educational resource centre.
3.0 Content 3.1 Meaning of Educational Resources Centre An educational resource center (ERC) is called by many names.
It is called a learning resource centre, learning materials centre, educational media centre, educational resource centre, educational services centre, educational communication centre, instructional technology centre, a library, an audio visual centre, library-media Resources centre or an educational materials centre (Ger/etti, 1976).
It is obvious that an educational resources centre is many things.
76  For this purpose, attempt shall be made to explain the meaning of educational resource centre by examining the three words of which form the concept under consideration.
These are: (i) Education (ii) Resources and (iii) Centres.
3.1.1 Education As a concept, the term education has several definitions and meaning.
In fact, its meaning/definitions are as many as the definers.
However, according to the Oxford Advance Learner’s Dictionary, education is “the systematic training and instruction of people especially the young ones in schools and colleges”.
Milton (1995) defines education as the process by which society through schools, colleges, universities and other institutions transmit its cultural heritage from one generation to another.
Connell (1965) views education as the social mechanism designed to bring about in the persons submitted to it, certain skills and attitudes that are judged to be vital and desirable in his society.
All these definitions according to Ogunsanya (1999) suggest a positive view of education, because education is presented as “………..being responsible for the growth and development which man passes through in life.
He also added that education has its “negative view” which becomes manifest in man when he exhibit negative behaviours.
However, every society works towards the promotion and entrenchment of positive education.
Thus, education is the totality of all the experiences that a man passes through which have helped him/her to learn one thing or the other.
Both in context and content, education is a very wide concept.
It includes almost everything and anything geared towards making a man to realize that he/she possesses certain capabilities and attributes that if utilize will make him/her to improve his own lots and that of the society in which he/she finds himself.
Thus, the word “education” an 77  adjunct or an adjective used to qualify the noun- education is used to making reference to efforts, policies, practices, activities that are directly related to assisting an individual to acquire skills, knowledge and attitude to live a successful and fulfilled life.
3.1.2 Resources These are facilities and materials that can be used to help achieve an aim.
(Hornby, 2000).
The role of resources in problem solving is enormous.
For any given task to be accomplished there is a need to making available resources both in terms of quality and quantity.
Teaching is no exemption.
Therefore, no matter how good a teacher is, he/she needs to be provided and utilized resources (human and materials) to achieve pre-determined objectives.
In education sector, resources to be provided will be determined by several factors such as needs, objectives to be achieved, the task (s) to be performed, etc.
3.1.3 Centres The generic meaning given to the concept “centre” as a venue or place designated for a service is sufficient for this purpose.
However, a distinction has to be made between a “school and a resource centre”.
A school is a social institution established and founded to assist in the transmission and renewal of the charitable aspect of societal culture from one generation another.
A “Resource Centres” on the other hand is a place which houses materials and facilities meant to be used for a purpose (s).
3.1.4 Educational Resources Centres A working definition of this term could be arrived at by matching of the meanings of the three concepts as explained earlier.
The following definitions thus emerge: 78  (i) A place where facilities for educative purposes could be found.
(ii) A place where educational materials in the form of hardware and software are classified arranged and are retrieved for the educational purposes.
(iii) A place where books and non-book materials are provided and scientifically organized for easy retrieval by users to promote education.
Abimbade (1999) further educational resources centre as “a setting where educational resources such as materials, tools and equipment can be designed, developed, utilized, borrowed and stored”.
Educational Resources centres is thus a store house where all sorts of educational devises both small and big, simple and complex, cheap and expensive could be found, loaned, utilized by all users- students, teachers, researchers etc.
3.2 Forms of Resource Centres In primary, secondary and tertiary schools, it is common to find places where books are kept.
These are called libraries.
Science laboratories too are common features in secondary and tertiary institutions.
There are places where facilities and chemicals for the teaching and learning of science subjects are kept.
Both the libraries and laboratories are forms of educational resource centres.
However, we need to understand what educational resource centres mean a comprehensive level.
3.2.1 Detailed Description of Educational Resources Centres Educational Resources Centres has been described as “a setting where educational resources such as materials, tools and equipment can be designed, developed, utilized, borrowed and stored”.
(Abimbade 1999).
It should however be noted that human resources such as facilitators for consultancy services in instructional material 79  production, technician, professionals in various fields are available at the educational resource centres.
Abimbade (1999) categorized educational resource centre into centralized, decentralized and coordinated types.
The centralised resource centre according to him is the one that function as a sole facility within a state or local government.
The decentralized resource centre is the one which functions independently within the school building.
Such a resource centre services the needs of the immediate community where it is situated.
The third category, which is the coordinated type, operates as a system.
It connects a network of schools resource centres, but it is supplemented and served by a central resource centre Modern trends in the development of library and information management have introduced new nomenclatures that are found relevant to the discussion of educational resources centres.
Fayose (1995) wrote about “School Library Resource Centres”.
Elaturoti (1990) used the term “School Library Media Centre”In the manner in which the two cited authors used the terms,it is very obvious that these two terms are synonyms of the term educational resource eentres at least in operations.
According to Elaturoti (1990) The School library media centre functions as a vital instrument in the education process.
It is not a separate entity from the total school programme but totally integrated into the teaching learning process of the school.
It provides a variety of books and non- book materials which have been selected, acquired and organized for use in support of the entire school Programme.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 (i) Explain briefly how libraries and laboratories are used for teaching and learning.
(ii) Describe the three types of resource centres.
80  3.3 NOMENCLATURE OF RESOURCE CENTRES When a concept functions differently in different settings, there is a need to differentiate the scenario at the different settings by giving different names to them.
Names are given for the purpose of identification.
Imagine a home where nobody has a name.
There will be confusion.
It will be difficult to identify individuals with what they do or do not do.
• Identify the names of resource centres with the relevant institution where they are found.
• Trace the source of the names given to educational resource centre.
3.3.1 The Naming of Resource Centres The issue of nomenclature of resource centres was premised on section 10 item 4 of the National Policy on Education (2004) where it is stated that “educational resource centre shall be established federal and state levels”.
A task force was then set up to name the resource centres at the different levels.
It recommended, among other things that: 1.
The resource centre at the federal level should be called National Educational Technology Centre (NETC) and be upgraded to the status of an institution and called National Educational Technology Institute (NETI).
This has now been annexed with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) as a media centre for the university.
2.
The resource centre at the state level should be called Educational Resource Centre (ERC).
This should be at the state capitals in the Ministry of Education (MOE) but should have zonal offices in each Local Government Area (L.G.A).
The implication of this is that Centre at the Local Government Areas should also be called educational resource centres.
81  3.
The resource centre at the institutional level should be named Centre for Education Technology for Universities, Polytechnics and Colleges of Education and should be named Learning Resource Centres (LRC) for Teacher Colleges, Secondary Schools and Primary Schools.
However, the LRC in the secondary schools will be part of the school library while the LRC in the primary school will be catered for by the Educational Resource Centres in the Local Government Areas (LGAs).
3.4 Stake Holders Involved in Naming Resource Centres 3.4.1 The Joint Consultative Council Reference Committee Educational Technology (JCCRCET) Issues concerning the nomenclature of the resource centres in academic and political institution are not left to mere chances.
Specific bodies were set up for the Educational Resource Centres.
Salawu, Afolabi and Taiwo (2001) reported the meeting in 1990 at the Joint Consultative Council Reference Committee (JCCRC) where decision was taken to name resource centres as: 1.
Learning Resource Centres (LRC) for primary schools and secondary schools.
2.
Educational Resource Centre (educational resource centres) for State Ministries of Education and Local Education Authorities.
3.
Centre for Educational Technology (CET) for tertiary institutions and 4.
National Educational Technology Centre (NETC) for the resource centre at the national level.
The NETC is however situated in Kaduna and not at the Federal Capital Tertiary (FCT) Abuja.
It is noteworthy that the NETC was changed to an institution of learning in 1990 when it was renamed the National Educational Technology Institute (NETI).
Recall that in 3.1 of this unit, it has been established that the NETC had been annexed by the National Open University of Nigeria.
82  3.4.2 The Federal Ministry of Education The input of the FME into the naming of educational resource centres shown in the setting up of the JCCRC according to the provision made in the National Policy on Education (2004) section 10 item 98.
The establishment of NETC at Kaduna in particular was given prominence in section 9 item 89, ‘g’.
Note: Search for the relevant portion in the 2004 NPE.
Edition.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What does JCCRC mean?
2.
What is the relevance of JCCRC to the naming of educational resource centre.
3.
Why was NETC changed to NETI?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been sensitized to the importance of meaning of words.
It is necessary that one should be sure of the operational meaning of the concept one is talking about so that one can stay focussed ‘resource’ and ‘centre’ may have many meanings in the dictionary, but you have been educated on the meaning that is relevant to this course unit In this unit, you have been enlightened about the different names given to educational technology centres at different educational levels and political levels.
You need to be familiar with these names and their corresponding owners.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit traced the source of the names given to educational resource centre to the recommendations of the Joint Consultative Council Reference Committee (JCCRC) set up by the Federal Ministry of Education (FME).
83  The unit also outlined the four names given to the educational resource centre at the various political and educational levels as: 1.
Learning Resource Centres (LRC).
2.
Educational Resource Centre (ERC).
3.
Centre for Educational Technology (CET).
4.
National Educational Technology Centre (NETC/NETI).
This unit defines ‘educational resource centre’ by • Defining ‘education’, ‘resources’ and ‘centres’ separately.
• Merging the three meanings together.
• Mentioning three different types of educational resource centre.
This unit also identifies the differences between resource centres, libraries and laboratories.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the content of the report given by the Joint Consultative Reference Committee on Education as regards to the Federal Ministry of Education.
Attempt a comprehensive description of educational resource centres.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education 3rd Edition Salawu, I.O, Afolabi, A.O & Taiwo, S.A (2001) Essentials of Educational Technology Oyo, Odumat Press.
Abimbade A.
(1999) Principles and Practice of Educational Technology: Ibadan International Publisher Ltd. Federal Ministry of Education (1991) Joint Consultative Conference Reference Report.
84  UNIT 2 FUNCTIONS OF RESOURCE CENTRES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The General Function of Education Resource Centres 3.1.1 Details of the “General” Functions 3.2 Peculiar Functions of Education Resource Centres 3.2.1 The Peculiar Functions of N.E.T.C.
3.2.2 The Educational Resource Centre in the States 3.2.3 The Centre for Education Technology (CET) 3.2.4 A Critique of the Functions of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational Technology Centres are established to take care of some needs in the educational system.
It is an innovation that is born out of series of research on how to improve the quality of teaching of thus making teaching/learning activities more rewarding and effective.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Mention the functions that are common to all Educational Resource Centres.
85  • Mention the peculiar function of some of the Educational Resource Centres that function peculiarly.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The General Function of Educational Resource Centres There are certain functions expected of the educational resource centres at all the three educational and three political levels.
Those are what we call “general functions” of educational resource centre.
They are: a.
The production of improvised instructional materials.
b.
The organisation of workshop/seminars on production and use of instructional materials.
c. The storage and preservation of instructional materials.
d. The distribution of instructional materials.
3.1.1 Details of the “General” Function a.
Production of Improvised Instructional Materials Research has shown that instructional materials have always been in short supply to schools for teachers to use in facilitating teaching and learning.
School administrators also complain of lack of fund to purchase the instructional materials when the need arises.
In addressing these two complaints, the strategy of improvisation of instructional materials was mooted and is being emphasized nation wide now.
It is expected that teachers and students should be able to use the locally available materials around them to produce some instructional materials that could be used for teaching and learning.
Educational Resource Centres are by design provide adequate space and personnel for instructional materials design and production.
Both the teachers as well as the learners 86  are allowed to consult with the Educational Resource Centres (ERC) staff to make equerries on how they can be assisted in the improvisation of instructional materials.
b.
The Organisation of Workshops/Seminars on Production and Use of instructional materials As research progresses in the area of produce and use of instructional materials, new ideas and innovations are being discovered.
These new ideas are shared and discussed at such workshop and seminars organized by the Education Resource Centres (ERC).
Specialists come together from all fields of academic endeavours to show case their findings and discoveries concerning instructional materials.
The resource centres are expected to have facilities for host such conferences regularly.
Exhibition of instructional materials by schools and teachers could be organized.
This is to encourage production and utilization of instructional materials.
c. The Storage and Preservation of Instructional Materials One main problem in the educational sector is the poor maintenance culture of some school administrators.
The educational resource centre therefore makes provision for the storage and preservation of the Instructional Materials that are produced locally and those that are acquired, bought or donated.
Safety of the instructional materials in schools where safety devices and facilities are not provided may discourage production and media utilization.
However an ideal Educational Resource Centres is empowered to be a place where safety of the instructional materials can be guaranteed.
d. The Distribution of Instructional Materials Another function of educational resource centres that is expected to enhance the availability of Instructional Materials for use in schools is the circulation of Instructional Materials to needy institutions.
It has been suggested that some very costly Instructional Materials could be loaned for temporary use or shared by institution that are in the same geographical location.
The educational resource centres are expected to serve as distribution centre of Instructional Materials to schools and study centres in the locality.
87  3.2 Peculiar Functions of Educational Resource Centres Some Educational Resource Centres perform certain functions which are more specific to them because of certain circumstances that surround their establishment.
The specific functions of Educational Resource Centres are hereby provided: 3.2.1 The Peculiar Functions of N.E.T.C.
The NETC is considered the parent resource centre to the Educational Resource Centres in the states.
In the light of this ‘parent’ status the NETC performs the following additional peculiar functions: • It gives financial aid to other resource centres in the states, local governments and to the institution at primary, secondary and tertiary levels.
• Designing and providing innovational instructional materials.
• Liases with international bodies for assistance in terms of finance and equipment.
• Acquiring and circulating educational equipment and materials to the Nigerian schools at all levels.
• She plans and organizes educational broadcast on television and radio.
• Carrying out research evaluation and training programmes in educational technology.
3.2.2 The Educational Resource Centre in the States The Educational Resource Centres in the states’ Ministries of Education links up with the NETC for necessary assistance.
Other functions include: • Planning and providing innovational and instructional materials.
• Panning and organizing educational broadcasting.
• Acquiring and circulating educational equipment and materials to all the schools in its jurisdiction as well as to all the centres at the Local Government level.
• Carrying out research, evaluation and organizing training programmes.
• Carrying out any other assignment for the upliftment of educational technology in the state.
88  3.2.3 The Centre for Educational Technology (CET) The Centre for Educational Technology in Polytechnics and Colleges of Education are expected to perform the following major functions: (i) Building up a pool of audio-visual equipment and materials.
(ii) Providing audio-visual services (not entirely free) to the entire campus members – students, academic and administrative members of staff.
(iii) Providing professional assistance to the staff and the entire students in the design, production and utilization of media materials for the improvement of teaching and learning.
(iv) Providing training workshops, seminars, orientation, etc on the use of educational media for personnel in the campus.
(v) Serving as a centre for the adoption, diffusion and dissemination of instruction, and (vi) Collaborating with other educational media related centres and agencies within and outside Nigeria.
3.2.4 A Critique of the Functions of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria Both in intent and practice, the Federal Government has demonstrated its concern for provision of high quality education at all levels going by all that have been said about the various functions of the educational resource centres at all levels.
It is however necessary for us to examine whether or not all these functions are being performed.
If they are, we may want to know whether they are not being performed satisfactorily or otherwise.
And if they are not being performed, we also want to ask a pertinent question ---- what are the impediments?
Some units particularly units 5 and 6 are devoted to this crucial issue.
Suffice to mention that with the taken over of the National Education Technology Centre by the National Open University of Nigeria, (NOUN), the Federal Government and the National Open University of Nigeria authority may wish to ensure that the roles expected by the N.E.T.C are not jettisoned.
The National Association for Education Media and Technology—An Association of specialist and practitioners of education technology 89  should be alert to its responsibilities by reminding National Open University, the Federal Ministry of Education as well as the Federal Government of the need to utilize the acquired N.E.T.C to play intended roles as SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Mention two general functions expected of any educational resource centres.
2.
What specific function is expected of the NETC.
4.1 CONCLUSION In this unit we have examined the function of the various resource centres.
The functions have also been stratified into “general” and “specific”.
You would have noted that there are interlap of functions with some major difference in the aspects of levels, and scope.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has identified the four general function of educational resource centre as the production, storage and distribution of instructional materials as well as the organisation of workshops and seminars.
Specific functions were also identified for NETC, ERC and CET.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the relevance of the CET in a University setting?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education 3rd Edition Federal Ministry of Education (1991) Joint Consultative Conference Report.
90  UNIT 3 ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONS OF KEY OFFICERS IN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRES IN NIGERIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Typical Organograms for Educational Resource Centres 3.2 Functions of the Director of an Educational Resource Centre 3.3 Functions of the Assistant Directors 3.3.1 Assistant director (Curriculum Design) 3.3.2 Assisted Director (Instructional Materials) 3.3.3 Assisted Director (Technical) 3.3.4 Assisted Director (Administration) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Association for Educational Media and Technology – An association of specialist and practitioners of educational technology should be alert to its responsibilities by reminding National Open University of Nigeria, the Federal Ministry of Education as well as the Federal Government of the need to utilize the acquired N.E.T.C.
to play its intended roles as these roles are even more germane to educational services now than when it was established in 1977.
There is hardly any organisation involving person without an established organizational structure together with details to the tasks to be performed by the staff occupying various positions 91  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • Sketch a simplified organogram for the administrative set up in an Educational Resource Centres.
• Mention at least three functions of the director of Educational Resource Centre.
• Mention at least two functions of an assistant director of Educational Resource Centre.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Typical Organograms for Educational Resource Centres The complexities of an Educational Resource Centre determine the size of its personnel as well as their function.
There can only be one director but a good number of assistant directors depending on the number of the units the centre is having.
There can be many units.
But function some resource centres may want to carry out in a unit may be lumped up in other resource centres to form a single unit (Salawu, Afolabi and Taiwo, 2001).
The organograms in figures 1, 2, and 3 have been designed for Educational Resource Centre in the states, Universities and Colleges of Education/Polytechnic respectively.
92  Fig.
1.4 Organization Chart: Educational Technology – Educational Resource Centres at the States DIRECT ASST.
DIRECTOR INSTRUCTIONAL ASST.
DIRECTOR CURRICULUM MEDIA DESIGN AND TECHNICAL DESIGN.
RESEARCH AND SERVICES EVALUATION LANGUAGES INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA DESIGN SOCIAL STUDIES MEDIA PRODUCTION AND REPROGRAPHY MATHS TECHNICAL SERVICES SCIENCE MOTION PICTURE AND SOUND PHYSICAL EDUCATION PRODUCTION ART AND MUSIC AGRIC SCIENCE VOCATIONAL TECHNICAL ED.
TRAINING RESEARCH AND EVALUATION RESOURCE LIBRARY Source: Federal Ministry of Education, Lagos – Committee Report on Educational Technology, May 1991.
93  HEAD OF CET Head of Sections of Head of Sections Head of Sections Design and of Technical of Instruction and Production Services Utilization Electronics and Graphics Electrical Resource Library Mechanical Photography Workshop Training and Utilization Radio and TV Reprography Studios Media Design Cinematography/ Video 3.2 Functions of the Director of an Educational Resource Centre The director of an Educational Resource Centre may not necessarily be an educational technology specialist.
At this level, most of his/her work shall be both academic/administrative in nature.
He/she shall be responsible for the recruitment and development of staff for the Educational Resource Centres.
Furthermore, he/she shall be charged with the duty of public relation, consultancy and general administrative policies.
However, if a person who specializes in educational technology and library science can be secured, the chances of better management seem higher.
3.3 Function of the Assistant Directors 3.3.1 Assistant Director (Curriculum Design) 1.
He/she develops the course of study for educational technology.
94  2.
He/she coordinates instructional design for all subjects group.
3.
He/she is involved in the planning and execution of workshop, conferences and seminars.
4.
He/she supervises research activities in educational technology.
5.
He/she develops the curriculum for and the implementation of teaching strategies like distance learning, nomadic education, educational broadcasting, migrant fishermen education etc.
6.
He/she should be a specialist in educational technology and curriculum expert.
3.3.2 Assistant Director (Instructional Materials) 1.
He/she liases with other sister Educational Resource Centre for procurement of equipment and materials needed by the community he/she serves.
2.
He/she coordinates the operation, maintenance and storage of the equipment of the CET.
3.
He/she supervises and monitors the movement of the equipment and materials of the resource centre.
4.
He/she is a specialist in educational technology.
3.3.3 Assistant Director (Technical) 1.
He/she is responsible for the supervision of the work of the technicians such as graphic artist, photographer, electrician etc.
2.
He/she protects the use of the equipment by offering technical advice on the mode of operation of the equipment (especially the electronic gadgets).
3.
He/she does not have to be an educational technology specialist but should be vast in the knowledge of technical services.
3.3.4 Assistant Director (Administration) 1.
He is charged with the duty of supervising (a) the accounts (b) secretarial services/record keeping (c) transport services 95  1.
He/she draws and supervises the schedule of duty for the staff.
2.
He/she is in charge of staff welfare.
3.
He/she ensures maintenance of order in the centre.
4.
He/she is not necessarily a specialist in educational technology.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention about 5 special staffers of an Educational Resource Centres and one major duty each one carries out.
2 Sketch the organisational structure of a named resource centre.
4.0 CONCLUSION For any resource centre to function maximally, the schools or government they service should give the director and assistant directors free hand to operate without much interference.
The director should also in turn be accountable to the supervisory body that established the centre.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has discussed the various possible administrative structures of the resource centres.
It has also outlined the duties of the personnel in the centres.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the administrative set up in a typical educational resource centre.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Salawu, I, O, Afolabi, A.O.
& Taiwo, S.A (2001) Essentials of Education Technology Oyo, Odumat Press.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education: 3rd Edition.
Federal Ministry of Education (1991) Joint Consultative Conference Reference Report 96  UNIT 4 THE ARCHITECTURAL LAYOUT FOR RESOURCE CENTRES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The General Construction Architectural Layout 3.2 Types of Facilities to Be Provided in the Resource Centres 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational Resource Centres are sites which keep on bubbling with action.
It is like a factory where coursewares, hardware’s and software are manufactured for instructional purposes.
Such centres need to have relevant buildings, furniture and other architectural structures for the activities of the resource centres.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Mention the types of apartments/spaces that should exist in a resource centre.
• Describe the special features expected in the physical structures of educational resource centres.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The General Construction Architectural Layout An educational resource centre should have work rooms as well as administrative offices.
Again, the structures in the Educational Resource Centre depend on the complexity of the centre vis-à-vis the services it is expected to render.
A single room could be utilized 97  properly to form a resource centre.
This could be partitioned with wooden materials to serve the required purposes.
On the other side, a space as vast as one hectare of land could be used to construct a resource centre.
Consider the structure drawn in figure 1 Ed.
Graphic Dark Intet Table Table Res.
Room 1 2 Office Table Store 3 Lecturer Exhibition Room Office Table Table Director 4 5 Microlab Poster’s Director Seat Office 3.2 Type of Facilities to be Provided in the Resource Centre a.
The microteaching laboratory and the educational broadcasting room should have sound proof walls plastered with acoustic materials.
b.
The rooms should have air conditioners installed in them for the longevity of the equipment stored there especially the electronics.
c. The floor of the rooms and laboratories should be rugged wall to wall.
This will disallow dust from settling on the sensitive electronic equipment used in the resource centre.
d. Resource centres should have facilities for internet connection and satellite antennae for contact with required channels.
e. The costly equipment and the delicacy of the facilities in the resource centre call for a reliable security fittings for the centres.
Burglary-proof irons, fire extinguishers, 24 hour surveillance etc should be put in place for the security of the educational resource centres.
98  SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Why should the resource centre be rugged and fixed with air conditioners?
2.
How can a new school afford the exorbitant amount of setting up a befitting resource centre?
4.0 CONCLUSION The construction of the building of educational resource centres should not be done by just any building contractor.
An expert in educational technology should have an input in the construction because of the peculiarities involved in such construction.
5.0 SUMMARY Educational Resource Centres are expected to be a service unit to an academic community such as University, Colleges, Polytechnics, Secondary and Primary schools.
The physical structures of the resource centre should therefore be constructed to the required specification so that they can serve the purpose for which they are constructed.
1.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the special features necessary in the physical structures of a befitting educational resource centre.
2.
Give reasons for the inclusion of those special features.
7.0 REFRENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education.
3rd Edition Federal Ministry of Education (1991) Joint Consultative Conference Reference Report.
99  Unit 5 PROBLEMS, PROSPECT AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES IN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Existing Situation on Ground 3.2 Specific Problems of Educational Resource Centres 3.3 Suggested Solutions to the Problem of Educational Resource Centre 3.4 PROSPECTS OF EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRES 3.4.1 How the Educational Resource Centres Could Improve Teaching-Learning 3.4.2 Other Factors that could pave way for the Realization of the Prospects of Educational Resource Centres 3.5 Maintenance of Facilities in the Educational Resource Centres 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further/Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The functions of Educational Resource Centre and the administrative setups seem to be very laudable master piece on the paper.
Many tertiary institutions cannot boast of a befitting Educational Resource Centre let alone the secondary and primary schools.
Something is wrong.
Somebody or some people are not doing what they are supposed to do.
But who are these people?
And are the Educational Resource Centres not functioning properly?
100  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Mention at least five problems confronting Educational Resource Centre in Nigeria.
• Proffer solutions to the problems mentioned in (I) above.
• Mention at least four areas where Educational Resource Centre could enhance the teaching-learning process.
• Identify the factors that could hinder the actualization of these prospects.
Mention at least three precautionary measures in the handling of • Photograph items • Glassware • Chemicals • Electronics in the Educational Resource Centres.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PROBLEMS CONFRONTING EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRES: The Existing Situation Educational Resource Centres is expected to be established in any university that runs a first degree.
Every College of Education should have it; every secondary school and Primary should at least have a well equipped library that is to function as a library media resource centre while the primary schools should have reading corners.
However, this is not in reality.
Educational Resource Centres that are functional are found mostly in the universities that run degrees in education technology.
Other universities may have structures lapelled as CET but which are glorified classrooms or mere stores.
Where you have Centre for Educational Technology or as is commonly and wrongly called University Media Centres not many Universities have actually use them for institutional purposes as expected.
101  The Colleges of Education are worse hit.
Educational Technology and Microteaching courses are taught theoretically and students do not have access to the electronic gadgets like projectors, computers, cameras, etc to facilitate learning and to help them in producing instructional materials for their teaching practice exercises.
Even though the Educational Tax Fund (ETF) and other similar intervention are rendering supports, yet the situation is not totally resolved in many institutions.
In the secondary schools, the negative reading culture of many Nigerians still shows up in the attitude of school administrators and members of the school community towards equipment of libraries.
The few schools that have libraries are the old schools.
The books in these old schools too are as old as the schools.
In most of them non-book materials and equipment are not available.
Some state governments are already taking some positive steps in establishing resource centres in the primary schools.
But then, what can one single resource centre do for a whole local government area?
We may also ask whether that single resource centre in the local government area is properly stuffed with the required facilities for a resource centre.
And so, the problems confronting Educational Resource Centres still persist across all educational levels in Nigeria.
3.2 Specific Problems of Educational Resource Centres Research findings have revealed the following existing problem situations in our Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria: 1.
Inability to procure the required equipment/facilities by schools because of their high financial cost.
2.
Non-availability of some of the equipment/facilities in Nigeria market.
3.
The erratic nature of power supply in Nigeria poses a great problem to the image of the electronic equipment in the Educational Resource Centre.
102  4.
The poor maintenance culture of many Nigerian coupled with the naïve attitude of seeing government property as no-man’s property shorten the life span of the few equipment procured for the Educational Resource Centres.
5.
Administrative bottlenecks and bureaucratic “road blocks” of school administrators who have no priority for Educational Resource Centres sometimes dampen the Morales of some resourceful teachers who like to promote the establishment of Educational Resource Centre in their schools.
6.
Specialists in educational technology who could be committed to monitoring the establishment of Educational Resource Centres are very few 7.
The relative newness of educational technology in Nigeria still posses a problem of acceptability to many ‘doubting Thomas’s.
The concept of educational technology is still new to many people.
3.3 Suggested Solutions to the Problem of Educational Resource Centre There is no problem without solution.
The following solutions are hereby suggested: 1.
Four or five schools that are in the same locality could pull their resources together to procure the so called costly equipment.
2.
Improvisation could be solution to the problem of non-availability of certain facilities.
International bodies like USAID, UNDP, UNICEF always assist schools to procure equipment when they are contacted.
3.
The use of standby generating plants could help to solve the problems of inconsistent electric power supply since power supply may not be needed all the time.
4.
Educational technology specialists should embark on enlightenment campaign to educate those who are ignorant of the prospects of Educational Resource Centres.
This will make school administrators to be properly educated on what the school stands to gain if Educational Resource Centres are established.
5.
In service training programme could be proposed for Educational 6.
Resource Centre workers to update their knowledge of educational technology.
These programmes are to be fully sponsored by government or instruction so that 103  when the workers complete their courses, they are bounded to serve their sponsors for some time.
7.
Local factories where equipment and materials for teaching-learning are being manufactured in large scale should be empowered financially and encouraged by government, NGO and individuals.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Mention four likely reason why Educational Resource Centres are not found in the schools as it is expected.
2.
Suggest solution to the problems mentioned in (i) above.
3.4 PROSPECTS OF EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRES Educational Resource Centre has a role to play in the teaching learning process.
With the resolve of Nigeria to catch up with the rest of the world in technological advancement, the proper attention has to be paid to teacher production programmes as well as the teaching-learning process.
Educational Resource Centres are very relevant to the achievement of this feat.
3.4.1 How the Educational Resource Centres Could Improve Teaching-Learning A functional, well equipped Educational Resource Centre is likely to: 1.
Encourage teachers in the use of instructional materials since they can just walk in and avail themselves with the Instructional Materials already stored for me.
2.
Make the classroom interaction of training and pupils lively with the supply of instructional materials from the Educational Resource Centre.
Many teachers have problems with how to make instructional materials but with Educational Resource Centre in place, they can have these instructional materials easily on loan.
3.
Offer to teachers the latest discoveries in teaching learning as a result of the researches conducted by experts.
104  4.
Make teachers to be better equipped for the task ahead of them since they have the opportunity of attending seminar, training and workshops organised by the Educational Resource Centres.
5.
Sensitize teachers at all levels to the strategies for enhancing the teaching profession.
The Educational Resource Centres have a way of providing fund and consultancy services to teachers who want to carry out projects that will enhance their profession.
6.
Assist resourceful teachers to discover their potentials.
Some teachers would not believe that they could draw, paint, make sketches, carve or mould any teaching aid.
These potentials would be uncovered in them with the presence of an Educational Resource Centre in their institution.
7.
Improve the quality of lesson delivery and in time enhance academic performance in learners at all levels.
When teachers teach well as a result of the provision of the Educational Resource Centre, the students too will learn with ease and the society will be a better literate society that it could have been without the Educational Resource Centre.
3.4.2 Other Factors that could pave way for the Realization of the Prospects of Educational Resource Centres 1.
Government Effort The laudable objectives of Educational Resource Centres and the prospects of establishing them could become realisable if the government enacts policies that can serve as the springboard for them.
Relevant government agencies could be saddled with this responsibility.
For instance, the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) recently made it compulsory for all lecturers in the College of Education to become computer literate.
This policy has made all lecturers, who were non-challant about computer literacy before, to pursue computer literacy with more seriousness.
105  2.
Teachers’ Empowerment It has been suggested that teachers should be empowered and eventually mandated to produce one teaching aid (possibly, a chart) monthly.
If teachers are paid a stipend tagged Instructional Materials Allowance (IMA), teachers will have no excusable reason for failing to procure at least one improvised instructional materials in a month (Afolabi, 2005).
It is believed that by the time these instructional materials accumulate over the years, there will be enough materials to be kept in the Educational Resource Centres in the schools.
This idea is expected to be implemented for teachers at all the three levels of education, that is, primary, secondary and tertiary.
3.
Inspectorate Services It is a common routine duty to see inspectors of education insisting the primary and secondary schools.
The items expected of them to supervise are already known by the head teachers and principals.
Usually, these are teachers’ records of work, statutory record books kept by the school, teaching-learning process etc.
If these items can include the inspection of the Learning Resource Centre of the schools, it will be a step in the right direction.
4.
Honours and Merit Award In an attempt to further create room for the realisation of the prospects of Educational Resource Centres, teachers and schools that are committed to the establishment of Educational Resource Centres should be commended and honoured somehow.
This step will create a healthy rivalry among the schools and consequently boost the status of Educational Resource Centres in the schools.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In what ways can the government assist in the realisation of the prospects inherent in Educational Resource Centres?
106  3.5 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES IN THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRES The life span of the facilities in the Educational Resource Centres depends much on the handling and usage in the personnel of the centres.
It is a common say that the cost of maintenance of any facility is far less than the cost of repairing it when it breaks down.
It is therefore wise to ensure a proper super vision of the handling and usage of the facilities.
The maintenance of the facilities in the Educational Resource Centres s shall be discussed under three sub-headings viz: (a) Storage of the facilities (b) Usage of the facilities (c) Servicing of the facilities 3.3.1 Storage of the Facilities According to Afolabi (2005), the pattern of storage for the facilities in the Educational Resource Centres depends on the category the facilities falls into, whether it is a printed material, photographic material, electronic equipment, wooden material and so on.
3.3.2 Printed Material Afolabi (2005) further opined that textbooks charts, maps and journals should be arranged in special ways.
The journals and newspapers should be living on racks and shelves with strings.
While textbooks should be arranged in book shelves with the edges taped to avoid the wear and tear from frequent usage, (Ogunranti, 1982).
3.3.3 Art Work The art work includes that craft produced locally such as weaving, carvings, modeling, paintings (Afolabi, 2005).
107  Adeyanju (1999) and Aremu and Makinde (2001) warned that excessive heat can cause mud work to crack.
They should therefore be stored in cool, dry places.
3.3.4 Hardware Material The hardware materials include television, computers, projectors, cameras and so on.
These items are very delicate and fragile.
Heavy items should not be placed on them in the store-room.
They should also not be on the bare floor to avoid rusting and dust.
If possible, the floor of the store-room should be rugged and air-conditioners fixed there to keep the room cool always.
3.3.5 Software Materials Software are materials in which information is stored (Afolabi,) this includes film cassettes, diskettes, disks, transparencies, slides etc.
They should be stored in the respective cases and containers recommended by the manufacturers.
They should be kept in cool, dry places.
They should also be kept secured to avoid being stolen because of the information on them, (Ogunranti, 1982).
3.3.6 Breakables and Perishables The breakables are the glass materials that are very commonly used in science laboratories and in the resource centres.
The perishables are consumable items that are often used up and regularly replaced.
The breakables should be kept in wooden racks or boxes stuffed with cellulose roughages to avoid scratching and creaking.
The consumable should not be kept for longer than required by the manufacturers.
Otherwise, they will loose their potency.
Some could be presented in deep freezer and refrigerators.
3.4 Usage of the facilities in the Educational Resource Centres It will be abnormal for one to spend much money to procure instructional materials and then use our own hand to destroy it.
The instructional materials in the Educational Resource Centres need careful handling as we use them from time to time so that they can last long.
108  3.4.1 Glassware, Modeling (Mud Items) and Other Breakables There items should not be dropped forcefully.
They should not be hit with hand objects or exposed to excessive heat or cold (Afolabi, Griffin, 1998).
3.4.2 Electronic Items The electronically operated item has the tendency to blow up or burn when electric power fluctuates or suddenly surges.
Users should ensure the correct voltage is in place.
The use of voltage regulator (stabilizer) is very essential (Duncan, 1985).
3.4.3 Metal Work Its has noted that metal items have been the most above of all instructional items.
This is because metals more durable than wood or glass items.
However, when these items are thrown about carelessly, they become dented, rough and sometimes become disfigured (Ogunmilade, 1984).
3.4.4 The Use of Display Furniture Many teachers do not attack importance to the use of display furniture.
You hardly find these included as part of the required furniture for a classroom.
When teacher think of instructional materials to be used for their lesson they also do not think of the display furniture.
Charts should be hung on display racks rather than being held in the teacher’s hands.
Or how can the teachers hold the chart and still write on the chalkboard and do all the necessary gesticulation?
3.4.5 Following Manufacturers’ Specifications Many of the factory-male instructional materials come with manufacturers’ specification.
There are instructions regarding sound volume regulations, regulation of the brightness of light, the types and brand of battery, software, hardware, replaceable parts etc to be used on each of the gadgets etc.
The procedure for operation of electronic materials, for instance is very essential.
One is expected to shut down the computer procedurally after use and not just to switch off the power source suddenly.
109  3.5 Servicing the Facilities Another aspect to be considered in maintaining of the longevity of the instructional materials in the Educational Resource Centres is the regular and routine servicing of the items.
This is done to ensure the maintenance of the original status, colony, shape, functionality etc of the materials for a reasonably longtime (Anmon 1976, Onadeko, 1994).
3.5.1 The Following Are Few Hints To Be Considered and Practiced Regularly To Ensure The Longevity of The Items In The Educational Research Centres.
a.
Regalia and Mockups should be dusted periodically with soft dusters (rags) and brush, sometimes with soap and water.
b.
Slides can be dusted with moistened cloth.
c. Prints and Graphics should be dusted periodically.
They should be hung in such a way that fresh air can pass through them.
Their racks/shelves should be sprayed with insecticide regularly to avoid cockroach and termites.
d. Films and Film Strips should be cleaned with film cleaner.
Bleaches should be avoided because this may clear off the images on the films.
e. Photographic materials should not be exposed to naked light when in use.
This is because the silver halides used to coat the surface of the films are light sensitive.
They forge when exposed to naked light.
f. Metal Items should be painted and regularly dusted with dry duster.
Moisture must not be allowed to settle on them to avoid dusting.
g. Electronic Items kept in the store should be exposed and operated occasionally to ensure that they are still in good condition.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Take a particular instructional material and describe how you will maintain its longevity while in use.
110  4.0 CONCLUSION Any problem that has ready solution is no longer a problem.
However, the solutions that are available will not become effective on the problem situation until steps are taken to implement them.
Now that the problems are still very much with us, could it be that the solution are not yet discovered or there are no initiators to set the motion.
Prevention, people say, is better and even cheaper than cure.
This is the reason why the maintenance culture should be imbibed by all teachers and managers of Educational Resource Centres.
It has been documented in literate that instructional materials have the ability to enhance learning either by concretizing abstract concepts, by making the class lively while learners are actively involved, by making illustration of points easy for the teachers or by encouraging individualized learning.
The next problem one would raises how to get the instructional materials for use.
This is the major focus of the establishment of Educational Resource Centres in the schools.
Educational Resource Centres have a lot of prospects if and when established in the schools.
5.0 SUMMARY We have tried to mention the problems confronting Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria.
The likely solutions to the problem have also been mentioned, with these aspects in place, it is expected that the educational technology as a discipline will progress in the tertiary institutions and the teaching-learning in primary and secondary schools be enhanced.
111  In this unit, you have been told how you may store, use and service the instructional materials in your Educational Resource Centres.
In this unit, the possible gains of establishing Educational Resource Centres in the schools have been outlined.
The much needed empowerment politically and financially, for the prospects to be realised, have also been discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain in details why instructional materials in the Educational Resource Centres should be handled with care while in use and non-use.
How can the level of understanding of a principal, concerning the prospects of educational technology affect the establishment of Educational Resource Centre in his school?
Justify the need for Educational Resource Centres in schools despite the huge financial cost involved.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyanju, A. Ogundele, J.A, Salami, K.A, Alabi A.O & Okemakinde T. (2004).
A Basic Text on Educational Management Ibadan: Akin-Johnson Press and Publishing Ogunranti .A.
(1982) Educational Technology Ibadan Heinemann Educational Books Ogunmilade C.A (1884) Media in Education Ile-Ife Obafemi Awolowo University Press.
Salawu, I.O, Afolabi, A.O & Taiwo, S.A (2001) Essentials of Educational Technology Oyo, Odumat Press.
112  MODULE 3: HISTORICAL TRENDS, ADMINISTRATIVE PRINCIPLES, CONCEPT OF INFORMATION STORAGE, RETRIEVAL AND CLASSIFICATION, ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURES AND REVISIONAL NOTES Unit 1 Historical Trends in the Development of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria Unit 2 Administrative Functions of Managers Unit 3 Administrative Principles Unit 4 The Concept of Information Storage, Retrieval and Classification Schemes Unit 5 Administrative Structures in an Educational Resource Centres I Unit 6 Revision Notes on the Management of Educational Resource Centres UNIT 1 THE HISTORICAL TREND IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE CENTRE IN NIGERIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Starting Point 3.2 The First Institution 3.3 Government Impact in Development of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria 3.4 The Establishment of NETC 3.5 Foreign Aid for the Development of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria 3.6 Decision Making By Managers and Highly Placed Officers 3.6.1 Basic Functions of a Manager 3.6.2.1 Planning 113  3.6.2.2 Organising 3.6.2.3 Staffing 3.6.2.4 Directing 3.6.2.5 Co-ordinating 3.6.2.6 Reporting 3.6.2.7 Budgeting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Tracing the development of a project over a specified period will show whether the trend is progressive or not.
It will also show the place of the progress if progressive.
This information can become very useful in research to determine whether there is need for paying attention to certain aspects of the project.
This is relevant to the development of the Educational Resource Centre too.
For any organisation to be run smoothly, the manager must be given defined roles.
He is indeed the life wire of the organisation.
The success or failure of the organisation depends largely on his administrative and management styles.
He must understand clearly the extent and limitation of his power to oversee the affairs of the organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Mention the origin of Educational Resource Centre in Nigeria.
• Identify the major landmarks in the development of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria.
• Identify the functions of the manager in an organisation.
114  • Describe in details, the functions of the manager in an organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT For tracing the historical trend of Educational Resource Centre in Nigeria, we shall use the account of Ofoefuwa (1999) as our guide.
3.1 The Starting Point Ofoefuwa (1999) refering to an earlier publication of 1992 opined that the starting point for the birth of Educational Resource Centre was in 1947 in Lagos.
The centre was then known as Media Production Centre.
The purpose of the establishment was to produce instructional materials to aid teachers in their teaching.
3.2 The First Institutionalised Educational Resource Centre An institutionalised Educational Resource Centre is that centre that is linked up with or affiliated to an academic institution.
The first of such centres is the one affiliated with the University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
The centre is called Abadina Media Centre.
It was established in 1974.
The centre has a comprehensive library stocked with instructional materials for school children in the pre primary and primary schools.
It also has audio rooms and viewing centres.
3.3 Government Impact in Development of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria Government interest in establishing Educational Resource Centres can be traced to 1975 when the government decided to reform the educational sector in its National Development Plan.
Part of the reform that government intends to put in place in education is “the improvement of quality of teaching through adequate supply of various forms of pedagogical and materials” (Ofoefuwa, 1999, P. 109).
Ofoefuwa (1999) further reported that government was willing to render financial assistance to institutions that embarks on adequate production of pedagogical aids.
115  3.4 The Establishment of NETC In confirmation the depth of Educational Resource Centres, the NETC was established as the climax of the developmental trend.
NETC was established in 1997 in Lagos.
The NETC is founded as the agent of FME.
3.5 Foreign Aid for the Development of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria The history of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria cannot be complete without acknowledging the foreign supports for the project.
Prominent among such foreign organisations are UNESCO, Ford Foundation, USAID.
It was reported that UNESCO assisted Alvan Ikoku College of Education to equip their microteaching laboratory.
It also helped to establish the audio-visual unit in the College of Education, Lagos.
3.5 The Establishment of NETC In confirmation the depth of Educational Resource Centres, the NETC was established as the climax of the developmental trend.
NETC was established in 1997 in Lagos.
The NETC is founded as the agent of FME.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss the contribution of (i) government and (ii) foreign agencies towards the establishment of the Educational Resource Centres.
3.6 ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONS OF MANAGERS 3.6.1 Decision Making By Managers and Highly Placed Officers Managers and other highly placed officers in any organisation are always involved in decision taking from time to time.
They therefore need to be guided on the kind of decisions they can take.
However, scholars do not agree on how many functions a manager (top executive) can perform in an organisation.
116  3.6.2 Basic Functions Whatever the size, objective and nature the organisation may be, there are seven basic functions the manager should perform.
They are: Planning, organising, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting (Adeyanju, Ogundele, Salami, Alabi and Okemakinde, 2004).
3.6.2.1 Planning This is an intellectual process.
It is a mental assignment.
It goes on in the personal library or on the table of the manager.
This is when he thinks about what he wants to do in future.
Here he asks himself several questions and also supplies answers to them.
3.6.2.2 Organising This is more pragmatic than planning.
The manager arranges his earlier plans (thoughts) into action steps.
It involves ordering the activities and personnels of the organisation in a specific pattern.
3.6.2.3 Staffing It is the duty of the manager to ensure that the relevant and appropriate personnel are enlisted in the mainstream of the organisations’ staff.
3.6.2.4 Directing This function involves passing instruction to subordinates that will culminate in the achievement of the objectives of the organisation.
The success of the administration depends on the correctness, relevance, clarity and simplicity of the instruction passed down by the manager.
117  3.6.2.5 Coordinating The manager plays supervisory roles as well.
He monitors and harmonises the activities of the staffers of the organisation.
3.6.2.6 Reporting The manager has the duty of creating in atmosphere that encourages a free flow of information in the organisation.
He gives the staffers regular feedback to keep them informed and to avoid communication gap.
He organises interactive forum from time to time.
3.6.2.7 Budgeting This is part of the activities that on in the planning stage.
It involves estimating the amount of money that may be needed for the running of the organisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Mention three main functions of a manager in any organisation.
2.
Describe in details three ways managers carry out their functions to an organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is no contention as regards the establishment of Educational Resource Centres.
Its essential functions have been mentioned earlier.
It is important that the origin of such an establishment should be known and documental.
In this unit you have been taught the seven basic functions of a manager in any organisation.
The overall role of the manager is to oversee the activities of the personnel in the organisation.
Each of the seven functions is described briefly.
The uniqueness of the role of the manager (chief executive) of an organisation presents the manager as an inevitable and unavoidable personnel.
118  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been taken through the stage of the humble beginning of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria.
You have also seen the progressive trend in the development of Educational Resource Centres and where the weak areas in the development showed up.
This unit has outlined seven basic principles of administration.
The principles are planning, organising, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and performance.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the major landmarks in the developmental route of Educational Resource Centres in Nigeria.
What are the activities that managers undergo in their organisation to ensure the achievement of the entire organisation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyanju, A , Ogundele, J.A, Salami, K.A, Alabi, A.O.
& Okemakinde T. (2004).
A Basic Text on Educational Management, Ibadan: Akin-Johnson Press and Publishers.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education 3rd Edition Federal Ministry of Education (19991) Joint Consultative Conference Reference Report Ofoefuwa M.O.
and Eya, P.E (1999) The Basics of Educational Technology, Enugu , J.T.C Publisher.
119  UNIT 2 ADMINISTRATIVE PRINCIPLES AND STRUCTURES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Necessities for Adopting an Administrative Principle 3.2.1 Administrative Principle As a Guide in Decision Making 3.2.2 Strategies Adopt by Manager with Administrative Principle for Dealing with Crisis and Non Crisis Period 3.2.3 Administrative Principle of a Leader Serving As a Check and Balance 3.2.4 Administrative Principle Enables Managers Prepare for Eventuality.
3.2.5 Managers with Administrative Principle Takes Calculated Steps 3.3 Administrative Structures.
3.3.1 Departmentalisation 3.3.2 Centralization 3.3.3 Decentralization 3.3.4 Delegation of Authority 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The manager of an educational resource centre should be guided by certain principles which serve as checks and balances for him.
This idea is true for all organisations involving human.
The manager/director should be able to identify the administrative style he is adopting for the organisation.
120  2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define administrative principle.
• Identify the reason why managers should adopt specific administrative principles in running their organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition Administrative principles could be defined as theoretical guidelines, pattern or style of leadership adopted by a leader/manager in running the affairs of his organisation.
3.2 Necessities for adopting an Administrative Principle Why does a leader need to adopt a particular style of administration in running the affairs of his organisation?
The reasons and purposes are not far-fetched.
3.2.1 Administrative Principle as a Guide in Decision Making Administrative principles guide the administrator in taking decisions.
That means the administrative principle adopted by the manager/leader will affect how he takes decisions.
Whether the principle is fundamental, bureaucratic, prudential or any other will go a long way to influence the decision taken by the administrator on specific issues raised.
3.2.2 Strategies Adopted by Manager with Administrative Principle for Dealing with Crisis and Non Crisis Periods The administrative principle could also provide the strategies for dealing with crisis and non-crisis situations of the organisation.An organization supposes to be operating in an hunred percent peaceful atmosphere.
121  3.2.3 Administrative Principle of a Leader Serving as a Check and Balance on Him/Her The administrative principle of a leader serves as checks and balance to him.
He always remembers his limitation and extent to which he can go in any situation in the organization .A leader who adopts an open door administration for instance would have a limitless opportunities to interact with the subordinates.
However a leader who wants to be respected by his subordinates would be cautious of his relationship with the other members of staff.
3.2.4 Administrative Principle Enables Manager Prepare for Eventuality The administrative principle enables the leader/manager to prepare himself \herself for any eventuality.
Negative situation never occurs to him unprepared, neither does positive situation.
3.2.5 Managers with Administrative Principle Take Calculated Steps A manager who has a administrative principle takes calculated steps.
He does not just take decision without weighing the pros and cons of the decision (Adeyanju et al, 2004).
3.3 The administrative structures that a director of Educational Resource Centre can use include: a. Departmentalization b. Centralization c. Decentralization d. Delegation of Authority Each of the structures mentioned in 3.3 has advantages and disadvantages.
Let us consider the structures one after the other.
122  3.3.1 Departmentalization It has been said earlier that the size of a resource centre depends on the complexity of its functions and the scope of its coverage and patronage.
Smaller centres may not need to be departmentalized.
But as the centre grows in scope and patronage, the director may find it necessary to create departments such as courseware department, electronic department, graphic design department, photography department etc.
This makes the management of the centre easier for the director.
3.3.2 Centralization Centralization is an administrative structure where most or all powers and authority guiding the organisation is concentrated round only one person, usually, the chief executive or in the present circumstances, the Director.
This type of structure permits dictatorial tendency where the chief executive is considered infallible and perfect.
3.3.3 Decentralization This administrative structure allows power and authority over the resource centre to be located at various spots in the organisation.
The director carries the subordinates along in his decisions.
Responsibility and commitment increase since the entire staff strength see themselves as part of the running of the organisation.
3.3.4 Delegation of Authority The director of the Educational Resource Centre may find it necessary to request that certain offices should stand in for him at certain functions.
This is delegation of authority.
The director takes the pain to give his subordinates various assignments to carry out on behalf.
This structure can be adopted where there are mature hands, at least at the level of the director.
Simple, non-volatile issues are conceded to trusted hands to carry out while the director attends to similar structures.
123  3.3 Styles of Relationships A vital aspect of administration of an Educational Resource Centre is what is known as Style of Leadership relationship.
Four of these styles of leadership relationship are: a. Span of Control b.
Unity of Command c. Line Authority d. Staff Authority Each style shall be discussed briefly for you to have a grip of what each one means as a prospective manager of Educational Resource Centre.
3.3.1 Span of Control This structure refers to the horizontal arrangement of administrative functions.
This suggests that there should be a yardstick for determining the number of individuals that a manager can conveniently control.
There is however to agreement yet as regards how many people should be under the leadership of one manager.
Whatever research findings may say on this issue, it is obvious that the span of control of any manager will differ from another one.
It will depend on the experience of that manager, his exposure, the nature of the subordinate with him, the nature of job he is doing and the facilities available to him.
3.3.2 Unity of Command This is also called “chain of command”.
It can be likened to the organogram in an organization.
It describes the direction of flow of authority that must be followed in the organization.
It spells out whom and who is each person directly responsible to.
Every member of the organisation should be well educated about this structure to avoid jumping of protocols which may attract the wrath of some officers in the rank.
124  3.3.3 Line Authority In an organisation, there may be a few individuals saddled with the responsibility of making policies or having final say on policy matters They are called Executive Committee in some organisation or policy makers in others.
They are usually very few.
The Educational Resource Centres could adopt this structure too depending on the existing laws established at the centres.
3.4.4 Staff Authority This structure involves the entire workforce of an organisation.
The voice of the different strata in the organisation usually has weight in decision taking.
This is what some people to mass action.
By the time each section in the organisation pulls their voices together through their delegates, their opinion will over ride that of the line authority.
The manager who ignores the welfare of the staff of his organisation will have a crisis- infected administration.
The educational resource centres too are not left out because it involves the services of some personnel.
The ability for a manager to adopt an appropriate administrative structure signals a peaceful and forward looking organisation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Are there any good or bad administrative structures?
2.
Does centralization of administration always has negative consequences?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to points relating to the importance of management principles.
It has also been shown that every leader/manager who does not value these administrative principles, may loose control of his organisation.
You have also been exposed to five major principles of administration.
Each of the principles has been explained briefly.
Any administrator who intends to manage an educational technology centre should be prepared to practice these principles.
The materials and human resources in the centre can be properly coordinated to improve productivity if the principles are followed.
125  Four administrative structures so far discussed are simplified and summarized to make them handy and to enhance memory.
You should be able to fish out the merits and demerits of each of the structures.
The essence of administration is to get your work done to the admiration of your boss.
For this feat to be achieved, the director of the Educational Resource Centre needs to adopt a worker – friendly administrative structure.
The manager who ignores the welfare of the staff of his organization will have a crisis- infected administration.
The educational resource centres too are not left out because it involves the services of some personnel.
The ability for a manager to adopt an appropriate administrative structure signals a peaceful and forward looking organization.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discusses eight administrative structures.
The adoption of any of the structures by the manager has far reaching effect on the organisation.
Five reasons why administrators should have specific management principles are also discussed.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What do you understand by administrative principles?
2.
Identify three reasons why administrators should have specific management principles.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Defend the fact that administrators do not need to adopt any particular administrative principle.
2.
Which of the four administrative structures discussed in this unit will you like to adopt as the Director of your school’s educational resource centre?
Give reasons for your choice.
126  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyanju, A , Ogundele, J.A, Salami, K.A, Alabi, A.O.
& Okemakinde T. (2004).
A Basic Text on Educational Management, Ibadan: Akin-Johnson Press and Publishers.
Federal Ministry of Education (1991) Joint Consultative Conference Reference Report.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education.
3rd Edition 127  UNIT 3: THE CONCEPT OF INFORMATION STORAGE, RETRIEVAL AND CLASSIFICATION SCHEMES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Need for Order 3.2 What is Classification?
3.3 Information Retrieval System 3.4 Dewey Decimal Classification 3.5 Library of Congress Classification 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will find out exactly what a retrieval system is all about.
We shall begin by considering what it means to retrieve, information.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you complete this unit, you should be able to: • Describe a document retrieval system • Explain the concept of information retrieval • Describe the organisation of an information retrieval system 128  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Need for Order One of the capabilities of man is his ability to organize and put things in order.
When you walk into super-market you will se that the items there are displayed in sections.
Items of the same are in the same section.
Can you think of why that is so?
You would have realised that it is much easier to locate the items.
You would not be looking for shoes in a section with the label “Household ware”.
When you go into the market, you do not go on roaming all over the place.
You know exactly which area to go because you know what you need and you know which section of the market sells things of that type.
Perhaps the best example of organisation of materials you have noticed or may notice is in the library.
We shall soon talk more about how such elaborate organisation is done.
First of all, how do you arrange your books?
It is very likely you do not arrange or organise them in any particular order, and certainly you do not have any problem with that.
You can pick out any book you want from the heap without any difficulty just because the books are not very many.
Now imagine a room with piles of books on the floor and almost reaching the ceiling.
The whole room has been taken up by books.
How easy would it be to locate a book from that room?
Sure enough, nobody would like the unpleasant task of bringing books from there for people who come to as for them.
In order to deal with this difficulty, various methods have been evolved to organize knowledge to classes representing subject fields.
Each class is divided into subclasses dealing with recognizable segments of that field.
The sub-class is also divided into smaller units representing well-defined subject matter within the segment in a sub-class.
Information resource document are then arranged in classes, sub-classes and units within subclasses.
Every document that is stored in the library is represented by a record in a collection of files, which is made available to those who come to seek for information.
129  3.2 What is Classification?
Classification is the act of grouping things together.
Classification portrays the relationships between things and between their classes.
In fact, classification is a way of imposing order on creation.
Since it is easier to think in terms of classes than individual things in creation, classification allows us to generalize.
It would be difficult if not impossible to reason if human beings did not have the power of classifying and creating categories.
What we know as knowledge is the outcome of grouping, dividing and registering thought, things and ideas in an unlimited number of ways.
For consistent classification, there must be a classification scheme.
A classification scheme is simply an orderly arrangement of categories of classes, a class being any group of entities sharing the same characteristics.
A characteristic is an attribute by which concept may be separated into groups or further subdivided by subject.
Thus the purpose of classification is to bring together (or form classes of) entities that share common characteristics and to separate entities that do not share common characteristics.
3.3 Information Retrieval System The diagram below illustrates an information retrieval system.
The input may be a document, some data or information.
The input process includes recording, subject analysis, and possibly some reorganization, especially in case of data.
The input processes generate the representations or surrogates to be stored in a database.
Document Input Database Query Data Processes Information Retrieval Document Information Store Fig.
2: An Information Retrieval System 130  What is retrieved will depend on the query.
If the request is for some factual information, the procedure will begin from the database, move to the document store to find an appropriate document, and end with the delivery of the information requested.
A second possibility is a request for one or two documents that will give information to help solve a problem on hand.
There is still a third possibility that the request is for a list of references in an area of interest.
In other words, the person who is making the request wants to know what information is available in that area.
A researcher often makes this type of request.
He or she would like to find out what work has been done and what has been published in the area of his or her research project.
The immediate need is not a physical document.
To satisfy this need, it is necessary to search the database.
The output is bibliographic information.
Self Assessment Exercise The information retrieval system shown in the diagram is actually an idealistic one.
We have just, described what seems to be a complex or an all-inclusive type of information retrieval system.
What kinds of information need can it respond to?
It is expected to respond to requests for • a known document • any document that will provide the kind of information need • some factual information • references of publications In real life not many libraries and information centres provide services to meet these needs with equal emphasis.
For instance, most libraries and document supply organisations put more emphasis on delivering documents.
Most of the organisations that offer information retrieval services actually concentrate on bibliographic information, sometimes with full text.
131  At this point we should try to distinguish between document retrieval system and information retrieval system.
This distinction is not very easy to make.
We know that a document retrieval system should deliver a document, an information material.
It is the business of the person who gets it to read it and find or discover useful information in it.
On the other hand, we expect an information retrieval system to deliver to a user the information he or she requests for.
Now, what is the difference between a document and information?
It is a fact that information is often carried in documents.
If you ask for information on the last budget of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and someone gives you a newspaper or a pamphlet containing the budget speech of the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, you have a' document all right, but in it you have the information you need.
However, if the person consults the budget document and then gives you a run down of the main items of the budget speech, he has given you information.
In this case, you would quickly conclude that information retrieval has to go beyond document retrieval to offering information in the form (possibly in a synthesized and concise form) that the user can apply directly.
Of course you must remember that the kind of information people need varies.
If what you want is not a document but a list of documents in the library or publications available in software marketing in Africa, the search for information would simply end at the library catalogue or in some database and you would have the information you need.
So you can see that the distinction between a document retrieval system and an information retrieval system is not a matter of organisational structure but a matter of service emphasis.
A system that provides documents in response to queries is a document retrieval system, while those that provide answers to specific questions give some direction on where information can be obtained, or produces a list of sources of information are information retrieval systems.
Modem information retrieval systems are computer-based systems.
132  3.4 Dewey Decimal Classification Some form of classification schemes have been used since ancient times for organisation materials in libraries.
They include chronological arrangement, arrangement by title, grouping by broad subject, as well as arrangement by author, order of accession and size.
The rapid growth of library collections and their use during the nineteenth century resulted in a pressing need for better methods of organising library collections.
Dewey decimal classification, developed towards the end of the 19th century is one of the many well-known library classification schemes that follow the hierarchical approach described above.
Dewey divided the whole of universe knowledge into tem main classes as follows: First Summary: The 10 Main Classes 000 Generalities 100 Philosophy & related disciplines 200 Religions 300 The social Sciences 400 Languages 500 Pure Sciences 600 Technologies 700 The Arts 800 Literatures (Belles-lettres) 900 General geography & history The second summary is made of the 100 divisions as follows: Second Summary: The 100 Divisions 000 Generality 010 Bibliographies & catalogs 020 Library& information sciences 030 General encyclopedic works 133  040 Unassigned 050 General serial publications 060 General organisation & museology 070 Journalism, publishing, newspapers 080 General collections 090 Manuscript & book rarities 100 Philosophy & related disciplines 110 Metaphysics 120 Knowledge, cause, purpose, man 130 Popular & parapsychology, occultism 140 Specific philosophical viewpoints 150 Psychology 160 Logic 170 Ethics 180 Ancient, medieval, oriental 190 Modern Western Philosophy 200 Religion 210 Natural religion 220 Bible 230 Christian doctrinal 240 Christian moral & devotional 250 Local church & religious orders 260 Social & ecclesiastical theology 270 History & geography of church 280 Christian denominations & sects 290 Other religions & comparative 134  300 The social sciences 310 Statistics 320 Political science 330 Economics 340 Law 350 Public administration 360 Social pathology & services 370 Educations 380 Commerce 290 Customs & folklore 400 Languages 410 Linguistics 420 English & Anglo Saxon languages 430 Germanic languages German 440 Romance languages French 450 Italian, Romanian, Rhaeto-Romance 460 Spanish & Portuguese languages 470 Italic languages Latin 480 Hellenic Classical Greek 490 Other languages 500 Pure sciences 510 Mathematics 520 Astronomy & allied operations 530 Physics 540 Chemistry & allied sciences 550 Sciences of earth, other worlds 560 Paleontology 570 Life sciences 580 Botanical sciences 590 Zoological sciences 135  600 Technology (Applied sciences) 610 Medical sciences 620 Engineering & allied operations 630 Agriculture & related 640 Domestic arts & sciences 650 Managerial services 660 Chemical & related technologies 670 Manufactures 680 Miscellaneous manufactures 690 Buildings 700 The arts 710 Civic & landscape art 720 Architecture 730 Plastic arts sculpture 740 Drawing, decorative & 750 Painting & paintings 760 Graphic arts prints 770 Photography & photographs 780 Music 790 Recreational& performing arts 800 Literatures (Belles-lettres) 810 American literatures in English 820 English & Anglo-Saxon literature 830 Literature of Germanic languages 840 Literature of Romance languages 850 Italian, Romanian, Rhaeto-Romance 860 Spanish & Portuguese literature 870 Italic languages, literature, Latin 880 Hellenic languages literatures 136  890Literature of other languages 900 General geography & history 910 General geography, travel 920 General biography & genealogy 930 General history of ancient world 940 General history of Europe 950 General history of Asia 960 General history of Africa 970 General history of North America 980 General history of South America 990 General histories of other areas The third is the 100 section.
The 1000 section for pure sciences is as follows: Third Summary: The 1000 Section 500 pure Sciences 501 Philosophy & theory 502 Miscellanies 503 Dictionaries & encyclopedias, Concordances 504 Unassigned 505 Serial publications 506 Organisations 507 Study & teaching 508 Collections, travels, surveys 509 Historical & geographical treatment 510 Mathematics 511 Generalities 512 Algebra 513 Arithmetic 514 Topology 137  515 Analyses 516 Geometry 517 Unassigned 518 Unassigned 519 Probabilities & applied mathematics 520 Astronomy & allied sciences 521 Theoretical astronomy 522 Practical & spherical astronomy 523 Descriptive astronomy 524 Unassigned 525 Earth (Astronomical Geography) 526 Mathematical geography 527 Celestial navigation 528 Ephemeredes (Nautical almanacs) 529 Chronologies (Time) 530 Physics 531 Mechanics 532 Mechanics of fluid 533 Mechanics of gasses 534 Sound & related vibrations 535 Visible light & parahotic 536 Heats 537 Electricity & electronics 538 Magnetism 539 Modern physics 540 Chemistry & allied sciences 541 Physical & theoretical chemistry 542 Laboratories, apparatus, equipment 543 General analyses 544 Qualitative analysis 545 Qualitative analysis 138  546 Inorganic chemistry 547 Organic chemistry 548 Crystallography 549 Mineralogy Using the Dewey classification schedules above, find the class code for the following documents: 1.
Practical lessons in Chemistry 2.
Report of the Agency for Agricultural Development 3.
The main political events and figures in Nigeria, 1990-2000 3.5 Library of Congress Classification The Library of Congress Classification was developed as a series of special classification schedules between 1899 and 1920.
The scheme was not intended to be a philosophical classification, but a very practical tool, an enumerative classification whose schedules are based entirely on the subject grouping of the collection of books in the library of congress.
The scheme uses both letters and numbers (mixed notation), unlike Dewey decimal classification, which uses only numbers.
Single letters are assigned to the main divisions.
The Library of Congress Classification schedules are as follows: A General Works B-BJ Philosophy.
Psychology BL-BX Religion C Auxiliary Sciences of History D History, General and Old World (Eastern Hemisphere) E-F History: America (Western Hemisphere) G Geography.
Anthropology.
Recreation H Social Science J Political Science KD Law of the United Kingdom and Ireland KF Law of the Unites States 139  L Education M Music, Books on Music N Fine Arts PA General Philosophy and Linguistic.
Classical Language and Literature PA Supplement Byzantine and Modern Greek Literature.
Medieval and Modern Latin Literature PB-PH Modern European languages PG Russian Literature PJ-PM Languages and Literature of Asia, Africa, Oceania, America Indian languages, Artificial languages PN, PR, PS, PZ General Literature, English and American Literature, Fiction in English, Juvenile Literature, PQ Part 1 French Literature PQ Part 2 Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese Literatures Q Science R Medicine S Agriculture T Technology U Military Science V Naval Science Z Bibliography, Library Science 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you were introduced to few of the main concepts in the management of resources (non-books) especially in an educational media centre.
You should by now be able to explain the meaning of such terms like information storage, information retrieval as well as classification.
In addition you are to bee able to classify library resources especially the printed materials using Dewey Decimal or Library of congress classification schemes.
140  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have found out exactly what a retrieval system is all about.
In the next unit, you will learn to appreciate the role of information centres in storage and retrieval.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the organisation of a document retrieval system and an information retrieval system and explain how one is different from the other.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Ministry of Education (1991) Joint Consultative Conference Reference Report.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education.
3rd Edition 141  UNIT 4 CATALOGUING OF EDUCATIONAL MEDIA RESOURCE \ MATERIALS (BOOKS) 1.0 Introduction: An educational media resource centre is expected to be rich in its holdings.
In order for the centre to achieve the main purpose of its establishment, all the materials so acquired as a matter of necessity be put into descriptive form for easy accessibility and retrieval by its users.
It is this descriptive presentation of information about books and non book resources that is technically referred to as cataloguing.
As a media specialist cum teacher you would find the experience you are going to encounter in this unit highly rewarding.
2.0.
Objectives: By the end of reading this unit, you should be able to : (i) Define (describe) such terms like cataloguing and accessioning.
(ii) Prepare Catalogue cards books and non – book materials (iii) Explain the sources from where bibliographic information could be gotten in a standard book.
3.0.
Main Content.
3.1.
Cataloguing: I ask “have you ever come across this concept / term before?
If you have, then, that is good but if you have not, this is an opportunity you have been waiting for!!!
Cataloguing according to Elaturoti Fagbeja, Kolade and Oniyide (1990) is the process of putting the description information of a book and non – book media on a catalogue card.
Essential bibliographic information and the order in which they are to be presented on the catalogue cards are, author, title, edition (if any), place of publication, publisher, date of publication, number of pages or volumes and illustrations in case they are provided in the book / non book material.
It should however be noted that in addition to all the bibliographic information so far mentioned, there are others that are peculiar to the non – 142  book media.
Such include, the medium, colour, speed of recording, duration, sound and number of pieces in a pack of the items.
Practice Exercise 1: List the essential information to be looked for in carrying out cataloguing.
3.1.2 Purpose of Cataloguing: Imagine you are searching for a particular book / non book material in a media resource centre with very large holdings without a catalogue cabinet, will be a laborious exercise and of course one may end up losing interest in the search.
With a well kept catalogue, the problem has been highly minimized even if the cataloguing is the manual type.
All that the user does is to flip through the catalogue cards so arranged alphabetically by author, title or subject.
By so doing, he / she is able to know whether or not the book / non book media is available.
In media resource centres where three entries (Author.
Title, Subject) are provided, users are provided wider opportunities of searching thus incase it is the name of the author of a particular book / non book media that the user remembers, he / she can search, a s he / she can also search, if it is only the title of the book / non book media that he / she remembers.
Little wonder, the catalogue has been rightly described as the index of the library / media centre.
By this is meant that the catalogue does to the library / media centre what the index does to a book.
The strength and weakness of the library / media resources centre can be ascertained by the fullness or emptiness of the catalogue cabinet.
The catalogue cabinet houses the catalogue cards.
A catalogue card is a standard unit card of 7.5 X 12.5cm or (3X5 inches) with a hole punched at the centre of the base (Elaturoti et al, 1990).
3.2.2 Sources of Bibliographic information of a book.
With reference to your answer to practice Exercise I where you listed bibliographic information that a catalogue should seek for, you could be wondering where such information could be located in a book.
You \should be guided here to restrict your thought to a typically standard book / non book material and not just any book / non book published by the “market place” or “hungry” publishers and authors.
143  Bibliographic information may be obtained from the following aspects of the book: the binding, the preliminary pages, the text, the auxiliary or reference material and in some cases,; the blurb.
3.3 Cataloguing a Book: It should be emphasized that cataloguing is the process of providing bibliographic description of print and non print material with the main objective of reducing or removing the problem of the users in retrieving the materials.
Cataloguing is not done any how or haphazardly.
It is a process that needs to be systematically followed.
The process of cataloguing is the focus of this sub unit.
In cataloguing, the surname is written first in capital letter (upper case letters) followed by a punctuation mark of comma (,).
Next is writing of the initials or the other names of the author as they are provided in the book.
The title of the book follows on another line with indentation.
The cataloguer ensures that he / she begins the writing of the title by leaving four spaces from the left hand side margin of the card.
This is followed by imprint area which consists of the place of publication, publisher and date of publication.
It is to be noted that the place of publication is preceded by a point, space, dash, space ( .
- ), while the publisher’s name is preceded by a colon (:) and the date is preceded by a comma (,).
Next is the collation area which consists of the pagination, that is, the number of pages and or number of volumes, illustration statement and size of the book.
Note that the pagination is preceded by a point, space, dash, spare ( .
- ) while the illustration statement is preceded by a colon (:) and it is written in abbreviated form as (ill).
The size of the book follows the illustration and it is recorded in centimeters (cm).
the size is usually preceded by a semi – colon (;) It is optional for a catalogue to indicate the size of the book.
The reason for this is obvious, it is cumbersome for a cataloguer to weigh each book that he / she needs to work on.
This task will waste a lot of time and it does not provide for much of user’s interest.
(Fig 1) In case a book is published under a series title, the series statement is to be entered after 144  the collation with a full stop space and dash ( .
- ) preceding it.
other important items to be included on the catalogue card are, the accession number of the book and the call mark.
The accession number is a serial number given to books as they arrive in the library and they indicate the number of books the library has acquired before its arrival.
Each book in the library therefore has its own peculiar number.
The call mark on the other hand is otherwise known as the notation and it is usually the combination of the classification mark and the first three letters of the author’s surname.
The call mark is usually found at the top left hand corner of the catalogue card.
(see fig 2) 896 KON KONADU A woman in her prime – henvon: Heinemann, 1967 – 108p.
– (African Writers Series) Acc.
No Fig.
2 Fig.
1a: Sole Authorship 420 ASH ASHADE, Dele.
‘A’- One English, A complete SSCE / GCE Text.
Lagos: Ashdell investment Ltd., 2008.
- 298p.
: Acc.
No.
145  Fig.
1b: Joint Authorship 420 ASU, MAR.
ASUDO, J.O and Marsh, L.G.
Lessons and exercises in grammar and language - Ibadan, specrum, 1982.
– 160p.
: ill. Acc.
No: Practice Exercise 2: Lay your hand on any book and catalogue it following the processes involved in cataloguing as provided.
Exchange your work with a student partner for a critique on degree of correctness.
3.4.
Types of Catalogue Cards for library / Media Resource Materials.
As earlier mentioned, for each medium (book or non - book) catalogued in the school library media centre, there should be at least three entries (Elaturoti et al.
1990).
These are.
(a) Main entry (card) otherwise known as the author entry (card).
The entry can be done under personal name or corporate body.
fig.
1a: Sole Authorship 420 ASH ASHADE, Dele.
‘A’- One English, A complete SSCE / GCE Text.
Lagos: Ashdell investment Ltd., 2008.
- 298p.
: Fig.
1b: Joint Authorship Acc.
No.
Personal names could be sole or joint authorship.
It is sole when and if the book is written by only one person.
In a situation where a book is written by more than 146  one person, we then talk of joint authorship.
In a situation whereby an institution / corporate body is recognized as the author of the book then it is to be so acknowledged and used by the catalogue.
Thus institution names like: International Institute of Tropical Agriculture ( IITA ) 420 ASU, MAR.
ASUDO, J.O and Marsh, L.G.
Lessons and exercises in grammar and language - Ibadan, specrum, 1982.
– 160p.
: ill. Acc.
No: National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) Federal Ministry of Education (FME), First Bank of Nigeria (FBN), etc could be rightly occupy the position of the main entry in cataloguing.
(See Fig.
3) 370 NIG NIGERIA : FEDERAL MINISTRY OF EDUCATION Blue print on computer education: Federal Minstry of Education, 2010.
– 16p Acc.
No (b) The Title Entry Card: This card carries the title of the medium as the heading with which a library user can locate the material.
You have been severally informed that the essential of cataloguing is to ease the problem of the library 147  media centre users.
You will then understand the reason why the title entry card is provided.
A library user who only knows the title of the work he / she is looking for can easily be assisted in a library that keeps titles entry cards.
(See Fig.
4) (c) The Subject entry Card: Catalogue card that is prepared for the subject entry carries the subject of the medium as the heading.
(See Fig.
4) Fig: 5 420 Effective English students’ book MON 2.
MONTGOMERY, Michael.
Effective English students.
Book 2.
– 2nd ed.
- Ibadan: Evans, 1971.
– 205p.
: ill. Acc.No Subject Entry Card 420 ENGLISH LANGUAGE MON MONTGOMERY, Michael.
Effective English students.
Book 2.
– 2nd ed.
- Ibadan: Evans, 1971.
– 205p.
: ill. Acc.No Cataloguing of Non – Book Medium The approach to the cataloguing of non – book is different from that of the books.
The major reason for the difference is that the bibliographic information in both resources differ.
It is to be noted that more frequently entries of non – book media are made under title because according to Elaturoti et al (2009) authorship 148  of non – book media cannot be easily established.
Now, carefully go over the sample catalogue cards for each medium in the subsequent figures provided.
(a) Disk: The information needed to catalogue the disc include; the composer or author or the artist (if known), title, medium, place and date of production, producer, duration in minute, recording mode i.e.
whether sterio or momo (fig.
4) F AND ANDERSON, Hans Christian.
The little Match girl and other tales (audio record.)
– London: Caedmon, (1967).
1 disc (12 ins): 33 1/ rmp: mono 3 Acc.
No.
Fig.
4. sample of catalogue card of Disc.
Source: Elaturoti, D.F et al (2009) Approach to Organizing learning Resources in school library Media Centre, fig.
30 pg.
35.
(ii) Tape (cassette) The cataloguing of audio tape (cassette) would require bibliographic information like; The title, producer, place and year of production number of tapes, duration in minutes (if available) and the recording mode (See fig.5).
149  F BON BONN, Rose I know an old Lady (Audio record).
– Oxfordshire: Weston Woods, 1961.
I tape cassette: 10 mins., Mono.
Acc.
No.
Fig.
5.
A sample of card catalogue of tape (Cassette).
Source Elaturoti, D.F et al (1999) Approach to organizing Leaving Resources in school library Media Centre, fig.
31 pg.
36.
(iv) Kit: This is typical of a multimedia instructional package in which a combination of instructional media are pulled together to aid better understanding of the topic / concept being presented to the learners.
A kit for instance may contain such items like: book, slide, tape, pictures and filmstrip.
For proper cataloguing of a kit, the bibliographic information required include, the author, title, producer, place of publication, year of production, the number and the type of media in the kit.
(see fig.
6.)
(v) 530 LET LET’S TALK ABOUT MAGNET (kit).
– Kansas city.
RMI Film Productions, (1977).
I tape cassette: 5 mins.
; Mono I film strip.
24 F. frames Guide (iv) Map: According to Elaturoti, Fagbeja kolade, Oniyide, Olaojo and Aramide 150  (2009) the bibliographic information required in cataloguing maps are title, producer, place of production, year of production, number of sheet the map has, coloured or black and white, size and the scale used (see fig.
7.)
916.69 NIG NIGERIA – PHYSICAL ()map.
– London: Macmillan, 1976 I relief map.col., 47 X 67cm 111300000 Fig.7: Sample of Catalogue card of a map.
Source: Elaturoti et al (2009) Approach to Organizing Learning Resources in School library media Centre and other Libraries.
Pg.
46.
(v) Video Records: Video records have become important modes of instructional delivery.
Different topics in almost all the subjects in the school curriculum are now available for effective teaching and learning.
It is to be noted that to catalogue video tapes, compact disks (CD) or Visual compact Disk (VCD) the required information include: title, number or portion of tape, duration, colour, size, playback speed and recording mode.
See sample of catalogue entry of the video recording (fig.8) 151  308 MET Metamorphosis (Video cassette) Ibadan: Broadcasting corporation of Oyo State 2008 1 tape: 60min col. 2 Fig.8.
(vi) Compact Disk (CD): This is a medium through which information is packaged usually in audio form using compact disk.
020 NIG E-Learning Networking of Nigeria Simulated E-Learning Clasroom School Support, 2009.
I.C.D., 30mins., col 312 Fig.
9.
(vii) Visual Compact Disk (VCD): this is a medium that allows for packaging of information in a compact Disk that allows presentation of pictures as well as sound.
A sample of VCD catalogue card is as shown in Fig.
10 H20 UKE UKEJE, B.C Biology: Ecology.
Bridget C. Ukeje (Vcd).
– lagos Biney and Biney, 2007 (Learning on VCD Series).
2 Vcd.
– 2hr.
col 348 Fig.
10.
152  (viii) Slide: Prior to the introduction of multimedia technology that allows for projection of information on the screen for classroom / worshop purposes, through the use of computer and multi – media projector, slides were produced using 35mm photographic camera which had to be framed using hard paper or cardboard.
Where such device still exits, these bibliographic information should be noted and recorded: author, title, place of production, date, number of slides, coloured or black and white, size of mount in centimeters and caption (see fig.
11) 636 ROY THE ROYAL SOVERY FOR THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
The care of your cat (slides).- Cause way: Diana Wyllie (1970) 29 slides.
Col. 2 X 2 ins Caption (50p) 7 Fig.
11 Source: Elaturoti, D.P et al (2009) Approach to Organizing Leaving Resources in school library media centre and other Libraries.
Pg.
39.
(ix) Realia : There are real objects, Phenomenon or situation.
They are regarded as the most effective resources to effect learning.
In order to catalogue this form of resources, such details such as : type, number of pieces, source if known (see fig.
12) should be indicated.
512 SNA SNAILS (Realia) 10 pieces Source: University of Ibadan Zoological garden.
153  4.0 Summary: In this Unit, we have attempted to discuss the process that are involved in the cataloguing of resource commonly found in media resource centres.
The three entries – author, title and subject are exhaustively discussed while samples of cataloguing cards for both books and non book materials are presented for easier understanding and references when you are embarking on practical cataloguing on your own.
5.0 Conclusion: As a potential manager / director of media resource centre, the need for what you have learnt in this Unit would be of emense value to you now and in the nearest future.
Resources in the media centres are not supposed to be left un organized or in a dis – organized form.
Users are to be guided in seeking for information in an organized and systematic manner.
6.0.
Tutor Marked Assignment: (1a) Explain the term Cataloguing (b) Of what value is Cataloguing in a media resource centre?
(2) How would you Catalogue books in the media centre?
Illustrate your answer with models of catalogue cards.
(3a) What are non Media resources?
(b) Describe with examples, how 5 non media resources could be catalogued.
7.0.
References: Elaturoti, D.F, Fagbeja I.O, Kolade H.K (1990) Learning Resources in School Library Media Centre, Ibadan, Omoniyi Artistic Printers.
Elaturoti D.F, Fagbeja I.O, Kolade H.K, Oniyide D.B, Olaojo P.O and Aramide K.A (2009) Approach to Organizing Library Media Centres and Other Libraries, (Third Edition), Ibadan.
154  UNIT 5 REVISIONAL NOTES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES CENTRES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Educational Resource Centre Described as a Place Where Instructional Materials are Produced and Stored 3.2 Different Names Given to Educational Resource Centres 3.3 Educational Resource Centres headed by a Director Who May Not Be an Educational Technologist 3.4 The Maintenance of the Personnel and Facilities in the Resource Centres 3.5 The Duties of the Director/Manager of the Educational Resource Centres are Enormous 3.6 The Architectural Structure, the Building and their Peculiar Features are Important 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational Resources Centres are a very vital component of any educational institution at whatever level (whether primary, secondary or tertiary).
It will be necessary therefore for us to review the major points made on this subject again.
155  2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define educational resource centres • Distinguish between the different names given to resource centres at various levels.
• Mention the prospects of resource centres in schools.
• Trace the historical trend of resource centres in Nigeria.
• Describe the administrative styles applicable to the resource centres.
• Describe the expected architectural structures of a befitting resource centre.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT This unit is a summary of all the major points made in this course to serve as a revisional note.
3.1 Educational Resource Centres Described as a Place Where Instructional Materials are Produced and Stored Educational Resource Centre have been described as the place where instructional materials are produced and stored.
It is similar to the libraries in primary and secondary schools where books are kept for reference purposes.
3.2 Different Names Given to Educational Resource Centres Educational Resource Centres are given different names depending on which governmental or academic level they represent.
The centre in primary schools and secondary schools is called Learning Resource Centre (LRC) while it is called Centre for Educational Technology (CET) in tertiary institutions.
It is called Educational Resource Centre (ERC) in the states and local government education ministries.
156  3.3 Education Resource Centres Headed by a Director Who May Not Be an Educational Technologist Educational Resource Centres are headed by a Director who may not be an educational technologist.
However, the Assistant Director who heads the professional units are experts in their fields.
3.4 The Maintenance of the Personnel and Facilities in the Resource Centres The facilities in the resource centres as well as the personnel are very special and so should be maintained to ensure their longevity.
There are different ways of maintaining the longevity of the facilities depending on the nature, texture and life span of the items.
The storage and the handling of each item have also been discussed.
3.5 The Duties of the Director/Manager of the Education Resource Centres are Enormous The duties of the Director/Manager of the educational resource centres are very enormous.
He has to maintain the facilities and the personnel as well.
The type of administrative style he adopts matters a lot.
This has been discussed in details in units 10, 11, 12 and 13.
3.6 The Architectural Structure, the Building and their Peculiar Features are Important The architectural structure, the building and the peculiar features relevant to them are also very important.
The construction of the structure has been discussed in unit 14.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
How did educational resource centres evolve?
2.
What problem are you likely to face if you have to establish educational resource centres in your school.
157  4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has revised and reminded you of the lessons learnt in this course.
Go through them again in unit by unit to refresh your memory.
Make attempt to answer the self assessment exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignment in each unit.
5.0 SUMMARY You should go through all the units and familiarise yourself with the major points made on the subject of discussion.
Get familiar with what Educational Resource Centre are, how they evolve, what functions they perform and how the facilities can be maintained to increase their life span.
3.4 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are educational resource centres?
2.
Why do we need them in our schools?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Ministry of Education (1991) Joint Consultative Conference Reference Report.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1998) National Policy on Education.
3rd Edition 158
