 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDT 811 COURSE TITLE: THEORIES OF COMMUNICATION AND PHILOSOPHICA L BASIS OF INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA  COURSE GUIDE EDT 811 THEORIES OF COMMUNICATI ON AND PHILOSOPHICAL BASIS OF INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA Course Developer Dr. Michael Segun Abifarin Centre for Educational Technolo gy Federal College of Education (T) Akoka, Lagos Course Writer Dr. Michael Segun Abifarin Centre for Educational Technolo gy Federal College of Education (T) Akoka, Lagos Course Editor Professor Patrick E. Eya National Open University of Nigeria Study Centre Enugu.
Programme Leader Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
ii 1.0 Introduction Theories of Communication and Philosophical Basis of Instructional Media (EDT 811) is a 2 Credit course for postgraduate students in Educational Technology.
The course is also designed for other students who may be offering related courses in other disciplines especially in the field of education.
The course contains 18 units which are written in modules.
The course is designed to expose students to the meaning of theory, theories of communication, the concept of communication, communication process, models of communication, teaching learning process versus communication process, concept of philosophy and some educational philosophers with emphasis on the use of Instructional Media.
This course material is written in simple English to make the contents to be understandable and more explicit to the students and other users of the course material.
The writer uses very common and simple examples to illustrate the contents in the course material so as to suit Nigerian students studying at the National Open University of Nigeria and other students at other open distance learning institurions.It will also be useful to students in other conventional institutions.
This course guide tells briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through this materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor marked assignments (TMAs).
Detailed information on TMAs is found in the separate assignment file, which will be available to you in due course.
There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend these sessions.
2.0 COURSE AIM The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: this course aims at giving you an understanding of the meaning of communication theories the general principle of communication and how they can be used to promote communication especially in the classroom.
This will be achieved by exposing you to; (i) understanding of communication theories (ii) several definitions of communication as given by experts (iii) Discuss the process of communication (iv) Cite the theoretical basis or models of communication (v) Explain the general principles of communication (vi) Highlight the general barriers to communication especially in the classroom.
(vii) understanding the relationship between philosophy and usage of instructional media 3.0 Course Objective To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objective.
In addition each unit has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always indicated at the beginning of a unit, you should read them before you start reading through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way you can be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
Highlighted below is the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: i.
Define Theory ii.
Explain communication theories iii.
Discuss some Definitions of communication theories iv.
Define communication v. Explain what communication involves vi.
Describe the nature of communication vii.
Mention types of Communication viii.
Enumerate purpose of communication ix.
Explain the components of communication x.
Discuss the factors that are affecting communication xi.
Discuss Communication Process xii.
Mention the principles of communication xiii.
State the barriers to communication xiv.
Explain classroom communication xv.
State the prerequisites for effective communication in the classroom xvi.
Mention some conditions for good communication in the classroom xvii.
Mention different media of communication in the classroom xviii.
Examine the barriers to effective communication in the classroom ii xix.
Explain models of communication xx.
Define the concept of philosophy xxi.
List the branches of philosophy xxii.
Discuss some educational philosophers with emphasis on instructional media.
4.0 WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read set of books and other materials.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises and at a points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course there is a final examination.
The course should take you about 12 weeks or more.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allot time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
5.0 COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are : 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment file 5.
Presentation schedule In addition, you must obtain your own course material as provided by NOUN.
Obtaining them is your own responsibility.
You may purchase your own copies.
.
6.0 STUDY UNITS There are 18 study units in this course, they are as follow: Module 1 Theories of communication Unit 1: Meaning /Definition of Theory Unit: 2 Meaning/Definition of Communication Theories Unit 3: Some Definitions of Communication Theories Module 2 Definition of Communication Unit 1 concept of communication Unit 2 Nature, purposes and types of communication Unit 3 Objectives and dimensions of communication iii Module 3 Unit 1 Definition of communication process Unit 2 Principles of communication Unit 3 Barriers of effective communication Module 4 Unit 1 Classroom communication Unit 2 Prerequisites and conditions for effective communication Unit 3 Media of communication and barriers to effective communication in the classroom Module 5 Unit 1 David Berlo s communication Model Unit 2 Harold Lasswell s communication Model Unit 3 S.M.R.E, models of communication, Communication model with fidelity and Communication model with overlapping of experience Module 6 Unit 1 Meaning/ Definition of philosophy Unit 2 Branches of philosophy Unit 3 Some educational philosophers with emphasis on instructional media Each unit contains a number of self assessment exercises.
In general, these exercises question you on the materials you have just studied or require you to apply it in some way and thereby help you to monitor your progress, and reinforce your understanding of the material.
There are tutor marked assignments (TMAs) at the end each unit, these assignments will assist you in achieving the stated learning objective of the individual unit and of the entire course 7.0 REFERENCES There are some books you have to consult for further reading.
.
These books include;.
Abifarin, M.S.
(1997) Communication for Effective Administration: A Case Study of Ireopodun L.G.A., Kwara State.
Unpublished M.P.A.
Project, Department of Political Science, Faculty of Business and Social Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin.
Abifarin, M.S.
(2004) Modern Approach to Educational Technology Lagos Inter- Ventures Publishers.
Abimbade, A.
(1997) Principles and Practice of Educational Technology.
Ibadan, International Publisher Ltd. iv Adetoro, J.O.
(1984) ABC of Philosophy Lagos, New Thought Printing and Publishing Company Nig.
Ltd. Akinpelu, A., Adewoyin, B. and Otunla, K (1999) Fundamentals of Media Communication (Design Production and Utilization) Lagos, Ziklag Educational Publishers.
Akinyemi, K. Talabi, K., Akinpelu, B.
(1992) Educational Technology in Book of Reading in Educational Theory and Practice (2), Ilorin, Institute of Education, University of Ilorin Bello, J.Y.
(1991) An Introduction to Philosophy Ilorin, Femac Press Etim, P.J.
(2006) Issue in Educational Technology.
Uyo, Abaam Publishing Co. Farrants, J.S.
(1980) Principles and Practice of Education (New Edition).
Hong Kong, Longman Group Ltd. Kanno, T.N.
(1991).
Effective Communication in the Classroom in Austere Time.
In Trend and Research in Educational Technology (ed).
IMogie, I. Onyejemezi, D.A.
Mkpa, D.A.
Anukam, I.L, Ibadan Y-Books Learning Private Ltd. Hittp//en.
Wikipedia org.wiki/theory Kerhinger,F.N (1964).
Foundations of Behavourer Research, New York, Harper and Row.
Mangal, S.K, Mangal, U (2009) Essential of Educational Technology New Delhi, PHI McGraw-Hill (2001).
Defining Communication Theories.
McGrew-Hill Higher Education, The McGrew-Hill Companies.
Molagun, H.M. (1999) Introduction to Philosophy of Education Ilorin, Blessed James Publications.
Ogunmilade, C.A.
(1984) Media in Education Ile-Ife, University of Ife Press Otite, O., and Ogionwo, W. (1979) An Introduction to Sociological Studies Ibadan, Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. Rusk, R.R.
and Dcotland, J.
(1985) Doctrines of the Great Educators.
London, Macmillan Publishers.
Ltd. 8.0 ASSIGNMENT FILE In this file you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The mark you obtain in the course assessment will be part of the final marks you obtain in the course.
All information about your assignments is contained in the assignment file later in this course.
You are to submit these assignments, promptly.
They are going to be recorded as your course work.
v  Presentation Schedu le The presentation schedule included in your course material gives you the important dates in this year for the completion of your TMAs and attendance of tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by date due.
You should guard against failing behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects of the assessments of the course.
The first is your TMAs and the second is a written examination at the end of the course.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutors for formal assessment in accordance with deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course you will have to sit for a final written examination for three hours duration.
This examination will also count for 70% of your course mark.
9.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) • There are four tutor-marked assignment in this course.
You need to submit the four assignments.
However the highest marks of the four assignments count for 30% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your set of books, reading and study units.
However, it is desirable at all the postgraduate degree level of education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment send it together with a TMA form to your tutor.
Make sure that each reaches your tutor on before the deadline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If, for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will be not be granted after the date due unless there are exceptional circumstances.
vi  Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDT 811 will be of three hours and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions that reflect the types of self assessment exercises and Tutor Marked exercises you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self assessment exercises (TMAs) and comments by your tutorial facilitators before the exanimation.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME The following table lays out how the actual course allocation is broken down: Table 1: Course Marked Schedu le Assessment Marks Assessment 1-4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course marks Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 2: course organizer This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of work Week Assessment End Activity of Unit Course guide Week 1 1.
Definition of theory 1 Definition of communication theories 2 Definition of communication, nature purposes 2 and types of communication 3 Objectives and dimensions of communication 2 Assignment 1 4 Definition of communication Process 3 vii 5 Principles of communication 4 Assignment 2 6.
Barriers of effective communication 5 Assignment 3 7 Classroom communication 6 8.
Prerequisites and condition for effective 7 Assignment communication in the classroom 3 9 Media of communication in the classroom 8 and barriers to effective communication in the classroom viii  10 David Berlo s communication model 9 Harold Lasswell Communication Model 11 S.M.R.E.
model of communication, 10 Communication Model with Fidelity and Communication Model overlapping of experience 12.
Meaning/Determination of Philosophy 11 Branches of Philosophy 13.
Some educational philosophy with emphasis 12 Assessment on instructional media 4 Revision 13 Exanimation 14 How to get the Most from the Course In distance learning programme, the study unit replaces the University Lecturer.
This is one of the greatest advantages of distance learning programme.
In this programme you have the opportunity of working and studying through a well designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
In this learning programme you read the material as against listening to a lecturer in the conventional school system.
In the same way that a lecturer might recommend some reading materials, the study units tell you when to read recommended books or other materials and when to undertake practical activities.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in- class exercises, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate time.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives which state what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These objectives are set down to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you cultivate the habit of doing this, you will make tremendous improvement in your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other courses.
This will usually be either from your recommended books or from a reading section.
Self assessment exercises are interspersed throughout the unit.
You are ix expected to work on them as well.
Working through these exercises will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should attempt such self-assessment exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be several examples given in the study units; work through these when you come across them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any problem, call your tutorial facilitator or visit your study centre for necessary assistance.
Remember that your tutor s job is to help you when you need help, don t hesitate to call and ask your tutor.
1.
Read the course guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the Assignment relate to the assessments Important information e.g details of your tutorials, and date of the first day of the semester is available.
You need to gather together all this information in one place, such as your diary or a small calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide and write dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schemes or schedules, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students do not perform well is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified for the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and assistance will be available at the study centre.
You must submit your tutor marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or during tutorial sessions if you need to.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: x • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assignment reading • You have difficulty with the self assessment exercises • You have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutors comments on an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Some of the questions you may be able to answer are limited to the following: • What is theory • Explain the concept of communication theories • What is communication?
• What are the types of communication?
• What are the nature and purposes of communication?
• State some of the objectives of communication • What are the dimensions of communication?
• Enumerate the major communication components.
• Examine the principles of communication • What are the barriers to affective communication?
• What do you understand by Class room Communication?
• What are the prerequisites for effective classroom Communication?
• State some of the condition for effective communication in the classroom • List and explain some of the media of communication in the classroom • With the aid of a well labeled diagram, explain the following models of communication.
(i) David Berlo s Communication Model (ii) Harold Lasswell s Communiation Model (iii) S,M.R.E.
Model of Communication (iv) Communication Model with Fidelity (v) Communication Model with Overlapping of Experience • What is Philosophy?
• Explain the branches of philosophy • What are the contributions of the following philosophers to the development and use of instructional media: (i) Comenius xi (ii) B.F. Skinner (iii) Maria Montessori 10.0 SUMMARY Of course the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above list.
To gain the most from this course you should try to apply the principles that you encounter in every day life.
You are also equipped to take part in every discussions or tutorials on this course.
We wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it both interesting, exciting and useful.
xii EDT 811 THEORIES OF COMMUNICAT ION AND PHILOSOPHICAL B ASIS OF INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA Course Developer Dr. Michael Segun Abifarin Centre for Educational Technolo gy Federal College of Education (T) Akoka, Lagos Course Writer Dr. Michael Segun Abifarin Centre for Educational Technolo gy Federal College of Education (T) Akoka, Lagos Course Editor Professor Patrick E. Eya National Open University of Nigeria Study Centre Enugu.
Programme Leader Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
xiii  TABLE OF CONTENT Module 1: Definition of Theory Unit 1: Meaning/Definition Of Theory 1-4 Unit 2: Meaning/ Definition of Communication Theories 5-8 Unit 3: Some Definitions of Communication Theories 9-17 Module 2: Concept of Communication Unit 1: Definition of Communication 18-22 Unit 2: Nature, Purposes and Types of Communication 23-26 Unit 3: Objectives and Dimensions of Communication 27-30 Module 3: Communication Process Unit 1: Definition of Communication Process 31-38 Unit 2: Principles of Communication and Situations of Communication 38-43 Unit 3: Barriers of Communication 44-46 Module 4: Teaching Learning Process Versus Communication Unit 1: Classroom Communication 47-51 Unit 2: Prerequisites and Conditions for Effective and Good Communication in the Classroom 52-55 Unit 3: Media of Communication and Barriers of Communication in the Classroom 56-62 Module 5: Models of Communication Unit 1: David Berlo s Communication Model 63-66 Unit 2: Harold Lassswell s Communication Model 67-69 Unit 3: S.M.R.E.
Model of Communication, Communication Model with Fidelity and Communication Model with Overlapping of Experience 70-74 Module 6: Concept of Philosophy and so me Educational Philosophers with Emphasis on Instruction media Unit 1: Meaning/ Definition of Philosophy 75-79 Unit 2: Branches of Philosophy 80-86 Unit 3: Some Philosophers with Emphasis on Instructional Media 87-94  Module 1 1LE 1 THEORIES OF COMMUNICATION INTRODUCTION Communication as a body of knowledge is based on some scientific and philosophical theories.
It is upon these theories that communication as a discipline or a field of study developed.
These, theories could include a body of concepts, statements or assumptions that have been subjected to empirical tests.
Theories guide the formation of rules or principles which right knowledge forms.
These knowledge forms have their roots in philosophy, sociology, psychology, history etc.
The knowledge forms have their place in communication debate and in the formulation of communication theories and principles.
In this module you would be introduced fully to the meaning of theory and communication theories.
These would be discussed under the following units.
Unit 1: Meaning/Definition of Theory.
Unit 2: Meaning/Definition of Communication Theories Unit: 3 Some Definitions of Communication theories Unit 1: DEFINITION OF THEORY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1  1.0 INTRODUCTION Theories are very crucial in the development of any body of knowledge.
They are essential for the understanding of the basic rules and principles underlying any body of knowledge or discipline.
For you to understand the theories of communication it is very important to expose you to the meaning of theory which is the basis for any form of body of knowledge.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit you should be able to: explain the meaning of theory.
Identify the two broad sets of the term theory.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Theory has been defined in various ways, both in the scientific and philosophical ways.
The scientific and approach to the definition of theory is quite different from the philosophical approach.
This unit will expose you to the different approaches to the definition of theory as a term.
You are expected to come up with your own definition of the term theory after going through the various definitions of theory.
3.1 Meaning/Definition of Theory According to Wikipedia free encyclopedia, the term theory has two broad sets of meanings.
The first meaning is used in the empirical sciences (both natural and social) while the second one is used in philosophy, mathematics, logic, and across other fields in the humanities.
A theory in the scientific sense of the word; is a set of empirical observations.
A scientific theory does two things: a.
It identifies this set of distinct observations as a class of phenomena.
b.
It makes assertions about the underlying reality that brings about or affects this class.
2  In the scientific or empirical tradition, the term theory is reserved for ideas which meet baseline requirements about the kind of empirical observations made, the methods of classification used and the consistency of the theory in its application among members of the class to which it pertains.
These requirements vary across different scientific fields of knowledge, but in general theories are expected to be functional and parsimonious: i.e., a theory should be the simplest possible tool that can be used to effectively address the given class of phenomena.
Although the scientific meaning is by far more commonly used in academic discourse, it is hardly the only one used, and it would be a mistake to assume from the outset that a given used of the term theory in academic literature or discourse is a reference to a scientific or empirically-based theory.
Kerlinger (1964) defines theory as a body of concept, statements or assumptions that have been subjected to empirical tests.
It guides the formation of rules or principles which right knowledge forms.
In summary, theory could be defined in the scientific or empirical perspective and in the philosophical, mathematical, logical and across other fields in the humanities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE It would be a mistake to assume from the outset that a given use of the term theory in academic literature or discourse is a reference to a scientific or empirically based theory .
Discuss.
3  4.0 CONCLUSION Having read through the meaning of the term theory adequately and understandably, you will observe that your understanding of the term is an essential tool for you to comprehend basic concepts in communication theories.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the term theory has been fully and explicitly discussed.
It is very necessary that you read the unit adequately in order to have an indepth idea of the concepts of communication theories.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Define the term theory 2.
Identify the two broad sets of meanings of theory.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Kerlinger, F.N.
(1964), Foundations of Behaviourer Research.
New York, Harper and Row.
http.//en.wikipedia.org.wiki/theory 4  UNIT 2: MEANING/DEFINITION OF COMMUNICATION THEORIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Distinction between Theorems and Theories 3.2 Meaning of Theories 3.3 Brief History of Communication Theories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION For a better understanding of the concept of communication theories, it is important to adequately explain the meaning of theories and to differentiate between theories and theorems.
There is also the need to discuss briefly the historical need to discuss briefly the historical development of communication theories.
Your understanding of the above concepts will assist you in having adequate idea of the concept of communication theories.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the meaning of theories 2.
Differentiate theorems from theories 3.
Give a brief history of communication theories.
5  3.0 MAIN CONTENT There is a difference between theories and theorems.
The difference between these two concepts will be discussed in this unit in order to assist you as a learner to have a clearer knowledge of the two concepts.
You are expected to pay attention as you read in order to be able to notice the differences as you read through this unit.
3.1 Meaning of Theories According to Wikipedia encyclopedia, theories are abstract and conceptual.
To this end they are never considered right or wrong.
Instead, they are supported or challenged by observations in the world.
They are rigorously tentative, that is to say, they are proposed as true but expected to satisfy careful examination to account for the possibility of faculty inference or incorrect observation.
Sometimes, theories are falsified, meaning that an explicit set of observations contradicts some fundamental assumption of the theory, but more often theories are revised to conform to new observations, by restricting the class of phenomena the theory applies to or changing the assertions made.
Sometimes, a theory is set aside by scholars because there is no way to examine its assertions analytically.
These may continue on in the popular imagination until some means of examination is found which either refute or lend credence to the theory.
3.2 Distinction Between Theorems And Theories Theorems are derived deductively from theories according to a formal system of rule, generally as a first step in testing or applying the theory in a concrete situation.
3.3 A Brief History of Communication Theories Claude Shannon (Bell labs) and Warren Weaver developed a theory of communication in 1948.
Shannon s original theory also k nown as information theory was later elaborated and given a more popular, non-mathematical formulation 6  by Warren Weaver, a media specialist with Rockeffeller foundation).
In effect, Weaver extended Shannon s insights about electronic signal transformation and the quantitative measurement of information flows into a broad theoretical model of human communication which he defined as all of the ways by which one mind may affect another .
Feedback: Information about a message that a receiver sends back to the sender.
That is, the receiver s reaction or response to a communication.
Interpretation: All operations that a receiver performs in order to decode and understand a message.
Medium: The method used to transmit a message (e.g, print, Speech , telephone, smoke signals etc).
Meme: Viral encapsulated idea, with built in feedback loop.
Message: The actual information or signal sent from a sender to a receiver.
The content of a communication.
Noise: Technical or semantic obstacle; that is, anything that interferes with the clear transmission of a message (e.g, low visibility, poor ink quality, static electricity).
Prosumer: a consumer with professional-level tools Receiver: The audience for a message.
Also known as the addressee.
Signal: An information source; a person or device that originates a message.
Viral: Spread by non-standard communication.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is the difference between theories and theorem.
7  4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been taught the meaning of theories and theorem.
The unit also discusses the history of communication theories briefly.
It is very essential for you to read and comprehend the meaning of these concepts.
This will assist you in making adequate attempt in giving your own appropriate meaning of the concepts.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit discusses the meaning of theories and theorem and it gives difference between theories and theorem.
The unit briefly discusses the history of communication theories.
Try to go over the unit severally in order to give you a good mastery of all the concepts discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly discuss the following concepts: a.
Theories b. Theorem c. Feedback d. Noise 2.
Briefly account for the development of communication theories.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Definition of theories http://www.awaredesign.nz/glossary.html 8  UNIT 3: SOME DEFINITIONS OF COMMUNICATION THEORIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Defining of Communication Theories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignments (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A number of communication theories will be discussed in this unit.
These theories are expected to widen your knowledge of the communication theories as viewed from different school of thoughts.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: Give several definitions of communication theories based on different school of thoughts in the field of communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Communication stands deeply rooted in human behaviours and the structure of society.
But communication theory remains a relatively young field of inquiry till now, therefore, one cannot expect a concensus conceptualization of communication across disciplines.
Currently, there is one paradign from which communication scholars may work, a universal law, posited by S.F.
scudder (1900).
The Universal Law of communication States that, All living Law communicates via movements, languages, breath etc.
Communication is primarily used as a means of survival.
It is therefore essential for people to have a broader knowledge of communication theories 9  in order to be able to communicate meaningfully, perfectly efficiently, and successfully too.
A number of definitions of communication theories are discussed in this unit for you to fully understand the concept of communication more perfectly.
3.1 Defining Communication Theories There are several views on communication theories.
These different perspectives have their individual focus.
Some of these theories of communication are briefly discussed below as identified by McGraw-Hill (2001) cognitive Dissonance theory: This theory argues that the experience of dissonance (or incompatible beliefs and actions is aversive and people are highly motivated to avoid it.
In their efforts to match their actions and seek reassurance to match their actions after making a different decision.
3.1.1 Communication Accommodation Theory Communication Accommodation theorists argue that during communication, people will try to accommodate or adjust their style of speaking to others.
This is done in two ways: divergence and convergence.
Convergence occurs when there is a strong need for social approval, frequently from powerless individuals.
Divergence occurs when groups with strong ethnic or racial pride use divergence to highlight their group identity.
3.1.2 Coordinated Manage ment of Meaning(CMM) Theorists in coordinated Management of meaning believe that in conversation people co-create meaning by attaining some coherence and coordination.
Coherence occurs when stories are told, and coordination exists when stories are lived.
CMM focuses on the relationship between an individuals who come to organize the meaning of literally hundreds of messages perceived throughout a day.
10  3.1.3 Cultivation Analysis This theory argues that television (and othermedia) plays an extremely important role in how people view their world.
According to Cultivation Analysis, in modern culture most people get much of their information in a mediated fashion rather than through direct experience.
Thus, mediated sources can shape people s sense of reality.
This is especially the case with regard to violence, according to the theory.
Cultivation Analysis posits that heavy television viewing cultivates a sense of the world that is more violent and scarier than is actually warranted.
3.1.4 Cultural Approach To Organization Theorists in this tradition argue that an organization s culture is composed of shared symbols, each of which has a unique meaning, organizational stories, rituals, and rites of passage are examples of what constitute the culture of an organization.
3.1.5 Cultural Studies Theorists in cultural studies maintain that the media represents ideologies of the dominant class in a society.
Because media are controlled by corporations the information presented to the public is necessarily influenced and framed with profit in mind.
Cultural theorists, therefore, are concerned with media influence and how power plays a role in interpretation of culture.
3.1.6 Dramatism This theoretical position compares life to a drama.
As in dramatic action, life requires an actor, a scene, an act, some means for the action to take place and a purpose.
A rhetorical critic can understand a speaker s motives of analyzing these elements.
Further, dramatism argues that purging guilt is the ultimate motive, and rhetors can be successful when they provide their audience with a means for purging their guilt and a sense of identification with the rhetor.
11  3.1.7 Expectancy Violations Theory This theory examines how non-verbal messages are structured.
It advances that when communicative norms are violated the violation may be perceived either favourably or unfavourably, depending on the perception that the receiver has of the violator.
Violating another s expectations may be a strategy used over other that of conforming to another s expectations.
3.1.8 Face-Negotiation Theory Face-Negotiation theory is concerned with how people in individualistic and collectivistic cultures negotiate face in conflict situations.
The theory is based on face management, which describes how people from different cultures manage conflict negotiation in orders to maintain face.
Self-face and other face concerns explain the conflict negotiation between people from various cultures.
3.1.9Groupthink Theory Groupthink theorists contend that group members frequently think similarly and are reluctant to share unpopular or dissimilar ideas with others.
When this occurs, groups prematurely make decisions, some of which can have lasting consequences.
3.1.10 Mute Group Theory Theorists in this group maintains that language serves men better than women (and perhaps European Americans better than African Americans or other groups).
This is the case because variety of experiences of European American men are named clearly in language, whereas the experiences of other groups (such as women) are not.
Due to this problem with language, women appear less articulate than men in public settings.
12  3.1.11 The Narrative Paradigm This theory argues that humans are story telling animals.
These theorists propose a narrative logic to replace the traditional logic of argument.
Narrative logic, or the logic of good reasons, suggests that people judge the credibility of speakers by whether their stories hang together clearly coherence and whether their stories ring true (fidelity).
The Narrative paradigm allows for a democratic judgement of speakers because no one has to be trained in oratory and persuation to make judgements based on coherence and fidelity.
3.1.12 Organisational Information Theory This theory argues that the main activity of organizations is the process of making sense of equivocal information.
Organisations members accomplish this sense- making process through enactment, selection and retention of information.
Organizational are successful to the extent that they are able to reduce equivocality through these means.
3.1.13 Rational Dialectics Theory This theory suggests that rational life is always in process.
People in relationships continually feel the pull-push of conflicting desires.
Basically, people wish to have both autonomy and connection, openness and protective-ness, and novelty and predictability.
As people communicate in relationships, they attempt to reconcile these desires, but they never eliminate their needs for both of the opposing pairs.
3.1.14 The Rhetoric Theory Rhetoric theory is based on the available means of persuation.
That is, a speaker who is interested in persuading his or her audience should consider the three rhetorical proofs: logical, emotional and ethical.
Audiences are key to effective persuation as well.
Rhetorical syllogism, requiring audiences to supply missing pieces of a speech, are also used in persuation.
13  3.1.15 Social Exchange Theory This theoretical position argues that interpersonal relationships is the satisfaction of both people s self-interests.
Theorists in social exchange posit that self-interest is not necessarily a bad thing and that it can actually enhance relationships.
The social exchange approach views interpersonal exchanges as analogous to economic exchanges where people are satisfied when they receive a fair return on their expenditures.
3.1.16 Social Penetration Theory This theory maintains that interpersonal relationships evolve in some gradual and predictable fashion.
Penetration theorists believe that self-disclosure is the primary way that superficial relationships progress to intimate relationships.
Although self- disclosure can lead to more intimate relationships, it can also leave one or more persons vulnerable.
3.1.17 Spiral of Silence Theory These theorists argue that due to their enormous power, the mass media have a lasting effect on public opinion.
The theory maintains that mass media work simultaneously with majority public opinion to silence monitoring beliefs on cultural issues.
A fear of isolation prompts those with minority views to examine the beliefs of others.
Individuals who fear being socially isolated are prone to conform to what they perceive to be a majority view.
3.1.18 Standpoint T heory This theory posits that people are situated in specific social stand points they occupy different places in the social hierarchy.
Because of this, individuals view the social situation from particular vantage points.
By necessity, each vantage point provides only a partial understanding of the social whole.
Yet, those who occupy the lower rungs of the hierarchy tend to understand the social whole.
Yet those who occupy the 14  lower rungs of the hierarchy tend to understand the social situation more fully than those at the top.
Sometimes, standpoint theory is referred to as feminist standpoint theory because of its application to how women s and men s standpoint differ.
3.1.19 Structuration Theory This theory argues that groups and organization create structures, which can be interpreted as organisation s rules and resources.
These structures, in turn, create social systems in organization.
Structuration theorists posit that groups and organizations achieve a life of their own because of the way their members utilize their structures.
Power structures guide the decision making in groups and organizations.
3.1.20 Symbolic Interaction Theory This theory suggests that people are motivated to act based on the meanings they assign to people, things and events.
Furthermore, meaning is created in the language that people use both with others and in private thought.
Language allows people to develop a sense of self and to interact with others in community.
3.1.21 Uncertainity Reduction Theory This theory suggests that when strangers meet, their primary focus is on reducing their levels of uncertainty in the situation.
Their levels of uncertainity are located in both behavioural and cognitive realms.
That is, they may be unsure of how to behave (or how the other person will behave) and they may also be unsure that they think of the other and the other person thinks of them.
Furthermore, people s uncertainty is both individual level and rational level.
People are highly motivated to use communication to reduce their uncertainty according to this theory.
15  3.1.22 Uses and Gratification Theory This theory explains why people choose and use media forms.
It emphasizes a limited effect position; that is, the media have a limit effect on their audiences because audiences are able to exercise control over their media.
Uses and Gratification.
Theory attempts to answer the following: what do people do with the media?
16  4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, various communication theories have been defined in different ways as discussed by a number of school of thoughts.
You are to consider the various definitions as given by different schools of thought.
By so doing, you will have a deeper knowledge of communication as a concept and communication theories as well.
Your deep knowledge of the communication theories will assist your communication skills verbally and non-verbally.
5.0 SUMMARY Different communication theories have been discussed in this unit, you are to study each of them thoroughly in order to assist you to understand communication skills perfectly.
A deeper knowledge of the theories will also expose you to inherent problems associated with communication and the solutions to these problems.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Identify the various definitions of communication theories.
2.
Attempt a critique of each of the communication theories earlier identified.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING McGraw Hill (2001).
Defining Communication Theories.
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, The McGraw-Hill Companies.
17  MODULE 2 CONCEPT OF COMMUNICATION INTRODUCTION Communication is very crucial to human existence.
It could be regarded as the life- wire of human existence and absence of it could lead to chaos and the demise of human society.
In every society or organization, the transmission of information, direction, feelings, attitudes, understanding and general interaction of people will almost be nil without a very good and effective communication system.
It is therefore very essential in every society to ensure there is a very smooth, effective and highly efficient communication flow between every member of the society or organization.
In this module you would be introduced fully to the concept of communication.
This would be discussed under the following units: Unit 1 Definition of Communication Unit 2 Nature, Purposes and Types of Communication Unit 3 Objectives and Dimensions of Communication UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Communication 3.2 What Communication Involves 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 18  1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication as a concept means different thing to different people.
For you to understand the concept of communication, it is important for you to examine some of the definitions for you to be able to understand the concept and to be able to come up with your own definition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define the word communication as a concept • Mention what Communication involves 3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are different definitions of communication given by the various educationalist, philosophers and other experts in the fields of communication.
This unit will expose you to some of these definitions.
You are expected to give your own comprehensive definition after going through these definitions.
3.1 Meaning of Communication Communication has been defined in various ways by different people, authorities and different schools of thought .
Despite the divergent views of people about what communication is, it is agreed that for every communication, there is the source, the message, the channel and the receiver or destination.
It is also agreed that communication should enhance high level of interaction between the communicators.
It is essentially important to examine some of these meanings or definitions of communication from some of these schools of thought.
Ogunmilade (1984) citing John Dewey, a great philosopher s definition which succinctly said society exist in and through communication.
It is through communication that a social system is held together.
The symbolic sharing of human experiences is made possible through this process.
And that no common 19  understanding and common basis for collective action may be arrived at, without communication and that without communication, individuals become socially isolated .
Akinpelu, Adewoyin and Otunla (1999) define communication as the process through which information, knowledge, ideas or message are conveyed or transmitted from one source (end) to another.
Akinyemi, Talabi and Akinpelu (1992), equally define communication as the process of transmitting information from a source to a receiver through a common system of symbols.
Communication helps us to develop common understanding and consensus.
It involves interaction between two or more persons.
Such interaction can be in form of spoken words (verbal communication), the movement of the hands, eyes or other parts of the body gesture or through written messages, diagrams or other visual symbols (graphic communication).
In all, the aim of communication is to elicit response from the receiver.
Abifarin (2004) describes communication as the process of information exchange between two people, organization or machine.
He further said that communication could be between man to man, organization to organization, man to machine, machine to man, machine to machine, man to organization and organization to man.
It is important to note that, in all aspects of human activities, the process of communication is a central element.
Man s ability to communicate has helped him to establish societies and other social groupings which has equally contributed to his survival and to more enjoyable pattern of living (Abifarin, 1997).
In a nutshell, communication therefore refers to the process of message from one source to another.
The source of communication is the originator or initiator of the message.
The message is usually passed through the channel to the receiver of the message.
It is very important to note that in any form of communication the place of interaction is highly central and equally important.
20  3.2 What Communication Involves Abifarin (2004) highlights the following as being what communication involves: • Sending of message from one point to another point.
That is, passing on relevant information from one person to another person.
• Communication is carried out primarily through the use of signs (that is, engaging is sign behaviour (Otite and Ogionwo, 1979).
• The signs or symbols used for communication must be universal to any person in the same situation.
• Communication could be oral, written or through the use of gestures, signs and symbols.
• Interaction serves as the core of effective communication.
The more the contact the communicators have with one another, the more effective the communication.
• Failure to communicate effectively is a constant source of friction between the sender and the receiver of the message.
• Additionally, communication between the sender and the receiver should generate immediate feedback either positive or negative.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1.
You have gone through all the definitions as present in this unit.
You can now attempt to give your own comprehensive definition 2.
Make an attempt to summarize what communication involves 21  4.0 CONCLUSION Having understood the concept of communication, you will observe that communication is very important to the teaching and learning process.
Therefore, teachers and learners have to be very efficient in the art of communication if teaching and learning is to be affective in the classroom.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the concept of communication has been discussed.
The unit also discussed what communication involves It is very important for you to understand this concept adequately if you are to communicate effectively as a teacher.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by communication?
2.
Explain what are involved in communication as a concept.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abifarin, M.S.
(1997) Communication for Effective Administration: A Case Study of Ireopodun L.G.A., Kwara State.
Unpublished M.P.A.
Project, Department of Political Science, Faculty of Business and Social Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin.
Abifarin, M.S.
(2004) Modern Approach to Educational Technology Lagos Inter- Ventures Publishers.
Akinpelu, A., Adewoyin, B. and Otunla, K (1999) Fundamentals of Media Communication (Design Production and Utilization) Lagos, Ziklag Educational Publishers.
Akinyemi, K. Talabi, K., Akinpelu, B.
(1992) Educational Technology in Book of Reading in Educational Theory and Practice (2), Ilorin, Institute of Education, University of Ilorin Ogunmilade, C.A.
(1984) Media in Education Ile-Ife, University of Ife Press Otite, O., and Ogionwo, W. (1979) An Introduction to Sociological Studies Ibadan, Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. 22  UNIT 2: NATURE, PURPOSES AND TYPES OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 1, you have been introduced to what communication means.
It is important for you to equally understand the nature, purposes and types of communication.
In this unit, the nature, purposes and types of communication would be explained.
Read carefully with rapped attention.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss the nature of communication • Explain the purposes of communication • Identify and discuss the various types of communication 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now that you have understood the meaning of communication perfectly, it will be very necessary for you to understand the nature, purposes and types of communication.
These concepts will be discussed in this unit.
23  3.1 Nature of Communication Communication could be done unconsciously.
This could be through the teachers actions and mannerisms.
For this reason, the teacher has to watch that he or she is free from bad mannerisms, especially when dealing with the learners.
Communication could be deliberate or conscious.
A teacher needs to concern himself or herself primarily with conscious and deliberate communication process as used in teaching.
For this purpose, he or she needs to think carefully about the information, concepts, attitudes and skills that provide the bulk of what he or she wants to communicate into his or her learners.
He or she needs to think about the various media that can be used for his teaching and he/she should also ensure that noise of any form is minimized in the communication process.
3.2 Purposes of Communication There is hardly any person who communicates without purpose except he or she is of unsound mind.
Therefore, communication is usually with purpose or purposes.
Communication could therefore be for the following purposes: i.
We communicate to inform.
That is, making other people to be aware of happenings in the society.
This could be through instruction, teaching or through the use of mass media.
ii.
We communicate to influence.
That is, to influence other people through persuasion or argument iii.
We communicate to entertain.
That is, to do something that amuses or interests other people.
3.3 Types of Communication Communication could be oral or verbal communication and it could be non-verbal in nature (Abifarin, 2004) 24  i. Verbal Communication This refers to the expression of ideas in oral form by the teacher or communicator.
It is the commonest way of communication and it is extensively used by the teacher in the classroom.
Conditions for Effective Verbal Communication a.
The ideas to be communicated should be properly and carefully organized and sequenced.
b.
The ideas should be without ambiguity in terms of sentence construction and composition.
The communicator should express his or her ideas in simple words that could be easily understood by the receiver e.g.
learners c. The ideas should be presented fluently without unnecessary mannerism and other forms of interruption.
ii.
NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION This refers to communication through the use of gestures, signs or symbols.
Communicator can use his hands, nose, eye contact, nodding of head and other forms of gestures to communicate with his or her intending receiver at any point in time.
Teachers are implored to master appropriate use of non-verbal communication strategies when teaching in the classroom.
SELF ASSESSM ENT Explain Highlight the following: • Nature of Communication • Purposes of Communication • Types of Communication 25  4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been exposed to the nature, purposes and types of communication.
It is very necessary for you as a teacher to adequately understand these concepts if you are to communicate with ease in the classroom 5.0 SUMMARY The nature of communication has been discussed in this unit.
These include unconscious and conscious or deliberate communication.
The unit also discussed the purposes of communication such as: we communicate to inform, influence and entertain.
The unit also discussed the verbal and non-verbal communication.
You are expected to understand all the concept discussed in this unit perfectly.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Discuss the main purposes of communication.
2a.
Mention the different types of communication b.
Explain the various types of communication you have mentioned fully.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Abifarin, M.S.
(2004) Modern Approach to Educational Technology Lagos, Inter- Ventures Publishers.
26  UNIT 3: OBJECTIVES AND DIMENSIONS OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Objectives of Communication 3.2 Dimension of Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is good for you to understand the objectives and dimensions of communication.
You are advised to pay adequate attention as you go through the objectives and dimensions of communication as explained in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Highlight the objectives of communication • Identify and explain the dimensions of communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT To communicate effectively, it is very important that the teacher understands the main objectives and dimensions of communication.
In this unit, the objectives and dimensions of communication will be explained in order to enable you understand them adequately.
27  3.1 Objectives of Communication People do not just communicate, they communicate with the intension of achieving some predetermined goals after communicating with other people.
This is also the situation in the organizations and institutions.
Ogunmilade (1984) pointed out five main objectives of communication.
These include (i) To stimulate participatory decision making and critical thinking.
It encourages participants to present their views before arriving at decisions.
(ii) To enhance morale.
Communication provides an outlet for the employees opinions and channels through which high morale can be maintained.
(iii) To develop people communication process is indispensable for a sound personnel development programme.
This can be achieved by providing orientation programme, training courses and periodic appraisal interview where each employee is told how she/he is doing and is given an opportunity to discuss his/her performance and his/her relationship.
This is one of the basic tenants of management by objectives (MBO) (iv) For effective control.
Communication is central to control system.
It is the instrument for delegation and for transmission to the lowest level of the organization.
It is also used as necessary weapon to combat rumour and falsehood 3.2 Dimensions of Communication Communication is usually classified into three dimension.
These are downward, upward and horizontal communications.
Let us examine these dimensions one after the other.
i.
Downward Communication This is a processing information from the top of the organization to the subordinate of the bottom of the ladder.
It is an order given by the management with intension of making itself understood by the employees.
Though downward communication, a mass is passed down to many people at the same time.
28  ii.
Upward Communication This refers to the communication process where information is transmitted from the subordinates of the bottom of the ladder of their boss at the top of the ladder.
In an organization, it is from the management to the subordinate staff in the organization.
This dimension gives staff the opportunity to interact with their employers or bosses.
It gives the employees the ample opportunity to air their views on certain management decisions and to equally lay down their grievance to the management on some issues effecting them individually or collectively.
The upward communication is to point out to the organizational boss the extent of the subordinates, understanding of the message sent down.
This is where the use of feedback is seen at play.
The subordinates are said to be free to make any remarks about their boss, but the mum effect is a barrier.
Mum effect refers to a situation whereby subordinates are afraid to say anything about the boss so as not to be punished.
iii.
Horizontal Communication This is the kind of communication between one department within an organization and another.
It may also be communication between people, departments or organizations of the same level, rank or status.
An example is communication between two colleagues in an office, school or industry.
The position of various departments in an organization and their relationship require constant consultations between one department and another as the action of one organization or department will affect the other.
Failure to communicate effectively is a constant source of friction between departments in the work situation.
The understanding of the reasons for poor communication in an organization is the first step towards enhancing effective communication in any organization.
(Abifarin, 1997) SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISES • List the objectives of Communication • Enumerate the 3 main dimensions of communication 4.0 CONCLUSION 29  4.0 CONCLUSION To communicate effectively, it is very important for the teacher to understand the objectives and dimensions of communication.
These two items have been discussed fully for teachers understanding in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY There are different objectives for communication and the dimensions of communication.
Teachers have to know these in their day to day communication if their communication is to be meaningful.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Discuss fully the main dimensions of communication 7.0 REFERENCES Abifarin, M.S.
(1997) Communication for Effective Administration: A Case Study of Ireopodun L.G.A., Kwara State.
Unpublished M.P.A.
Project, Department of Political Science, Faculty of Business and Social Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin.
Ogunmilade, C.A.
(1984) Media in Education Ile-Ife, University of Ife Press 30  MODULE 3 COMMUNICATION PROCESSES INTRODUCTION Communication process is very important in teaching and learning process.
It shows the flow of communication from the source (sender) to the receiver (destination).
In the communication process, six main components are involved, these are, source of communication, contents of communication or message, media or channel of communication, receiver of the communication, response material or feedback and facilitators or barriers.
In order to communicate effectively, there is the need for the communicators to master the principles of communication and equally take care of some of the barriers to effective communication.
The module is discussed under the following units: Unit 1 Definition of Communication Process Unit 2 The Principles of Communication Unit 3 Barriers of Effective Communication UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF COMMUNICATION PROCESS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 31  1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units, you have been introduced to the meaning of communication, nature, purposes of communication, objectives and dimensions of communication.
In this unit, the definition of communication process will be given.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain the process of communication.
• Discuss the six components of communication process 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Now that you have known the objectives and dimension of communication, it is equally essential for you to understand the major components of communication process.
These are discussed below 3.1 Definition of Communication Process Communication process is a two-way process through which message passes from the sender, source, originator or encodes to the destination or receiver or decoder.
It can also be defined as a line of communication flow from the sender to the receiver of the information.
According to Abimbade (1997), in the Communication Process, information flows from a source or sender through a channel to the receiver or destination.
Etim (2006) asserts that communication process involves source and message, at the mental level which forms the (encoded message).
The message then passes through a transmission unit.
e.g.
print and non-print, television, films etc.
through a suitable channel (air, wire, paper, light) to the receiver motor skill (a person s senses such as eyes, ears, nose and tongue) where the message is therefore decoded into mental symbols at the destination which is the brain of the receiver.
Communication process 32  therefore involves a source (sender), message transmitted through certain channel to a receiver.
The sender becomes aware of the receiver s response through a response loop called feedback and sometimes, the message could be distorted through some inferences or disturbances called noise factors.
Some elements are involved in the process of communication.
These are sender or source or encoder, message, channel (noise factor), receiver or decoder or destination and feedback.
Mangal and Mangal (2009), states that, communication as a two way process involving interaction between two or more persons (on giving and receiving ends) is carried out in a cycle illustrated in the figure 1 below.
The Process of Communication Communication Media or Channel Facilitators or Barriers Communication of Communication Material Receiver Source of Communication Communication Facilitators or Barriers Responded Material Media or Channel of Communication or Feedback Figure 1 3.2 Components of Communication Process As indicated in the above diagram (Figure 1) six main components or elements could be noticed in any communication process These are: i.
Source of communication ii.
Contents of Communication or Message 33  iii.
Media or channel of communication iv.
Receiver of the communication v. Response material or feedback vi.
Facilitators or barriers of communication i.
The Source of Communication The process of communication normally starts with a source of communication.
The process of communication has to be initiated by somebody.
This source could be in the form of some object, event or person.
This source must be in a position to transmit information, ideas, thoughts, opinions, feelings etc.
known or possessed by it with the other person or persons on the receiving end of the communication.
It is generally referred to as Sender in the language of communication technology.
In the teaching and learning process, especially in the classroom communication, the teacher, the pupil or instructional media or materials can serve as source of communication.
ii.
Contents of Communication or Message Contents or message refer to what is intended to be communicated or transmitted by the source, that is sender, from his own stock of knowledge, information, thoughts, opinions, feelings etc.
to the other person or persons (receivers).
These may be well organized and structured (as in the case of planned classroom teaching) or unorganized and unstructured or spontaneous (as in the case of casual discussion) among communicators.
iii.
Media or Channel of Communication What we wish to convey to others is always communicated with the help of appropriate media or channel.
The media or channel usually takes two distinctive forms.
These are verbal (spoken or written words) and non-verbal (gestures, sign language, body language, word code, etc.)
in a communication process, both the sender and receiver are forced to make use of the media or channel of communication that is acceptable as well as effective.
The communicators in a communication process should also share the same understandable code of communication.
In the classroom situation, the teacher as the source of communication process should use 34  simple communication codes that will be easily understandable by the learners if effective teaching and learning is to take place.
iv.
The Receiver of the Communication The receiver is the person who remains at the receiving end of the communication.
He is to receive the encoded intended message of the source of communication, decode it for its proper interpretation and react or produce a desired response (feedback) to the source (the sender).
In any communication process, the receiver is very important for the flow of the current of communication of the message.
According to Mangal and Mangal (2009), the communication can remain operative only if the receiver is interested and possesses the required competency to decode, understanding and effect response to the communicated message.
v. Response Material or Feedback The response material or feedback may be defined as the reaction or response signals (in the encoded form transmitted back by the receiver) on the part of the receiver of the communicated message (after its proper decoding, interpretation and understanding) in other to maintain the flow of communication.
The effectiveness in the flow is dependent much upon the equality and effectiveness of the component.
It is through the feedback that one may evaluate the outcome of the communication, that is, what was intended to be communicated, if it has or has not reached the receiver, has there been any gap in the communication process, has there been any message, etc.
thus, the quality of communication as a two-way process may thus be from the receiver and its subsequent follow up on the part of the sender.
In the case of classroom communication, the effectiveness of the teacher communication skills and codes will determine the kind of feedback he receives from what he taught his pupils.
If his teaching is effective, definitely, his pupils responses to his questions after the lesson will equally be effective.
35  vi.
Facilitators or Barriers to Communication According to Mangal and Mangal (2009), the quality and effectiveness of the process of communication is affected favourably and adversely through the presence of some intervening variables lying between the source (sender) of communication and the receiver.
These variables helping or hindering the communication flow are termed as facilitators or barriers of communication.
The presence of congenial, physical, psychological and environmental conditions and facilities available for effective communication may facilitate and help in providing ending the desirable effectiveness to the communication system.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE Make an attempt to draw and label fully the process of communication 36  4.0 CONCLUSION In explaining the process of communication the teacher should make sure he/she is able to explain it with well labeled diagram.
5.0 SUMMARY Communication process explains the flow of communication from the source to the receiver.
Six main components or elements could be noticed in any communication process.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is Communication Process 2.
Explain the six main components of communication model 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abimbade, A.
(1997) Principles and Practice of Educational Technology.
Ibadan, International Publisher Ltd. Etim, P.J.
(2006) Issue in Educational Technology.
Uyo, Abaam Publishing Co. Mangal, S.K, Mangal, U (2009) Essential of Educational Technology New Delhi, PHI Learning Private Ltd. 37  UNIT 2: PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNICATION AND SITUATIONS OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In communication, there are principles that very essentially and they have to be adequately considered for any meaningful communication to take place.
There are communication situations as well.
These may be grouped into one to one communication, small group, large group, organizational or institutional and mass communication.
In this unit, the principles of communication and communication situations will be explained.
Try to pay adequate attention to the discussion.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Mention the principles of communication.
• Enumerate the communication situations.
38  3.0 MAIN BODY The principles of communication such as principle of readiness and motivation, principle of possession of competent communication skills, principle of sharing and interaction, principle of suitability of the communication contents, principle of appropriate media and channel, principle of appropriate feedback and principle of facilitator and barriers of communication will be discussed.
The unit will also examine the communication situations in details.
3.1 THE PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNICATION Certain principles are very essential to the effective communication.
These principles have to be observed for effective outcome of any form of communication.
Mangal and Mangal (2009) .
These principles include: a.
Principle of Readiness and Mot ivation Both the communicator and the receiver should be ready and remain motivated throughout the process of communication, lack of interest, zeal and enthusiasm on the part of either of them may adversely affect the process and product of communication.
b.
Principle of Possession of Competent Communication Skills.
The communicator and the receiver should be quite competent and efficient in terms of communicating and receiving the desired information or message.
There is a great need of development of the required communication skills so that the task of communication in terms of transmission and receiving may be performed by them effectively.
In addition, as a source of communication, the communicator or teacher must possess sufficient knowledge (coupled with its skill and application component) to allow the flow of communication to the receiver (students) to be as natural and persuasively as possible.
c. Principle of Sharing and Interaction sharing of the ideas and keeping mutual interaction between the source of communication (teacher) and receiver (students) as possible.
The greater the level of interaction, the more the involvement and participation of the students in the 39  teaching-learning process.
This will definitely bring positive results to the process of communication.
d. Principle of Suitability of the Communication Contents The content of what to be communicated should be very suitable and easily understandable.
It should be appropriate on the part of both the communicator and the receiver.
The communicator (teacher) must be able to handle the communication contents being transferred to the receiver (student) and at the receiving end, the communicated material should be suitable enough for grasping and easy response.
In addition, the communicated material should have a definite purpose, cohesiveness and appropriatness in the light of the objectives set and the situation prevailing at the time of communication.
e. Principle of Appropriate Media and C hannel The effectiveness of the process of communication will depend on the type and appropriateness of media or communication channel used.
It is therefore worthwhile for teachers and other communicators to make use of the verbal or the non-verbal or both means and media for the efficient and effective flow of communication.
Similarly, the use of appropriate media especially multimedia should be preferred over the single or restricted use of the media and channel of communication for fruitful results.
f. Principle of Appropriate Feedback The communication enjoys its effective flow if it continues to receive the desired feedback from the receiver and vice versa.
In the classroom, if a teacher gets the desired feedback from his students in terms of the quality of his teaching efforts, it will definitely boost up his morale and give the desired direction of his further effort.
g. Principle of Facilitators and Barriers of Communication There are many intervening variables lying between the source and the receivers of communication.
The way these variables affect, positive or negative, or favourable or adversely the functioning of the source and receiver becomes a decisive factor of the 40  success or failure of communication.
Therefore, it should be so managed as to eliminate barriers of communication as much as possible.
Example of such barriers include noise from rain, vehiclar movement or from a neighbouring class.
3.2 COMMUNICATION SITUATIONS Communication may occur in a variety of situations or environments in the communication process involving two or more individuals at one time or the other.
These may be grouped in the following types.
a.
One to One Communication This form of communication takes place between two individuals.
Most of our day- to-day informal or formal communication occurs in this form.
Communication between wife and husband, shopkeeper and customer, relatives, friends, two strangers, colleagues, lovers and beloved are examples of one to one communication.
b.
Small Group Communication This involves communication among more than two people; examples include family members, classmates, passengers in a commuter bus or railway coach.
Instead of individuals, the communication may take place between groups such as between two females as a neighbour or units of a locality or a sector.
c. Large Group or Public Communication This involves a large number of people or individuals or groups.
It is usually conducted in an organized or formal way.
For example, communication carried out during political party meetings, college assemblies, discourse or some religious preaching at a religious gathering or places of worship etc.
41  d. Organizational or Institutional Communication This is the type of communication carried out within the premises of factories, government offices, police and army barracks, hospitals etc.
The style and functioning of this type of communication is quite formal, systematic, planned and organized.
e. Mass Communication This is carried out through different types of mechanical, electronic means, appliances and mass media such as radio, television, video, cinema, films, books and literature, news paper and magazines, e-mail, internet, tele-conferencing, satellite communication and transmission etc.
There may not be face to face interaction between the communicators but they still remain the most effective way of mass communication till today.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1.
Try to list the principles of communication and examine them one by one on your own 2. identify the five main situations of communication 42  4.0 CONCLUSION The effectiveness of communication especially in the classroom depends to a large extent on the ability of the teacher to follow the communication principles.
Teachers are therefore advised to observe these communication principles when teaching.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the principles of communication and communication situations are well discussed.
This is very essential in order to assist the teachers in their daily interaction with the students in the school system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1a.
Examine the main principles of communication b.
Of what importance are these principles in the communication process 2.
Discuss the main types of communication situations 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Mangal, S.K, Mangal, U (2009) Essential of Educational Technology New Delhi, PHI Learning Private Ltd. 43  UNIT THREE: BARRIERS OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every communicator will want his/her communication to be effective.
But no matter how skillful the communicator is, if he/she does not identify the envisaged barriers to his/her communication, the communication will not be effective.
As communicators we should endeavour to make our communication effective by eliminating some of the barriers that will hinder its flow 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify and discuss the main barriers to effective communication • Proffer solutions to the identified barriers of communication 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS In this unit, the barriers to effective communication will be examined.
For ease of understanding, the barriers will be considered under two main headings.
These are: internal and external barriers to communication,.
44  3.3 Barriers of Communication The effectiveness of communication very much depends on the presence or absence of the elements and conditions, facilitating and obstructing the proper flow of communication.
The elements that are obstructing the communication flow are regarded as communication barriers.
These could be internal or external in nature.
Both the internal and external barriers are highlighted below: 3.2 Internal Barriers i.
Poor physical health or illness ii.
Poor background in terms of previous learning and general knowledge about subject communication iii.
Poor mental health and improper psychological make up such as prejudices, non-attention, feeling of insecurity, anxiety, depression and dissatisfaction.
iv.
Handicap in understanding the symbolic expression, verbalism, graphical representation etc.
v. Poor visual literacy vi.
Poor hereditary and traits development 3.3 External Barriers i.
Noise and other similar distractors ii.
Polluted environment iii.
Invisibility iv.
Environmental and physical discomfort v. Improper functioning of the communication channels involving audio-visual materials and equipment.
vi.
Non-co-operative or unhealthy rivalries and competition among the participants.
vii.
Lack of proper motivation, incentives, zeal and enthusiasm needed to remain active on the part of the sender and the receiver.
viii.
Poor coding system ix.
Inadequate reinforcement x. Communication of distorted ideas or information.
45  4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is very unique in teaching and learning process.
It is therefore necessary for communicators to understand the basic communication situations and the envisaged barriers to the communication process.
5.0 SUMMARY Every communicator always try as much as possible to ensure perfect and uninterrupted communication.
Despite all the efforts, some barriers to communication are always identified in communication process.
To really communicate effectively, communicators have to master the communication skills perfectly and minimize or eliminate the likely barriers to the communication process.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT (TMA) 1a.
Identify and discuss any five main barriers to effective communication b.
Suggest remedies to combat the identified communication barriers.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Mangal, S.K, Mangal, U (2009) Essential of Educational Technology New Delhi, PHI Learning Private Ltd. 46  MODULE 4 TEACHING LEARNING PROCESS VERSUS COMMUNICATION INTRODUCTION Communication is very important and highly crucial to the teaching and learning process.
There will be little or no effective teaching and learning when there is defective communication.
Teaching and learning processes require a greater deal of interaction.
The communication in the teaching and learning environments need a high level of interaction which is only possible through adequate and well planned communication strategies.
Teaching and learning may not be possible if the teachers and learners communication skills are poor and undeveloped.
Therefore, for effective teaching and learning to take place in a school setting, the place of communication is inevitable.
In this module the following units will be discussed Unit 1 Classroom Communication Unit 2 Prerequisites and Conditions for Effective and Efficient Communication Unit 3 Media of communication in the classroom and Barriers to effective communication in the classroom UNIT 1 CLASSROOM COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 47  1.0 INTRODUCTION The success of any teacher and student in the teaching and learning process depends on how effective and efficient they can communicate.
In fact, whatever goes on in the classroom without consideration for effective communication may be a ruse.
In this unit, efforts will be made to enlighten teachers and students on the different forms of communication in the classroom.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • Explain classroom communication • Mention the different forms of classroom communication 3.0 MAIN COMPONENT Teaching and learning in the classroom is only possible when both the teachers and the students are highly skillful in the communication skills.
Learners who are deficient in the communication skills may not benefit adequately from the classroom teaching.
While teachers without adequate communication skills may not be able to put their brilliant ideas across to the students perfectly.
It is therefore very essential for both the teacher and students to be skillful in communication if efficient and adequate teaching and learning is to take place.
3.1 The Place of Communication in the C lassroom According to Farrant (1980), perfect communication is almost impossible to achieve because it depends on so many variables.
Nevertheless, it is such a vital process in teaching that you should make every effort to develop skill in it.
Based on Farrant (1980) assertion, it is very important for both the teacher and the pupils in the classroom to develop adequate communication skills in order to enhance effective and very efficient teaching and learning .
Classroom communication is mostly carried on through verbal and non-verbal means.
The communication in which we make use of the oral and written form of language is termed verbal communication while communication through facial expression, eye 48  contact, body language and some other gestures are termed non-verbal communication.
3.2 Verbal Communication Language is the backbone and the base for any verbal communication.
Each society develops one or more forms of languages with spoken or written words for communicating with each other.
The basic unit of any language are words and sentences which are governed by the rules of grammar.
Language can make use of one of the three forms of communication.
That is, oral, written and oral and written.
In the oral form, we can communicate one s feeling, thoughts and intentions to others by the speaking and listening channel.
For this purpose, the sender/communicator makes use of some precise and distinct sounds which when heard by the receiver, are decoded for understanding and reaction.
In the written form of language communication, the communicator/sender makes use of the script of the language.
In the usual classroom setting, a teacher explains some concepts to the students orally just as he writes on the chalkboard.
In this way, the oral form combined with the written form of communication or vice versa always proves more effective than any of this forms used separately.
In verbal communication, there is the need for careful ordering of ideas on choice of vocabulary that is well within the capacity of the students.
Fluency of speech also helps to prevent interrupted thought in the receiver.
b. Non-Verbal Communication Communication process can also be done without the use of any verbal means.
For instance, in communicating with deaf and dump person, non-verbal communication are usually used.
Non-verbal communication is an important means of sending messages between people.
For example, a simple smile can tell someone else a great deal about how you feel towards him/her.
A great deal of class control can be exercised by non-verbal communication and so, it is very important for everybody to master its skills.
Some of the commonly used non-verbal communication modes are 49  facial expression, language of the eye, nodding of head, body language, sound symbol, symbolic code language etc.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE • Try to explain the place of communication in the teaching and learning process • Examine the two forms of classroom communication • Which of them should be used by the teachers 50  4.0 CONCLUSION Effective communication is a necessity in the teaching and learning process.
It is very essential that both teachers and students make efforts to update their communication skills on regular basis in order to ensure perfect communication in the classroom.
5.0 SUMMARY The process of communication is quite beneficial to both teachers and learners.
Therefore, they should ensure that there areno barriers of any form in their communication flow from time to time.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1a.
Explain the different forms of communication that are available for a class teacher b.
Which one should be adhered to strictly and why.
70.
REFERENCE AND FURTHER READING Farrants, J.S.
(1980) Principles and Practice of Education (New Edition).
Hong Kong, Longman Group Ltd. 51  UNIT 2: PREREQUISITES AND CONDITIONS FOR EFFECTIVE AND GOOD COMMUNICATION IN THE CLASSROOM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Prerequisites for Effective Communication in the Classroom 3.2 Conditions for Good Communication in the Classroom 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are prerequisites for effective communication in the classroom.
These prerequisite include choosing a code that every student understands, avoiding ambiguous code, choosing good medium for the message and protecting noise and its effects.
It is equally important for the teacher to master the content of his message to the students, understand the code they understood and which of them is suitable for a particular situation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the prerequisites for effective communication in the classroom 2.
Explain the necessary conditions for good communication in the classroom.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT It is very important for the teacher who wants to be successful in his career to master the necessary prerequisites and conditions for good communication in the classroom.
By so doing, he will be able to put his ideas across to his/her students perfectly and suitably 52  3.1 Prerequisites for Effective Communication in the Classroom • Choose a code that is known by everyone to whom the message is to be sent • Avoid using a code that is ambiguous or that might be misunderstood by the receiver • Avoid choosing a medium that any of your receiver might find unpleasant to him or her • Choose medium that is well suited to the condition in order which the message is to be sent • Take whatever steps you can to reduce noise and its effects 3.2 Conditions for Good Communication in the Classroom a.
The Message: (That is, the teaching point you want to get across to your students) • Do you have good mastery of the content?
• How do you want to ensure good mastery of the content?
• How do you want to structure it to ensure it is clearer to your receiver?
b.
The Receiver: (The individual students in your class) • What code does he know?
• What previous knowledge does he have that will enable him to make sense of the message?
c. The Code: (This refers to the verbal, non-verbal) • What codes are available to you that the receiver knows?
• Which of this is most efficient for this occasion and this particular purpose?
d. The Medium: (Audio visual media such as chalk and talk, pictures, modules, broadcast, satellite communication etc.)
• What media are available in your school?
• Which will be most appropriate for the message you want to send under the noise condition you expect?
53  e. The Noise: (In attention, lack of interest, knowledge or limited experience interruption etc.
• What possible forms of noise will your message have to compete with?
• How can some of these forms of noise be removed or reduced?
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE List the conditions for good communication in the classroom.
Itemize the necessary conditions for effective communication in the classroom.
54  4.0 CONCLUSION To adequately communicate perfectly in the classroom, the teacher has to master the prerequisite effective communication.
they should also keep abreast of themselves the good conditions that will promote good communication in the classroom.
5.0 SUMMARY You have been taught fully the necessities for effective and good communication in the classroom.
You as a teacher is expected to master these prerequisite and conditions of good conditions.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) What are the necessary prerequisites for effective communication in the classroom.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FUTURE READING Farrants, J.S.
(1980) Principles and Practice of Education (New Edition).
Hong Kong, Longman Group Ltd. 55  UNIT 3 MEDIA OF COMMUNICATION AND BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION IN THE CLASSROOM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The unit discusses some media used in the classroom to promote better understanding and greater interaction between the students and their teachers.
The unit equally explains some barriers to effective communication in the classroom.
Teachers are expected to take note of these barriers in order to minimize them when teaching in the classroom.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • Mention and explain some media of communication in the classroom.
• Discuss some barriers of communication in the classroom 56  3.0 MAIN CONTENT The place of instructional media in communication process cannot be over emphasized.
For effective communication and better interaction between the students and the teachers, it is very important for the teachers to always use different instructional media to teach their students.
Apart from the use of appropriate instructional media for teaching, the teacher should also be mindful of some problems that can lead to ineffective communication in his/her class.
3.1 Instructional Media of Communication in the Classroom i.
Audio Media: All media of communication that appeals to the sense of hearing e.g.
radio, audio tape, audio CD, etc.
ii.
Visual Media: All media of communication that appeal to the sense of seeing e.g.
photographs, charts, diagrams, graphs etc.
iii.
Audio-Visual Media: All media of communication that appeal to the sense of hearing and seeing e.g.
television, computer, video CD etc.
iv.
Mass Media: These include both print and electronic media that are used to reach larger audience e.g.
newspaper, radio, television, internet etc.
57  v. Multimedia: A communication process may be termed as based on the multimedia approach when it employs a number of media in a planned and organized combination for deriving the maximum output in a particular communication situation.
Most of the well- organized programmes of the reputed open education or distance learning institutions are run through the multimedia approach adopted for the interaction with the learners.
In advanced countries like United States of America, Canada, Britain, Australia and Japan, it is used in a quite effective way for carrying out a number of on-line Courses.
3.2 Barriers to Effective C lassroom Communication The basis for efficient and highly successful teaching/learning process is the effectiveness of the communication system.
If the communication is highly effective in the teaching and learning process, definitely there will be effective learning.
The result and effect of successful teaching could be well determined by the level of effectiveness of the communication system adopted.
Therefore, it could be said without fear that the success of any form of classroom teaching and learning depends highly on the efficiency of the communication system adopted by the teacher.
Nevertheless, some barriers to effective communication in the classroom have been identified.
These include the following.
i.
Physical Discomfort There is no form of physical discomfort that the learners are subjected to in the classroom that cannot affect communication in the classroom.
For instance, a classroom that is over crowded will definitely bring some discomfort to the learners.
Children with some health problems such as bad sight, pains, aches etc.
cannot equally benefit from the teaching of the teacher no matter how powerful the communication system adopted by the teacher.
Other forms of physical discomfort in the classroom include poor classroom furniture, poor illumination of the classroom, unreadable teacher s handwriting both on the chalkboard and on paper and any other conditions that make learners not to be at peace in the classroom.
It is unfortunate that most teachers pay little or no attention to this problem in the classroom.
58  Physical environment of any place has a significant influence and impact on the mental, aesthetic and natural development of anyone within the vicinity, therefore, to ensure effective and meaningful communication in the classroom, frantic efforts should be made to reduce problems relating to physical discomfort to the bearest minimal level in the classroom (Abifarin, 2004).
ii.
Verbalism Verbalism refers to a communication mode in which the teacher devote much of his time to talking without involving the learners in the communication chain and without giving them some activities that are related to what he/she is talking about to do or engage them in some other classroom activities in order to make them active participants in the communication chain.
According to Abifarin (2004), when learners are subjected to parrot fashion of teaching by the teacher, the learner may no longer be interested in the teaching.
At the same time, when a teacher uses words to express himself without other learning activities in the classroom, the learner will naturally become bored and tired of listening.
This uninteresting experience may make the learner to shift his attention from what he is teaching to a more interesting experience in his environment.
This is a very serious problem to effective communication in the classroom.
It is therefore, advisable to all teachers to ensure they do little of talking but much of practical activities that will adequately engage the learners while teaching in the classroom.
iii.
Day-Dreaming Another major problem to effective classroom communication is day-dreaming.
Day dreaming refers to a situation whereby a child is physically present in the classroom but his mind is several kilometers away from the classroom.
According to Abifarin (2004), the anger in this sort of barrier is that, the learner may be so much carried away in this recalled experience that sometimes he or she may smile and seem to be very attentive.
The teacher may interpret the external physical feature of the learner presuming that he or she is really paying attention to his lesson.
Day-dreaming can happen to all categories of learners, be children or adults, because it serves as an excellent and pleasant defense mechanism against incessant classroom boredom.
59  Therefore, to ensure effective communication in the classroom and to reduce occurrence of day-dream among the learners, the teacher needs to adequately prepare for his or her lesson, pay more attention to the learners, throw questions to different learners in the class frequently and most importantly, involve the learners in what is going on in the class from time to time.
iv.
Limited Perception Perception refers to the process whereby an individual becomes aware of events and objects in one s environment through the sensory modalities such as hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting and touching.
Limited perception on the other hand refers to the learners insufficient knowledge about a particular concept (Abifarin, 2004).
For instance, the leaner may perform poorly in a particular course because he or she has no sufficient knowledge on the different course content.
This is another crucial hindrance to effective communication in the classroom.
To solve this problem, the teacher needs to ensure that the learners have sufficient and adequate knowledge of what he is saying while teaching.
He needs to make his lesson as simple as possible and should also engage the learners in a variety of class activities to ensure that the learners are really following his explanation while teaching.
v. Referent Confusion This concept refers to a situation whereby the learner cannot adequately relate his past experiences to the presence task.
For instance, the place of previous knowledge cannot be over emphasized.
However, when there is no previous learning to employ, apply or recall in teaching and learning situation, referent confusion eventually set in.
It is pertinent to note that, when the previous knowledge or learning of the learner is not in conflict with his or her present learning experience, then there will be no referent confusion.
The teacher should know that each individual learner is different and unique in the class, so also is his/her referent ability and knowledge which directly determine the meaning of the transmitted message or information.
According to Kanno (1991), any teacher who neglects the presence of referent confusion in his class will end up having all the forty or so students, who received the 60  same message come up with genuine divergent, contradicting and conflicting approaches on the lesson the teacher has taught.
It is therefore imperative for the teacher not to merely relate messages in the classroom but to ensure that the basic information or message communicated is thoroughly related to the learner s previous positive experience to enable them acquire the actual intended meaning.
This is saying in essence that the teacher should always expose the learner to the connection between their previous knowledge and the present experiences.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1.
List five categories of instructional media in the classroom.
2.
List five major barriers to effective communication in the classroom 61  4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is highly central in the teaching and learning process.
No matter how prepared the teacher is for the lesson, he can only succeed in getting his message across to the learners if he has adequate and very efficient communication skills.
The teacher should endeavour to constantly use appropriate instructional media when teaching and equally improve on their communication skills.
Additionally, classroom communication is prone to some problems or barriers, it is very important for the teacher to identify any of the barriers that are peculiar to his/her situation and remedy them effectively if communication is to be highly effective in the classroom.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit identified some media of communication in the classroom such as audio, visual, audio-visual, mass media and multimedia.
It is concluded with explanation on some of the barriers of communication in the classroom and how such barriers can be prevented or minimized 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
List the various categories of instructional media and explain how they can be used in the classroom 2.
Discuss the five main barriers to effective classroom communication and suggest ways to remedy them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abifarin, M.S.
(2004) Modern Approach to Educational Technology Lagos, Inter- Ventures Publishers.
Kanno, T.N.
(1991).
Effective Communication in the Classroom in Austere Time.
In Trend and Research in Educational Technology (ed).
IMogie, I. Onyejemezi, D.A.
Mkpa, D.A.
Anukam, I.L, Ibadan Y-Books 62  MODULE 5 MODELS OF COMMUNICATION INTRODUCTION This module would teach you some models or theories of communication.
Several models or theories of communication have been developed by experts in the fields of educational technology.
These models of communication include those of David Berlo (popularly known as engineering model), Harold Lasswell, Shannon and Weaver etc.
SMRE model of instructional communication, communication model with fidelity and communication with overlapping of experience.
These communication models would be discussed under the following units: Unit 1 David Berlo s Communication Model Unit 2 Harold Lassswell s Communication Model Unit 3 S.M.R.E.
Model of Instructional Communication, Communication Model with Fidelity and Communication Model with Overlapping Experience 63  UNIT 1: DAVID BERLO S COMMUNICATION MODEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 3.1 INTRODUCTION In the field of communication, there have been a lot of theories or models that have been developed over the years by people in order to improve communication flow.
David Berlo is one of the people that develop such models.
The model he developed was named after him as David Berlo s Communication Model.
You are expected to go throught the model with rapped attention.
3.2 DAVID BERLO S MODEL OF COMMUNIATION Feedback Source Message Channel S Receiver M C Sender R S = • Teacher M = • Knowledge C = Air R = • Teacher • Noise Factor Fig.
1 64  In David Berlo s communication model, communication originates from the sender or source.
The sender or source could be the teacher, pupil, resource, person and media (Abifarin, 2004) There exist the message in the communication channel.
The message could be inform of knowledge, values, attitudes and skills.
In between the sender or source and message, there exist the noise factors.
These can affect effective communication adversely.
The noise factor could be psychological, physiological or physical.
Any form of distraction in the communication process is regarded as noise factor.
In is model of communication, next to the message is the channel through which the message will pass through.
It is often directly through the air waves.
The channel can be by correspondence books, letters, post, radio, television, package instruction package and some form of electrical or electronic devices.
The final stage of David Barlo s model is the receiver or the destination.
In classroom communication, the destination or receiver of instruction are the pupil and the teacher.
The popular acronyms used for this communication model is SMCR meaning Sender Message Channel and Receiver.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE Give a brief description of David Berlo s Communication Model 65  4.0 CONCLUSION In explaining David Berlo s Communication Model, the teacher should make use of well labelled diagram of David Berlo s Communication model in order to make his explanation more explicit.
5.0 SUMMARY David Berlo s communication model shows the flow of communication from the source to the destination.
It equally points out the noise factor in the communication flow.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) With a well labeled diagram, explain in details David Berlo s Communication Model.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abifarin, M.S.
(2004) Modern Approach to Educational Technology Lagos, Inter- Ventures Publishers.
66  UNIT 2: HAROLD LASSWELL S COMMUNICATION MODEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Harold Lasswell is one of the experts that developed a model of communication.
His model is also called psychological model.
The model he developed is also named after him just like David Berlo.
You are advised to critically study the model and compare it with David Berlo s Model.
You can as well tabulate the differences you may observe.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain Harold Lasswell s Model of communication in details 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Harold Lasswell s Communication Model is one of the popular models of communication developed over the years.
You are expected to study the model and point out its contributions to communication technology.
67  3.1 Harold Lasswell s Communication Model SAYS WHO WHAT WITH WHAT EFFECT TO WHOM Fig.
2 Herold Lasswell s model is under the psychological models of communication.
Psychological model of communication is concerned with the effect of message as well as its source and distinction.
In psychological model of communication ask questions such as (i) Who?
(ii) Says What (iii) In which Channel (iv) With what effect are addressed.
Comparism between David Berlo and Harold Lasswell s Model of Communication Harold Lasswells Model David Berlo s Model WHO Corresponds with source or sender WHAT Corresponds with Message IN WHICH CHANNEL Corresponds with channel TO WHOM Corresponds with Receiver/Destination WITH WHAT EFFECT Corresponds with feedback SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE Try and study Harold Lasswell s communication model in detail and point out its similarities and differences with David Berlo s communication model 68  4.0 CONCLUSION Teacher should explain Harold Lasswell s communication model to the students with the aid of a well labeled diagram.
He can also compare the model with David Berlo s model of communication 5.0 SUMMARY Harold Lasswell s Communication is called or referred to as psychological model of communication.
the model is based on certain psychological questions such as who says what?
with what effect?
and to whom?
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Carefully explain the differences between David Berlo and Harold Lasswell s model of communication 7.0 REFERENCES Abimbade, A.
(1997) Principles and Practices of Educational Technology.
Ibadan, International Publishers, 69  UNIT 3 S.M.R.E MODEL OF COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION MODEL WITH FIDELITY AND COMMUNICATION MODEL WITH OVERLAPPING OF EXPERIENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, S.M.R.E.
Model of Communication, Communication Model with Fidelity and Communication Model with overlapping of experience are examined.
The relationship that exist between S.M.R.E.
model of communication and other communication models are also pointed out.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • S.M.R.E.
Model of Communication • Communication Model with Fidelity • Communication Model with Overlapping of Experience 3.0 MAIN CONTENT S.M.R.E.
Model of Communication, Communication Model with Fidelity and Communication Model with overlapping of experience are models of communication.
All these models explain communication flow in their own forms.
70  S.M.R.E.
MODEL OF INSTRUCTIONAL COMMUNICATION Source Message Receiver Effect Effect Fig.
4 3.1 S.M.R.E.
Model of Communication Communication can also be explained in terms of input-output relationship involving message formulation, transmission reception and interpretation as reflected in the S.M.R.E.
model presented above (Etim, 2006) This linear communication model does not illustrate the reciprocity which the communication process is known for.
Weaver (1950) and Gebner (1952) as lifted by Ibe-Bassey (1992) who modified this process to include the response that will reduce noise ration to ensure communication fidelity Communication Model with Fidelity Source of Message Transmission Message Receiver Destination Message encoded Channel and Decoded of Message Noise Feedback Fig.5 (Source: Ibe-Bassey 1988) 71  3.2.
Communication Model with Fidelity In the above table, message is encoded and transmitted through channels by the sender or source of information to the receiver that will process the message by decoding using sensory modalities.
The message will be sent back through the feedback (response loop) of the sender who will examine the impact of the message sent.
The sender will observe the degree of analysis and interpretation by the receiver.
There may be inferences of noise that will reduce the fidelity of the message.
In general, communication models are developed on the overlapping of experiences between the sender and the receiver of information (Etim, 2006).
This is recorded by the psychological model of communication by Schramm (1954) as cited by Ibe- Bassey (1992).
This model is concerned with interaction between audience and their environment; the effect of the message as well as the source, the destination analysis and interpretation in relationship to learning.
In the classroom communication where the activities of the teachers include careful identification of the audience, objectives instructional strategies, contents, channels and a sound evaluation technique will produce the learning outcome as shown in the model belo.
COMMUNICATION WITH OVERLAPPING OF EXPERIENCE Sender Encoder Signal Decoder Receiver Noise Feedback Fig.
6 (Source: Ibe-Bassey 1988) 3.3 Communication Model with Overlapping Experience SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE Discuss the following model of communication a. S.M.R.E.
Model of Communication b. Communication model with fidelity c. 72 Communication model with overlapping of experience  4.0 CONCLUSION Communication models or theories are the bed rock of communication, Several communication models have been developed over the years.
Some of the models have also been modified over the years.
Some of the examples of the communication models are linear communication model, S.M.R.E.
communication model, communication model with Fidelity and Communication Model with Overlapping of experience.
You are expected to read and master these communication models in order to understand the basic theories that are associated with communication 5.0 SUMMARY .
In this module, the different communication models have been discussed.
These communication models include S.M.R.E communication model, communication model with fidelity and communication model with overlapping of experience.
73  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
With the aid of a well labeled diagram, explain the following communication models : a. S.M.R.E b. Communication Model with Fidelity c. Communication model with overlapping of experience.
7.0 REFERENCES Abimbade, A.
(1997) Principles and Practices of Educational Technology.
Ibadan, International Publishers, Ibe Bassey, G.S.
(1992) Principles and Practices of Instructional Communciation Uyo.
Dorand Publishers.
Etim, P.J.
(2006) Issues in Educational Technology.
Uyo Abaam Publishing Co. 74  MODULE 6 CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY AND SOME EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHERS WITH EMPHASIS ON INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA CONCEPT OF PHILOSOPHY INTRODUCTION In this unit we shall examine the concept of philosophy.
That is, the meaning of philosophy from the popular conception of philosophy and the technical or professional sense.
From the popular sense of it, philosophy is often used to characterize a person s or a group of people s attitude to life.
It is often used to characterize a person s expressed or observed world view.
According to Akinpelu (1985), this world view may be the sum total of his assumptions, beliefs, attitudes, and prejudices which are popularly inherited and partly acquired in the process of living.
It is to either or both of these two senses that is sometimes referred to when we claim to have a personal philosophy of life.
In the technical or professional sense, philosophy is conceived of as an academic discipline to which scholars devote their time and energy.
It is characterized by logical consistent and systematic thinking so as to reach conclusions that are sound, coherent and consistent in all their parts.
This unit presents a detailed discussion on the meaning of philosophy.
In this module, you would be introduced to the concept of philosophy.
This would be discussed under the following units.
Unit 1 Meaning/Definition of Philosophy Unit 2 Branches of Philosophy Unit 3 : Some Educational Philosophers with Emphasis on Instructional Media 75  UNIT 1: MEANING AND DEFINITION OF PHILOSOPHY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Explain the meaning of philosophy b.
Identify the branches of philosophy, that is, metaphysics, epistemology and axiology c. Identify philosophers with emphasis on instructional media 3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are different terminologies you will be coming across in our course of discussion.
These terminologies are well discussed in this unit.
They are discussed in a very simple language.
3.1.
Meaning/Definition What is Philosophy?
The word philosophy is coined from Ancient Greek word Philosophia which means love of wisdom.
That is, an indepth search for knowledge and truth.
It is the search for and establishment of the truth by the use of reason.
That is why Bello (1999) defines philosophy as the process of asking questions or asking rational inquiry into the meaning of reality.
76  According to Molagun (2000) Philosophy is a critical inquiry into the principle of reality, knowledge and value .
It is also attempts to find out and establish what is happening in life by the way of reasoning Philosophy is about enquiry.
That is, it involves asking questions in order to rid a man s mind of all pre-conceived ideas which usually stand in the way of the understanding.
Philosophy do not ask questions that are ambiguous.
That is, questions that are loaded with several interpretations and those that demand for yes or no answers.
In asking philosophical questions, all biases, assumptions and prejudices are avoided.
Philosophy ask questions that are related to beliefs (that is, on reality), question asked are purely theoretical.
In Greek Theoria means speculation or contemplation, that is why philosophical question are speculative and contemplative.
Adetoro (1984) asserts that, from a contemporary or modern perspective, philosophy can be defined as the activity which involves the examination, analysis of words that represent ideas (that is, concepts) and statements to discover their real meaning .
The validity of statement are tested by making reference to their factual contents.
For instance, to get to the actual meaning of the sociologists definition of education, which states that education is the process of cultural transmission and renewal .
Philosophers will examine and analyze the key concepts in the definition such as education, process, culture, transmission and renewal.
It is only when this is done that one will have a clearer picture of what the statement connotes.
Philosophers adopt analytical approach to issues in order to reach or attain reliable truth.
It is true to say that man often uses the same words to mean different things and sometimes using different words to mean the same thing.
Sometimes too, words and statements are expressed subjectively or objectively.
Hence, the need to fully analyze and clarify words (concepts) that are used in the expression of ideas and experiences (philosophical or otherwise).
In general term, philosophy can be defined as a person s or group of people s altitude to life.
It is the principles, the general pattern or habitual way a person or group of 77  persons responds to issues, problems or things.
People often speak of their personal philosophies of life, that is, the principles that guide their behaviour and actions in life.
Philosophy can also be seen from the perspective of school discipline.
As an academic discipline, it attempts to organize all fields of human endeavour, in order to allow for a comprehensive understanding and interpretation of the totality of reality.
Every aspect of human endeavours are covered through the main branches (structures) of philosophy.
These are, Metaphysics, Epistemology, and Axiology.
These branches of philosophy are called components of philosophy in some books of philosophy.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE Make an attempt to explain the meaning of philosophy in your own words.
78  4.0 CONCLUSION Philosophy as a discipline has a lot of contributions to the development of education generally.
Therefore, whatever development in educations has philosophical foundation.
Teachers are expected to explain this philosophical foundations to their students adequately.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the concept of philosophy has been explained fully.
Emphasis has been laid to philosophy as an academic discipline.
Teachers should explain this to their students very well.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Discuss the meaning of philosophy as a school discipline 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetoro, J.O.
(1984) ABC of Philosophy Lagos, New Thought Printing and Publishing Company Nig.
Ltd. Bello, J.Y.
(1991) An Introduction to Philosophy Ilorin, Femac Press Molagun, H.M. (1999) Introduction to Philosophy of Education Ilorin, Blessed James Publications.
79  UNIT 2 BRANCHES OF PHILOSOPHY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, the meaning of philosophy has been explained.
In this unit the branches of philosophy such as metaphysics, epistemology and axiology will be discussed 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the 3 branches of philosophy • Explain each of the branches of philosophy • Compare each of the 3 branches of philosophy 3.0 MAIN CONTACT Philosophy as an academic discipline can be divided into 3 branches.
These are metaphysics (nature of man and the nature of the world), epistemology (which is about the search for knowledge and truth) and axiology which deals with values.
These 3 branches will be explained in detailS in this unit.
80  Branches of Philosophy The three main or important branches of philosophy are: i. Metaphysics ii.
Epistemology iii.
Axiology 3.1 Metaphysics Metaphysics is the theory about the nature of man and nature of the world in which he lives.
• It deals with the questions of what man really is • From where man had his origin • What place does he go after his death • It deals with how man behaves the way he does things?
Metaphysics, however, at times goes beyond and above questions to discuss abstract and hidden topics.
For example, we can discuss under it the questions about the nature of the soul or the mind, whether a man has a soul or mind, if he has one how it functions and finally what happens to it at his death?
Metaphysics also asks other questions such as • Whether God exists • If he does, how can we know him?
All these are fair questions for metaphysics to answer.
Other philosophical topics such as human destiny, predestination, fate and freewill are regularly discussed under metaphysics.
3.2.
Epistemology It is in theory of knowledge or epistemology that the relevance of philosophy to education, most especially, in the classroom teaching and learning activities is most felt.
John Dowey had noted that, the search for knowledge and the truth is the common task of both education and philosophy.
The only difference is that while education as process is concerned with the impacting of knowledge by the teacher and its acquisition by the student (using the finding of educational psychology).
Epistemology digs into the root of knowledge.
It asks questions such as: 81  • What do you mean by knowledge itself?
• What is it to know something?
• What are the sources of knowledge?
• How do we establish that we know when we claim that we know something?
• Do we know in the same way in all the subjects in the curriculum?
• If not, what are the types of knowledge that are possible?
• What are the prices that we should pay on the difference of knowledge available to us?
• What types of knowledge is of most worth?
These are questions which philosophy deals with while psychology of education deals with the most efficient way by which the knowledge can be imparted or acquired (Akinpelu, 1985).
Akinpelu (1985) equally asserts that teachers impart various types of knowledge in the classroom according to their area of disciplines.
It is important for a teacher to know the types of knowledge he impacts.
What are their sources and how much relevance can be placed on them.
It is equally of relevance that the teacher should be aware of the way of knowing his particular subject.
3.3 TYPES OF KNOWLEDGE i.
Revelation Knowledge This is the type of knowledge we have through revelation.
This is the characteristic knowledge in all religion, especially the revealed religion of Christianity and Islam with which most of us are familiar through the Bible and Quran respectively.
For instance, the ten commandments in the Bible were revealed to Moses while Quran was revealed to Prophet Mohammed.
This is a type of knowledge that is not open to observation or other empirical test, nor can it be proved by logic and reasoning.
It just has to be accepted by faith, that is, regarded as absolutely true on faith.
For example, Christians and Muslim believe that there is God despite the fact that they have never seen him.
They believe and their belief is not open to doubt or investigation.
82  ii.
Empirical or Scientific Knowledge This knowledge is scientific in nature.
It is the type of knwledge that is obtained through observation of the things around us, through your sense organs and through personal experiences from actions in which we are involved.
This type of knowledge is widely used in sciences both the natural and social sciences.
It is an empirical type of knowledge which means that it can be verified for its truth especially by those who have the expertise to do so.
It is a type of knowledge that is highly valued due to its truthfulness and reliability.
iii.
Rational Knowledge This is a type of knowledge we derive through reasoning.
It is not acquired by empirical knowledge.
That is, not by observation but by inferring new knowledge from what we know already.
The mathematical subjects are good example of natural knowledge, so also is a subject like philosophy.
Given some hypotheses or premise, we can go on to deduce a number of conclusions that must necessarily follow.
For example, for the given premise that a man is a bachelor, it follows as of necessity that he is not married.
3.4 Axiology Axiology as branch of philosophy deals with values.
That is, it is the theory of value.
It considers the nature and kinds of values, beliefs and the worthwhileness of issues, practices and things.
Value primarily refers to those objects which are cherished, appreciated, wanted, deserved or needed.
The psychologist will determine values as the objects of our desire and interest.
But such a definition gives only half the truth, but it is just the case that a person may desire an object, but that object may turn out to be something that has no lasting value or something that he ought not to desire.
For example, children, if left to themselves, may desire to play or talk the whole day; but their teacher, considering that, it is not valuable (desirable) enough, sets them to work for part of the time.
Here it is clear that it is not sufficient for a person to express a desire for something, the object desired has also to be worth desiring or to be desirable before we can say it is valuable.
83  Thus, in curriculum development what the child wants to do out of spontaneous interest has to be taken along with what he needs to do either for survival or for his future development.
There are two main kinds of values.
These are aesthetic and or moral .
3.5.
Kind of Values i Aesthetic Value This refers to the philosophy of art and beauty.
It is the field that tries to define nature of the beauty and formulation of principles governing its production and evaluation (Bello, 1991).
Beauty is the recognition of perfection through the employment of the senses.
Individual s aesthetic perception differs.
For example, what is beautiful to one person may not be beautiful to another person.
Aesthetic value is of a great necessity to production of instructional media.
ii.
Ethics or Moral Philosophy This refers to the philosophy of right conduct and right action.
It classifies man s action and behaviour into either right or wrong by probing and analyzing such actions.
Ethics and Moral philosophy ask questions such as a.
Is it right to steal your uncle s money?
b.
Is it proper to cheat in an Examination?
c. Is it good to damage your school infrastructure?
d. Is it ideal for one to tell lies?
e. Is it proper to take bribe as a public officer?.
People with right ethical values will always conduct themselves well in all aspects of life.
They will always want to act according to the law of the land.
A man with high ethical value will always act according to his conscience.
There are ethical values attached to different disciplines.
For example, there are professional ethics such as military, educational, legal, medical, ethics etc.
84  Members of these professions are expected to practice according to the ethics of the profession.
SELF ASSESSM ENT TEST • You are expected to be able to identify the various branches of philosophy • You should be able to mention the types of knowledge under epistemology and kinds of values under axiology 85  4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, the 3 branches of philosophy have been discussed.
The teacher is expected to show the different types of knowledge and the kinds of values to their students.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discusses the 3 branches of philosophy.
That is, metaphysics epistemology and axiology.
The types of knowledge under metaphysics and kinds of values under axiology ware equally discussed.
Teachers are expected to explain these fully to their students.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Explain the 3 branches of philosophy 2.
Identify the types of knowledge under metaphysics and explain each one of them fully 3.
What is value?
3b.
Discuss the different kinds of values 7.0 REFERENCES Akinpelu, J.A (1985) An Introduction to Philosophy of Education London, Macmillan Publisher Ltd. Bello, J.Y.
(1991) An Introduction to Philosophy Ilorin, Femac Press 86  UNIT 3: SOME EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHERS WITH EMPHASIS ON INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher Marked Assignment (T.M.A) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the unit, we shall examine three educational philosophers which placed emphasis on the use of instructional media.
These include Comenius, Skinners and Maria Montessori.
The contributions of these philosophers to the development and use of instructional media will be explained fully in the unit.
1.2 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain the contributions of the following educational philosophers to the development and use of instructional media i. Comenius ii.
B.F. Skinner iii.
Maria Montessori 87  3.0 MAIN CONTENT There have been several philosophers that have contributed to the development of education.
These include people like Socrates, Herbert, Dewey etc.
Their contributions to the Development of Education is still very unique till today.
In this unit, emphasis will be placed on Comenius, Skinner and Montessori because of their contributions to the development and use of instructional media.
3.2 Some Educational Philosophers These men and women are regarded as educational philosophers because of their contributions to the development of instructional media in different fields of education.
For instance, many of the educational philosophers concentrated on only one or two foundation disciplines in education, such as psychology, sociology or economics and did not treat the whole field of education as one unit.
There are other educational philosophers of note, who over a considerable period of time offered inclusive and unified system of ideas relating to all or most of the main issues of education.
People like John Dewey and Alfred North Whitehead have written inclusively and comprehensively on education.
Some other educational philosophers of note are regarded because of their contributions or theories or new emphasis on the process of education.
These may relate to psychology relating to the pupil or his teacher.
For instance Rousseeau and Frobel charted the stages through which a child matures John Locke or Pestalozzi describes the properties of an ideal educator .
Some other philosophers concerned themselves with general or specific methods of teaching and learning.
This is the field of Comenius with his one sure way of Loyola and the Jesuits, of John Dewey s project method and Herbert whose step were developed into lesson plan of countless courses in pedagogy.
88  3.2 Educational Philosophers with Emphasis on Instructional Media Many of the educational philosophers did very little on the use of teaching aid for teaching and learning.
Except Commenius who made mention of its relevance to teaching and learning specifically.
Some other philosophers whose work could be seen as contribution to the development of teaching aids (now called instructional media, educational media or instructional materials) are B.F. Skinner who developed the teaching machines and Maria Montessori who laid much emphasis on the teaching of the children with graphic and other materials.
i. John Amos Komensky (Comenius ) He was born in 1552 in a small Moravian village near Uhersky Brod.
His father was a man of standing in the small religious sect called Unity of Brethren but more generally known as Moravian Brethren.
His father, mother and two of his three sisters died when he was twelve years old.
When John was sixteen years old he became a candidate of the ministry and his church sent him to the grammar school at Prerov where he proved to be very intelligent and successful scholar.
He was ordained in 1616 after his higher education at the Calvinist Academy of Herborn.
He spent the next two years as an assistant to Bishop Lanechy before getting married.
He left for Northern Moravia after his marriage.
He wrote his major book Opera Didactica Omnia in 1657.
He spent his last years in Holland where he died in 1670.
Comenius advocated for universal education.
He contends that school education is preferable to home education.
He believes that school is necessary since it is seldom that parents have adequate ability or the necessary leisure to instruct their children.
He also advocated that children should be taught together in the same class.
He equally believes that better results and more pleasure are obtainable when one pupil serves as an example and a stimulus for another.
A manuscript work in Latin by Comenius The Pampadia argues that consideratble length, supported freely by texts from the scriptures, that all should be educated irrespective of class, creed, sex or age, in all things and according to their true nature.
All life is to be a school from cradle or even prior, to the grave.
He distinguishes seven stages or schools education.
89  i.
The Antenatal ii.
Infancy iii.
Boyhood iv.
Adolescence v. Youth vi.
Adulthood vii.
Senescence He is of the opinion that death should complete these series of education or stages of learning.
According to Comenius, the first school has its location in the womb, the second stage in every home, the third stage in every village, the forth stage in every town, the fifth stage in every kingdom or province, the sixth stage in the whole world and the seventh stage wherever old men congregate.
The first two may be designated private schools, the middle three pubic schools since they are under the supervision of the church or community; and the last two personal since every man thus far advanced in years is, should be, the architect of his own fortune, and his education is in the hands of himself and of God.
Provision for each stage of life in the way of schools, books and teachers must be made.
A chapter in the Pampadia is devoted to each of these stages.
Rusk and Scotland (1985) asserts that Comenius laid great emphasis on the value of teaching aids.
He would certainly have pressed today for the widest possible use of mass media for teaching and learning .
Based on the assertion of Rusk and Scotland (1985) it is assumed that Comenius is one of the earliest philosophers if not the first to advocate for the use of mass media in the teaching and learning process.
It is upon his earlier assertion that other philosophers, educators and experts carried out further investigations and development in the use of mass media for teaching and learning.
ii.
Burrhus Freedrick Skinner (March 20, 1904 to August 18, 1990) B.F. Skinner was born on March 20, 1904 in Susquehanna, Pennsylvania to Grease and William Skinner.
He is a son of a Lawyer, he attended Hamilton College in New York with the intention of becaming a writer.
He received his B.A.
English Literature 90  in 1926. on graduation he was at his parents home in Scranton, attempting to become a writer of fiction .
He soon become disillusioned with his literacy skills and concluded that he had little world experience and no strong personal perspective from which to write.
Skinner received a PhD from Harvard in 1931, and remained there as a researcher until 1936.
He then taught at the University of Minnesota at Minneapolis and later at Indiana University where he was chair of the psychology department from 1946-1947 before returning to Harvard as a tenured professor in 1948.
He remained at Harvard for the rest of his career.
He died in 1990 and was buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Invention of Teaching Mach ines Teaching machine is one of the earliest instructional media invented.
It was invented by B.F. Skinner.
It is a mechanical invention to automate the task of programmed instruction.
The teaching machine was a mechanical device whose purpose was to administer a curriculum of programmed instruction.
It housed a list of questions, and a mechanism through which the learner could respond to each question.
Upon delivering a correct answer, the learner would be rewarded.
In Europe and America, the introduction of computer technology into education resulted from the invention of teaching.
Machine.
The ideas got from teaching machine were later extended and integrated into programmed learning and now to computer technology in education.
Teaching machine were initially used for testing learning but Skinner laid more emphasis on the programme.
He believed that the teaching machine should not only test, that is, should not only perform an adjunct function to the teacher but should also teach.
Skinner borrowed ideas from his operant conditioning of learning to really organize a programme for teaching.
The machine was thus used to teach this programme and also to test and provide immediate feedback.
91  With the development Skinner brought into the teaching machines, all the teaching, did just three things: a.
Display a stimulus materials b. Accommodation of a response c. Provisions of reinforcements Based on the functions of teaching machines above, it could be detected that there are similarities between the teaching machine and programmed learning.
Infact, programmed learning could be seen as an off-shoot of the concept of teaching machine iii.
Maria Monte ssori Maria Montessori is a medical doctor by profession.
Her parents intended her to be a teacher, but her own preferences were more assertive.
She was seeking a career in engineering.
She went to a Boys Technical High School, but in 1989, at the age of twenty-six, she became the first woman to graduate in medicine from the University of Rome, indeed the first in Italy.
On the staff of the University s Psychiatric clinic, she specialized in working with mentally deficient children.
She was travelling to London and Paris to study the method of Jean Itard and Edward Seguin.
Her two years of success with backward children fostered her interest in general education.
She returned to Rome as a student of philosophy, psychology and anthropology, at the same time assisting on the staff of the City s Training College for women.
In 1904 she become a professor of Anthropology.
Maria Monte ssori Emphasis on Instructional Media The role of Maria Montessori in the development of instructional media could be seen in her efforts to give the best education to the children through her preparatory training.
Her effort in the development of instructional media started in one December when some pupils were playing near the chimney where she was sitting.
She asked a five year old boy who sat beside her to draw a picture of the chimney with a piece of chalk.
The little boy obediently made a rough sketch of the chimney on the tiles which formed the floor of the roof terrace.
Maria Montessori encouraged the boy and 92  praised his work.
After a little time, the child said I can write!
I can write the boy knelt down again and wrote on the pavement the word hand .
He also wrote Chimney and roof .
Later two or three said to Maria Montessori Give me the chalk.
I can write too indeed, they began to write various words such as mama, hand, John, chimney, Ada etc.
These children s ability to draw and write letters is a further development in the field of instructional media.
The teaching of reading is prepared for in the Montessori system by the procedure adopted in the teaching of writing.
Included in the exercises preparatory to writing is word building with sand paper script characters representing the sounds of the spoken word.
According to Montessori, reading demands the inverse process, that is, the reproduction of the sounds into words.
It is also necessary for the correct enunciation of the word for the proper accentuation of the syllables, and this comes only with recognition of the meaning.
She equally said, what I understand by reading is the interpretation of an idea from the written signs and again, until the child reads a transmission of ideas from written words he does not read .
In Montessori system, the didactic material for the lessons in reading consists of slips of paper or cards upon which are written, in clear large script, words and phrase.
In this system also, graphic signs for the numbers are cut in sandpaper, the pupil is taught to associate the names of the numbers with their graphic forms.
The graphic signs are related to the quantity represented.
The use of various sand paper cuts and some other graphic material to teach reading and number in Montessori system can be regarded as Maria Montessori s contribution to the development of instructional media despite the fact that the action is not a deliberate attempt towards the development of instructional media.
93  4.0 CONCLUSION It is very important for you to know the philosophical basis of learning and to equally understand some of the contributions of some of the philosophers that have made their impacts on the development and use of instructional media.
This will serve as basis for your understanding of the place of instructional media in the teaching and learning process.
5.0 SUMMARY In the module, the concept of philosophy has been examined.
The different branches of philosophy such as metaphysics, epistemology and axiology were also discussed.
Under the discussion of epistemology, the different forms of knowledge such as revelation knowledge empirical or scientific knowledge and rational knowledge were adequately explained.
In this unit specifically, the contributions of some of the educational philosophers with emphasis on instructional media such as Comenius, Skinner and Maria Montessori were equally discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Write short notes on the contributions of the following philosophers to the development and use of instructional media: (a) Comenius (b) B.F. Skinner (c) Maria Montessori 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Rusk, R.R.
and Dcotland, J.
(1985) Doctrines of the Great Educators.
London, Macmillan Publishers.
Ltd. 94
