NoneCOURSE GUIDE EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Course Developer Dr. Emmanuel Atanda Adeoye Faculty of Education University of Ilorin, Ilorin Course Writers Dr. Emmanuel Atanda Adeoye Faculty of Education University of Ilorin, Ilorin Course Editor Prof. O. Alaezi Centre for Continuing Education & Workplace Training, NOUN, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. (Mrs) M. E. Aina School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Ms) School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos iiNATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-422-6 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiivTABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………….............… 1 What you will learn in this course.......………………….. 1-2 Course Aims ...........…………………………………...... 2 Course Objectives …………………………………….. 3 Working Through This Course.......……………………… 3 Course Materials.........…………………………............... 3 - 4 Modules and Units ……………...……………………... 4 - 7 Set Text Books ………………………………………….
7 - 8 Assignment File.....……………………………………… 8 Presentation Schedule........……………………………… 8 Assessment................…………………………….....…… 8 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA)…………………...... 8 Final Examination and Grading……………………........ 9 Course Marking Scheme.............……………………….. 9 How to Get The Most From This Course………….......... 9 Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………..... 10 Summary……………………………………................... 10 - 11 vINTRODUCTION From society to society, and from primordial times to the present millennium, human beings have always passed on the knowledge, culture and traditions of their age to the younger ones for two purposes: one, to enable the young ones integrate into the society and two, to ensure the continuity and survival of human society.
What is transmitted, however changes from time to time because society is dynamic.
Man has progressed from a mere fruit gatherer, to a highly successful mechanised farmer growing his own fruits; he has progressed from rubbing two stones together to make fire and light, to producing electricity at thermal stations where fire burns at several thousands of centigrade degrees!
Man has done all this by educating his young ones.
Nowadays, the task of integrating the young ones into the society, which begins from home, is given mainly to schools where professional teachers expose learners to various learning experiences or existing body of knowledge possessed by the society.
In Nigeria, the education of the younger ones has passed through three distinct stages; namely: the pre-colonial, colonial and post-colonial periods respectively.
This means that curriculum, what the learners and teachers do in school, has changed (and is still changing) according to the needs of the society at any particular time.
In these course units, you will get to know how modern curriculum is designed and implemented, and know your place as an agent for curriculum implementation.
THE COURSE What you will learn in this course?
The course you are about to study is titled; “Curriculum Development: Theory and Practice”.
As you read through this material, you will get to understand what curriculum is and the various processes involved in curriculum development.
During the colonial years and because of the focus of colonialists to produce catechists and letter writers, what was taught in Nigerian schools were narrow subjects, consisting mainly of Reading ‘Righting and ‘Rithmetic (The 3 Rs).
Today, the curriculum is wider and more related to the needs of Nigeria in an age of science and technology.
The National Policy on Education (1981) is the most prominent official document produced by Nigerians for the education of the young.
The policy is the blueprint for all educational activities organised for learners under the auspices of the school.
It is the policy that specifies the 6-3-3-4 educational system, premised upon a pragmatic and liberal approach to educating learners.
The objective is to equip all recipients EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE of education at all levels with the necessary tools for living in a modern world.
In this course, you’ll get to know the processes by which curriculum is presented to schools and how it is to be implemented.
Without a curriculum plan, education would be a haphazard and wasteful venture.
For example, before the National Policy on Education was finally introduced, there had been several commissions and committees on Nigerian Education.
The most comprehensive and indigenous of all such efforts, however, was the national curriculum conference, which took place in September, 1969.
In the conference, Nigerians, government officials, educationists and curriculum experts – etc.
all gathered to decide what type of educational programme (or curriculum) Nigeria should give to her schools for educating the learners.
Every other thing being done in Nigerian Education from then on is based on the policy, (or Blueprint for Nigerian education), which is only being revised from time to time to accommodate fresh ideas emanating from its implementation.
Course Aims The overall goal of this course is to enable you see what goes on in the schools as a product of society’s needs, aspirations and expectations.
At the end of the course, you should be able to see and understand how the educative process is conceived and implemented.
You should be able to see that what is done in schools is not haphazard but a carefully, well- thought out plan based upon the needs of the society at any given time.
Course Objectives Specifically, the course is designed to enable you to: • deduce that schools do not just teach what they like but they only carry out what society wants, based upon their needs, desires and aspirations at any given era in their history, • infer that there are principles involved in planning curriculum for schools, • deduce that without a curriculum plan, educating the learners would be a haphazard enterprise, • describe the process of curriculum design and implementation, viiEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE • explain the important need for selecting appropriate curriculum objectives, as well as selection and organisation of learning experiences in order to achieve the objectives, • justify the need for evaluating curriculum using appropriate evaluation devices, and finally, • conclude that having a curriculum plan is sine qua non to correctly educating the young ones in society.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE The course is written in 4 modules subdivided into various units.
It is essential that you understand the fact that the overriding theme of various units in a module is in the title of the module.
The content of each unit is written with great care and it is detailed.
You will need to spend considerable time, in a relaxed atmosphere, to work your way through each unit.
The language has been considerably stepped down to avoid having to make frequent use of your dictionary.
It is simple and readable.
I would advise that you do not rush through each unit, and also avail yourself of the opportunity of attending tutorial classes where you would have the opportunity of comparing notes with your peers.
THE COURSE MATERIALS Apart from this course guide and the study units, which are the main materials for this course, a list of recommended textbooks is provided at the end of each unit.
Although, it is not compulsory for you to purchase these books, they are necessary to provide additional or supplementary information to reinforce what you learn in each unit.
As much as possible therefore, endeavour to get to read some of them, either by purchasing or borrowing from libraries or friends.
MODULES AND UNITS As I said before, the entire course is divided into Modules.
There are four (4) modules, consisting of fourteen (14) units altogether.
Module 1 has 4 units; Module 2 has 3 units; Module 3 has 3 units; Module 4 has 4 units.
The following are the outlines of the study units: Module I: Curriculum: Meaning, Nature, Importance and History of Curriculum Development in Nigeria Unit 1: Basic Concepts in Curriculum This unit explains various meanings of curriculum as presented by experts.
It attempts to let you see the varying conceptions of the word “curriculum” by different scholars.
It allows you therefore to see that viiiEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE the term “curriculum” is not difficult to define but each scholar tends to look at the term from a certain angle.
An attempt has been made to present a holistic definition of curriculum at the end.
Unit 2: History of Curriculum Development in Nigeria This unit traces the history of how the present curriculum being presented for use in Nigerian schools have evolved over time.
The factors, which are responsible for the type of curriculum in use in each era from pre-colonial through the colonial to the immediate post- colonial era, are examined and discussed.
Unit 3: Curriculum Development in a Developing Nation like Nigeria In this unit, you are being exposed to the fact that developing a curriculum in a developing country is dependent on many factors.
These factors are examined in some detail.
Unit 4: An Introduction to Curriculum Development Process: Planning This unit tells you the processes involved in developing a curriculum plan.
Module II: Curriculum Development: Selection of Objectives Unit 1: General Objectives of Education Specifically, this unit describes the general objectives of education; differentiating among “aims”, “objectives” and “goals”.
Unit 2: Selection of Educational Objectives The concern of this unit is to explain the important considerations necessary before educational objectives are selected.
It shows that the objectives which school should attain do not come from the thoughts of one or more expert curriculum planners, but from various interests, groups and societal needs and national philosophy among others.
Unit 3: Curriculum Objectives at Classroom Level This unit is to explain the important issues to be considered in drawing curriculum objectives at classroom level.
Module III: Learning Experiences: Selection and Organisation ixEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Unit 1: Concept Clarifications The first task in this unit is to clarify some concepts such as programme of studies; programme of activities and programme of guidance – all of which are the components of curriculum.
Unit 2: Selecting Learning Experiences: Sources and Selection Criteria The unit explains the important criteria and the sources from which what is taught in schools are obtained.
Unit 3: Organisation of Curriculum OR Learning Experiences This unit describes how curriculum is organised so as to make learning easy.
It shows that learning material must be systematically presented or arranged in some special way to make learning easy.
Module IV: Curriculum Evaluation Unit 1: Concepts, Meanings and Types of Evaluation As in the previous beginning units of a module, concepts are first of all clarified to make comprehension of the facts to follow easier.
So, in this unit, meaning and types of curriculum evaluation are examined.
Unit 2: Curriculum Objectives and Evaluation This unit tries to show the relationship between curriculum objectives and evaluation.
This may be diagrammatically presented as follows: 1 OBJECTIVES 2 3 SELECTION OF ORGANISATION OF CONTENT/MATERIAL CONTENT EVALUATION 4 Thus, it could be seen that the objectives of curriculum are related directly to evaluation.
Unit 3: Evaluation Devices xEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE This unit shows you that appropriate evaluation devices or tools must be fashioned in order to obtain accurate measurement upon which assessment and judgement of whether the objectives are achieved or not, are based.
You are also taught in this unit how to develop a test plan or a test blueprint as a precursor to accurate evaluation.
Unit 4: Uses of Curriculum Evaluation This unit concludes the 4 modules.
It explains the various uses of evaluation, using some case studies for illustration.
You will see at the end of this unit that curriculum should constantly be revised in order to overcome some shortcomings which the evaluation processes may have brought to light.
This is an important use of curriculum evaluation.
TEXTBOOKS Various textbooks have been recommended at the end of each unit.
However, the following should be particularly noted for further reading: Adaralegbe, A. ed.
(1969).
A Philosophy of Education for Nigeria: the proceedings of the National Curriculum Conference, Ibadan; Heinemann Educational Books (Nig.)
Ltd. Alaezi, O.
(1990).
The Nigerian New School Curriculum: Issues and Insights.
Jos: Ehindero Press Ltd. Bishop, G. (1981).
Curriculum Development.
Textbook for Students.
Hong Kong: Macmillan Company.
Daramola, S.O.
(1995).
Curriculum Development in Schools.
Ilorin; Nigeria.
Lekan Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2003) National Policy on Education (4th edition) NERDC; Abuja, Nigeria.
Gronlund, N.E.
(1976).
Measurement and Evaluation in Teaching.
(3rd edition) N. Y. Macmillan Publishing Company.
Onwuka, U. ed.
(1981).
Curriculum Development for Africa: Onisha; Nigeria.
Africana Fep.
Publishers.
Taba, H. (1962).
Curriculum Development.
Theory and Practice.
N. Y., Harcourt, Brace and World Inc. Tanner, D. & Tanner, N. (1980).
Curriculum Development: Theory and Practice.
N.Y., Macmillan Publishing Company.
xiEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Tyler, R.W.
(1971).
Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction: Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Wheeler, D.K.
(1978).
Curriculum Development Press.
London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Assignment File The assignment file will be posted to you in due course.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignment will be found in the Assignment file, itself and later in this course guide in the section on assessment.
Assessment There are two aspects of the assessment of the course.
The first part is the tutor-marked assignments.
The second part is a written examination.
To treat the assignment questions, you should use the knowledge gathered during the course.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutors for formal assessment.
The assignments you submit to your tutors constitute 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will write three-hour examination.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor Marked Assignment There are tutor marked assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments in which case the highest three will be counted.
Each assignment carries 10% of your total course mark.
The assignment questions will be found in the assignment file.
Send the completed assignment to your tutor for formal assessment on or before the indicated deadline.
Final Examination and Grading xiiEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE The final examination constitutes the remaining 70% of the total assessment of the whole course.
You will be informed of the time for the examination.
Course Marking Scheme Assessment Mark All assignments from which the best three 1 Assignments marks will be chosen and used.
Each assignment carries 10% i.e 10 x 3 = 30% 2 Final examination 70% of overall course marks.
3 Total 100% of course marks.
HOW TO GET THE BEST FROM THIS COURSE In Open and Distance Learning, the course materials serve as substitute for university lecturer.
This is one of the advantages of open and distance learning as students can read and work through the designed study materials at their own pace, and at a time and place that suit them most.
Each unit follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction, which acquaints you to the topic, next is the objective of the unit, which allows you to know when you have completed the unit and your guide.
The main body of the unit called the contents guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from set books or from a reading section.
Practical exercises and tutor-marked assignments are given at the end of each topic, which if practiced, will enhance your understanding.
Tutor-Marked Assignment questions are interspersed throughout the units.
If you have questions bothering your mind about the course, contact your tutor through phone, e-mail or any other means as he or she will be willing to assist you at all times.
In addition to this, you are advised to: (1) Read the course guide thoroughly; (2) Read the course outline very well; (3) Organize a study schedule with the help of course overview; (4) Try to adhere strictly to your schedule; (5) Work through the unit and use it to guide your reading; (6) Review the objectives for each unit to confirm that you have achieved them if you are not satisfied consult your tutor; (7) When you are satisfied with a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit, proceed unit by unit through the course xiiiEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule; (8) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the course objectives.
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulty you might encounter, and provide necessary assistance to you during the course.
Your tutor- marked assignment must get to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
These will help you to succeed in this programme.
Prepare your questions before attending the tutorials.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
SUMMARY This course is intended to provide you with the fact that schools do not just teach what they like.
Instead, what learners are exposed to in schools, as learning experiences, are derived from society’s needs and expectations, with well-defined objectives that are evaluated at the end.
It also attempts to broaden your outlook so that you will not understand the word “curriculum” from the narrow conception of school subjects and to understand that no student can be said to have learned anything if the three domains of educational objectives are not taken into consideration.
Developing a curriculum plan, as you can see, is therefore an important exercise in meeting society’s needs and expectation for training her young ones.
xivEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Course Code EDU 201 Course Title Curriculum Development: Theory and Practice Course Developer Dr. Emmanuel Atanda Adeoye Faculty of Education University of Ilorin, Ilorin Course Writer Dr. Emmanuel Atanda Adeoye Faculty of Education University of Ilorin, Ilorin Course Editor Prof. O. Alaezi Centre for Continuing Education & Workplace Training, NOUN, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. (Mrs) M. E. Aina School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Ms) School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xvEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-422-6 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria xviEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Curriculum: Meaning, Nature, Importance and History of Curriculum Development in Nigeria……... 1 Unit 1 Basic Concepts in Curriculum………………….
1-8 Unit 2 History of Curriculum Development in Nigeria……………………….. 9-18 Unit 3 Curriculum Development in a Developing Nation like Nigeria……………….. 19-28 Unit 4 An Introduction to Curriculum Development Process: Planning……………….. 29-40 Module 2 Curriculum Development: Selection of Objectives….. 41 Unit 1 General Objectives of Education……………….
41-55 Unit 2 Selection of Educational Objectives…………… 56-66 Unit 3 Curriculum Objectives at Classroom Level…….
67-77 Module 3 Learning Experiences: Selection and Organisation….
78 Unit 1 Concept Clarifications………………………….
78-86 Unit 2 Selecting Learning Experiences: Sources and Selection Criteria……………………………….
87-96 Unit 3 Organisation of Curriculum OR Learning Experiences…………………………………….
97-106 Module 4 Curriculum Evaluation………………………………... 107 Unit 1 Concepts, Meanings and Types of Evaluation………………………………………107-118 Unit 2 Curriculum Objectives and Evaluation…………119-125 Unit 3 Evaluation Devices…………………………….. 126-135 Unit 4 Uses of Curriculum Evaluation………………... 136-141 .
xviiNoneEDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE MODULE 1 CURRICULUM: MEANING NATURE, IMPORTANCE AND HISTORY OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Basic Concepts in Curriculum Unit 2 History of Curriculum Development in Nigeria Unit 3 Curriculum Development in a Developing Nation like Nigeria Unit 4 An Introduction to Curriculum Development Process: Planning UNIT 1 BASIC CONCEPTS IN CURRICULUM Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Curriculum 3.2 Analysis and Summary of Definition 3.3 Distinctions between Curriculum and other Related Terminologies 3.3.1 Curriculum and Syllabus 3.3.2 Curriculum and Scheme of Work 3.3.3 Curriculum and Course of Study 3.3.4 Curriculum and Note of Lesson 3.4 Purpose of Schools 3.5 Nature of Curriculum in Schools 3.6 Importance of Curriculum in Schools 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Schools exist in society for the main purpose of transmitting existing knowledge, culture and traditions of the society to her learners.
This is necessary in order to ensure the continuity of that society.
From time to time however, members or society are concerned with what the schools are for and what must be taught in the school.
Thus, members of the society do come together to take decisions on what schools teach to the learners.
The totality of the learning experience in schools is what is called “curriculum”.
However, because of varying perspectives from which different people are bound to look at the same things, the term 1EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE “curriculum” has been defined in many different ways by different experts.
In this unit you will be exposed to the basic concepts of curriculum and its nature and importance in schools.
Go ahead and enjoy your study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Explain the purpose of school; b.
Distinguish between the term “curriculum” and other associated terminologies such as “syllabus; scheme of work” “course of study” and lesson note”; c. Explain what is meant by “nature” of the curriculum; d. Explain the importance of curriculum in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Curriculum The word “curriculum” comes from the Latin word “currere”, which means: i.
“to run or to run a course”.
That is, a course of study, which contains a body of subject matter approved for teaching by society in schools.
However, as said earlier, different experts view “curriculum” from perspectives other that the “course of study” definitions.
Here are some of them; ii.
Curriculum is a “structured series of learning outcomes”.
It therefore tries to see curriculum as an “input” which results in a certain “output”.
Another definition says: Curriculum is “an organized set of formal educational or training intentions”.
The emphasis of this view is clearly seen, from the “input” perspectives.
In other words, what the school teaches or intends to teach is organized according to some set rules.
For example, there is a principle which says that what is known should be taught first before proceeding to what is not known.
Another example is the principle that what is simple should be taught first before teaching complex material.
A pupil must learn first by counting concrete objects such as bottle tops- adding and subtracting them, before extrapolating to abstractions and more complex mathematical problems.
2EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE iii.
Curriculum is a “deliberate, systematic and planned attempt undertaken by the school to modify or change the behaviors of the citizens of a particular society”.
iv.
This view appears to be more elaborate in explaining the term “curriculum” than the others.
Although the input-output paradigm is subsumed in this definition it is clear that what the school teaches must be deliberately planned and arranged in a particular way to bring about the desired outcome of changing the citizen’s behaviour.
3.2 Analysis and Summary of the Definitions From the foregoing, it is clear that there is a programme which schools must run in order to properly educate the citizens.
It is therefore a plan, a statement of purpose with a specification of content and methods, in- built with the capacity for evaluation to know whether the purpose has been achieved or not.
This programme which the schools must follow or use has been carefully divided into three namely: i. Programme of studies – the subjects which must be taught in schools such as History, Geography, Economics and Physics.
ii.
Programme of activities – planned and organized out-of – classroom teaching activities which help the learners to neither grow nor mature but are not formal as in classroom teaching setting.
Examples includes getting students to join various clubs and societies in the schools (e.g.
Sports, Historical Clubs, Debating Clubs, Dramatic Society etc)Through these, students learn through the process of socialization, because it is less formally strutted.
iii.
Programme of Guidance – a programme of care for the well being of the learner.
In this programme, professionally – trained helpers are employed to assist the learners achieving self- understanding and self direction necessary for adjustment to school, home and the larger environment.
In specific terms, the counselors assist learners in three major areas: educational, vocational and persona-social.
In educational areas, counselors help learners to take decisions on the right choice of vocational area, counselors assist learners to take decisions on the right choice of vocation or careers.
In the persona-social area, counselors assist learners in handling emotional and psychological problems which may affect their behaviours adversely or prevent them from learning in schools.
3EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE In summary, the term “curriculum” may be said to be a total package of what schools do to make learners become what society expects them to become, namely good citizens, who are not only able to understand or learn certain school subjects, but fully integrated individuals that are able to fit into society and contribute their own quota as well, to the progress of that society.
3.3 Distinction between “Curriculum” and other Related Terminologies 3.3.1 Curriculum and Syllabus Most often people tend to equate the word “syllabus” with Curriculum”.
This should not be so.
As can be understood from explanations already given, curriculum is wider in scope than “syllabus”.
A syllabus is part of a curriculum but it is not the Curriculum.
Syllabus is the content of the school subjects offered in the school, and it is a sub-set of the curriculum.
Such subject includes Mathematics, English Language, Biology and so on.
A syllabus normally contains what students will learn in the various school subjects in a year or for a longer period of schooling leading to certification.
It is a long term plan of work for students.
It is normally prepared by the classroom teachers but a body such as West African Examination Council (WAEC) or the National Examination Council (NECO).
At the university level, the National Universities Commission (NUC) presents syllabi (plural of syllabus) to all Nigerian universities.
3.3.2 Curriculum and Scheme of Work Again, the curriculum of a school is not the scheme of work.
As the name implies, a scheme of work is a break down of the contents of what student are expected to learn in a given period.
In other words, a scheme of work is the systematic arrangement of subject matter and activities within a given time period, such as a term or a semester.
Whatever the learners are expected to learn are broken down into instructional units (which include activities) and are normally prepared by the classroom teacher.
It is usually a guide in planning what is to be done per week over a term or semester and for the three terms or two semesters in an academic year as the case may be.
3.3.3 Curriculum and Course of Study A course of study is an educational programme leading to the award of a certificate at the end of the programme for a particular set of learners.
4EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE For example, a Nigeria Certificate in Education (NCE) is a course of study.
Another example is a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) programme in English, in a Teacher Education programme.
Another example still is the Master of Science Programme (M.Sc.)
in Plant Biology offered in a Faculty of Science in Nigerian Universities.
A course of study therefore refers mainly to a programme of learning that are offered to students – with various course contents – at the end of which they are awarded a certificate indicating the type of course of study they had undergone.
To understand this better, a friend might ask another what course he/she offered at the College or University.
The answer could then be any of the following: a B.A.
Ed course in Language Arts; an NCE course at the College of Education, an M.Sc course in plant Biology etc.
3.3.4 Curriculum and Lesson Note A lesson note (or note of lesson; or lesson plan) is a guide for teachers to assist them in the orderly presentation of a lesson to the learners in order to facilitate learning.
Teachers draw the plan for teaching a particular lesson from the scheme of work.
That is, just as the scheme of work is a breakdown of the syllabus so the lesson note is a breakdown of the scheme of work into daily lessons, which are planned by the teacher.
In this plan, the teacher explains the step by step procedure which he/she would follow in presenting the lesson to the learners.
It usually contains the activities expected of the students as well as the teachers during the period of the lesson.
The lesson note (or note of lesson, or lesson plan) is therefore not “curriculum”.
The classroom is the implementation point of the programme of learning, which is just one of the three major components of the curriculum.
Thus, the lesson note is an important aspect of curriculum implementation, especially the programme of learning component of the curriculum.
3.4 Purpose of School Schools are separated institutions by society for the purpose of transmitting the existing body of knowledge, culture and traditions of the people of a given society to her citizens.
Schools are important because they produce boys and girls, men and women that are prepared to live and be integrated into the society.
Schools provide manpower, as well as training in character and the virtues which society holds dear.
The school is therefore both an agent of stability and change in society.
The educated citizenry produced by schools are expected to go back to the society and contribute to its growth and development.
However, the school cannot carry out this task without having an adequate and appropriate curriculum designed after due consultation with relevant and appropriate members of the society.
Hence the saying that the school and society should both be involved in the curriculum planning process.
5EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.5 Nature of Curriculum in School An expert in curriculum called Tyler (1949) was among the first to suggest four fundamental questions which must be answered when talking about the nature of curriculum in schools: These are: 1.
What educational purpose should the school seek to attain (Objectives); 2.
What educational experiences can be provided to attain these purposes?
(i.e.
the activities, the subject-matter etc); 3.
How can these educational experiences be organized effectively to achieve these purposes?
(e.g.
Teacher-centered or child-centered learning); 4.
How can we determine whether or not the expected objectives have been achieved?
(i.e.
using tests, performance observations and other forms of evaluation).
These four fundamental questions from the core of the curriculum development process.
By its very nature therefore curriculum cannot be said have been presented until objectives, contents evaluation procedures are clearly specified.
This will be further elaborated in upon subsequent units.
3.6 Importance of Curriculum in Schools It is clear from what has been written so far as you can see, that curriculum is the very heart of the school system.
There can be no school if there is no curriculum.
Curriculum is the reason for existence of the school.
Schools develop their own curriculum, sometimes, from existing planned curriculum, in order to meet its own peculiar needs.
For example, in school where truancy is very common, the authorities of the school (which includes the Parents/Teachers Association) may design a package to attract students to school so as to stem the tide of truancy.
As the plan used by the school to implement its educational programmes, curriculum is the very vital software without which building and other facilities, (as well as teachers too) will have nothing to do in the school.
Self Assessment Questions 1.
Explain the term “learning experiences”.
2.
What is the purpose of the school?
6EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.
Make a clear distinction in your own words between curriculum and a. Syllabus b.
Scheme of work c. Course of study d. Lesson note 4.
Would you agree or disagree that any one of the three programmes that make up the term “curriculum” can stand as “the curriculum” of a school?
Give reasons for your answer.
4.0 CONCLUSION The word “curriculum” must be fully understood by educationists so as to avoid confusion which in turn will affect what goes on in schools.
The clarifications that have been made in the unit has cleared the confusions.
Curriculum must be understood from the totality of programmes or learning experiences organized for learners under the auspices of the schools.
Thus, the term curriculum must not be restricted to syllabus, scheme of work or other related terms.
These basic concepts must be understood for meaningful implementation of the school curriculum.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: i) different scholars tend to define curriculum from different perspectives; ii) the distinction between “curriculum” and other related terminologies which are misunderstood as curriculum; iii) the syllabus is a part of the curriculum, but not the curriculum; iv) the scheme of work is a breakdown of the syllabus to meaningful related units of work that are done in aterm or semester; by the teacher; the syllabus is normally presented by a body; v) while the scheme of work is prepared by the teacher the syllabus is normally presented by a body; vi) the note of lesson describes the daily division of the scheme of work into lessons, and the notes prepared by the teaches is an organized plan of how the teacher intends to present the lesson; 7EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE vii) the four fundamental questions that must be answered which explained the nature of curriculum include the why (or purpose), what (content) how (the method) and how we can determine whether the objectives are being achieved or not (evaluation).
viii) Without the curriculum the school cannot exist.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define the term “curriculum” as you understand it; ii.
Distinguish clearly between the syllabus and scheme of work, illustrating your answers with appropriate diagrams; iii.
Explain the importance of curriculum in school iv.
Explain each of the components of curriculum in some detail.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Alazi, O (1990).
The Nigeria New Curriculum: Issue and Insights.
Jos: Ehindero Press Ltd. Bishop, G. (1981) ‘Curriculum development, Textbook for students’ Hong Kong: Macmillan Company.
Johnson, M. (1967) Definitions and models in Curriculum Theory; Education Theory: 17 (1), 125-140.
Onwuka, U.
(1985) Curriculum Development for Africa.
Onitsha: Africana – Feb Pub.
Ltd. Tanner, D. & Tanner N.(1980) Curriculum Development: Theory and Practice.
N.Y. Macmillan Publicity Company.
8EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 2 HISTORY OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT IN NIGERIA Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Curriculum Development in Nigeria 3.2 Reasons for studying the history of curriculum development in Nigeria 3.3 Curriculum Developments during the Pre-Colonial Era 3.4 Curriculum Developments during the Colonial Period 3.5 Curriculum Development During the post Colonial Period 4:0 Conclusion 5:0 Summary 6:0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7:0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you had learnt the meaning and nature of curriculum.
I believe you would have been able to differentiate between “curriculums” and other associated terminologies which usual tend to confuse beginning Students of curriculum.
You would therefore have seen clearly that Curriculum is the totality of the learning experiences organized for students (learners) under the auspices of the school.
So, curriculum is holistic in nature, and “syllabus” “scheme of work” etc are only subsets of the curriculum, as they are only parts of one of the three programmes that make up the curriculum of a school.
In this unit you will learn the history of curriculum development in Nigeria.
So relax as you enjoy your study.
Self Assessment (Review) Questions 1.
Name the three programmes which make up the curriculum of a school.
2.
Explain each of them in some detail.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: a) Explain the reasons for studying the history of curriculum development in Nigeria; 9EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE b) Trace the history of curriculum development in Nigeria from the pre- colonial, colonial and the post-colonial periods respectively; c) Identify the key stakeholders that have been involved in curriculum development in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of Curriculum Development in Nigeria 3.2 Reasons for studying the history of Curriculum Development to Nigeria History is the recording of past events that happen in a community, or nation.
It is a systematic account which shows the course of events in the past events enables people in the present to project into the future, and make better plans for future development of the Community or Nation.
This is possible because the historian tries to present the events recorded concerning people and places in their unbiased form.
The historian highlights important areas of interest, raises important questions on issues and problems, which enable the community members’ guide against past mistakes and make better plans for development in the future.
History can be written about various subjects studied in the school system.
For example, Mathematics historians or Literatures historians can write the history of the development of the different subject offered by the school has a history behind it, and the subject-historian can highlight important issues and problems in the development of the subject area in order to guide curriculum planners to make better plans for the future.
Therefore, the reasons why you need to understand the history of curriculum development in Nigeria may be summarized as follows: • Broadly i.
It help us to see the trends in curriculum development so we can appreciate the level of development in the present; ii.
It helps in learning from mistakes of the past in order to prepare a better curriculum plan for the future; • Specifically iii.
It helps curriculum planners to see what type of education the society had in the past and the purpose it served then; this is useful in helping the planners to design a new curriculum or improve on the existing one in order to meet the needs of the 10EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE present and the future.
For example, Nigeria is part of the rest of the world that are no moving extremely very fast in Science and Technology.
Thus, computer studies are now being included in the school curriculum in order not to disadvantage Nigerian students; iv.
Certain problems and deficiencies of past curricula can be remedied in the new one.
Form example, improvements can be made in the teaching of mathematics to make students enjoy it, as it is currently being discovered that many students fail in mathematics as a result of certain teaching methodologies that need improvement; v. A major objective of Nigerian Education as contained in the National Policy of Education is to build a self-reliant nation with education for citizenship as the cornerstone.
Thus, an appropriate curriculum need to be designed to meet this need, and a look at the curriculum designed in the past, could have helped in that it would have revealed it s inadequacies to meet present needs; vi.
Finally, studying the history of curriculum development can assist planners to produce new materials.
For example, appropriately written textbooks study materials and equivalent, can be produced to replace old materials that may no longer be useful.
Self Assessment Exercise Complete the following sentences with appropriate phrases: 1.
In studying the history of the development in a subject area, e.g.
Mathematics, Curriculum planners can avoid the ………….. of the past, especially in the …………….. of teaching the subject.
2.
History of curriculum development involves the recording of ………….
Effort which can assist in current curriculum development.
3.
Usually subject historians tend to highlight important ………….. and …………….. arising from the operation of the curriculum over the years.
4.
The current focus in Nigerian education is education for ………….. and this is best done by designing appropriate ……….. to achieve this objective.
11EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 5.
Since Nigeria is fast moving away from subsistence farming, new …….
Are now being …………… and ………….
in schools to meet the needs of modern agricultural development.
3.3 Curriculum Development during the Pre-Colonial Era Though Europeans had been coming to Nigeria before the amalgamation of the Northern and Southern Protectorates in 1914, Nigeria had not existed as one single country until 1914.
During the pre-colonial period, educational development depended on the needs of the various nation- states that make up Nigeria today.
Thus, while the people of the then Sokoto caliphate had an educational system which met the needs of the nomadic life style of the cattle rearers, people of the South had as the cornerstone of their education, the development of good character and teaching of 3Rs to produce Sunday school teachers catechists and clerks in the emerging European economy.
During the pre-colonial era, therefore, appropriate curricula development depended largely on the needs of the different communities and nation-states that make up what is now called Nigeria.
In other words, there were no uniform educational objectives, and so no uniform curriculum to meet the varying needs of each community.
Generally, traditional or indigenous education (i.e.
the educational system in operation before the advent of Europeans) had no written curriculum.
The major approach, for achieving the educational objectives was social learning in which a child learns informally in the home, through religious societies/ceremonies, the age-grade system as well as the apprenticeship system to mention few.
Since there were no written syllabi, the child learned through imitation/modeling, the various contents of the curriculum that have been informally designed to produce an integrated citizenry.
In the South Western part of Nigeria (as well as in the other parts) farming was the predominant occupation.
The boy-child learns methods of farming through watching and imitating adult members of the society, especially the father.
The girl- child on the other hand, learned to prepare meals and take care of the men, through the mother.
The curriculum, as said earlier, was not written and there were no formal school system.
However, one major lesson to be learned in indigenous education is that it produced well- integrated citizenry.
The curriculum was appropriate to the needs of the primarily agricultural communities where life was simple.
Moral training was given both at home (by the parents) as well as other adult members of the family and community – again through the informal passing on of knowledge.
The informal methods included word of mouth instruction, story-telling and dramatizations.
Songs and music usually accompany the stories and help to fulfill the affective 12EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE components of the educational objectives.
Skills were also learnt by observing and doing.
Summary You will see therefore that during the pre-colonial period, learning was not structure.
There were no classrooms and designated professionally- trained teachers as we have today.
There was curriculum, i.e.
the learning experiences to which the learners were exposed, but it was not formalized.
Different societies/communities transmit to the younger generation, what was though best for them to become an integrated citizenry i.e.
citizen who would conform to the objectives of their respective societies.
Society was therefore very stable since respect for and imitation of elders was a major content of the unplanned and unwritten curriculum.
3.4 Curriculum Development during the Colonial Period Europeans ( the Portuguese) aired firstly in Benin as far back as the 15th Century and by the nineteenth century, in 1861 Lagos colony was ceded to the British.
In 1914, the Northern and the Southern Protectorates were merged and administered as one entity by the British Government.
This marked the beginning of modern Nigeria.
During the colonial period, the Christian missionaries identified very early that schools would be essential and indispensable.
Their main objective of course, was to evangelize and convert people to Christianity.
They saw that formal education would be very useful so that the new converts would be able to read and understand the Bible.
Also, schools were serving other purposes of the missionaries, as the only few educated Nigerians were being used as interpreters, catechists and servants to the white missionaries.
The curriculum therefore consisted mainly of reading and writing, and later “ Rithmetic (Arithmetic) was introduced to ease the problems of calculation and trade.
When the colonial Government came, following the period of the Missionaries they came in with similar approaches to educating the citizenry, but the objectives were different.
Their main objective was aimed at fulfilling their own political colonization goals.
By 1888, they produced an educational policy document tagged “The First Education Ordinance”.
By 1920, the Phelps Stoke’s Commission was set up precisely in 1920 to critically examine the process of education in Africa.
The Commission came out with a blueprint stressing the need to make education relevant to the needs of the society.
The Commission’s submissions were however later found to be defective as it did not include the need for science subjects and failed to recommend the implementation strategy of vocational and technical education in the 13EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE school curriculum.
Formal schools were established but the curriculum was meant to produce teachers, clerical officers, and middle level administrative officers that would serve the British Colonial master.
Thus, the curriculum during the colonial period was narrow and could not be very useful in the rapid transformation of the country in an age of science and technology.
Cognitive learning (i.e learning which promotes the intellectual functioning) was the main focus.
Brief, the curriculum during the colonial period was “bookish” and imposed some limitations on its recipients.
3.5 Curriculum Development during the Post-Colonial Period Nigeria became an independent country on October 1, 1960, and a full Republic in 1963.
As a young, nation, it became necessary to determine what curriculum should be designed for schools in order to accelerate her growth and development as a nation.
In order to achieve this objective, a team of curriculum experts was invited from Harvard University in the United States of America.
(USA), to examine Nigeria’s educational system and school curriculum that were then in use and make appropriate recommendations.
The findings of the experts were as follows: 1.
The missionaries who introduced formal education the first place, neither followed nor use any written curriculum plan, nor had an educational policy to guide proper curriculum planning.
Each school operated independently in accordance with its own specific needs.
2.
The prescribed leaning activities were old-fashioned and meant to serve the interests of the colonialists.
The Educational objectives and orientation were not applicable to the Nigerian context.
3.
As a pluralistic society, there are peculiar problems in each section of the country.
For example, what was considered important by a group could be irrelevant in another culture?
Besides, the Nigerian Arts and Culture, and Nigerian Languages were neglected.
4.
There were irregularities in the time of opening and closing of the school sessions.
5.
School learning tends to concentrate on mental processes (or cognitive skills) to the detriment of other processes.
6.
There is much emphasis on rote learning and passing of terminal examinations.
14EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE So you would have seen from the foregoing that immediately after independence, Nigeria as a nation had taken up the challenge of nationhood by trying to determine what was best for her citizens.
They found the answer in education, and knew that an appropriate curriculum that would meet the needs and aspirations of her citizens should be designed and implemented.
These teams from the USA were invited as external experts who could make appropriate recommendations.
Thus, a change of the curriculum in Nigerian schools was imminent.
As you would understand later on in subsequent units, curriculum plans are usually reviewed from time to time, or as the need arises.
Curriculum change is always an on-going process.
Curriculum development is therefore NOT static, but dynamic in nature.
This point will further be expatiated upon in subsequent units, but suffice to say for now that these experts made very useful recommendations which, resulted in the new curriculum in which, for example, subject such as Geography and African History were introduced as part of the curriculum.
French Language replaced Latin, and British History, which was a major subject, gave way to African/Nigerian History.
The then, Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC) (now known as Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC), as well as Comparative and Scientific Adaptation Centre (CESAC), were assigned the responsibility of implementing the recommendations of the US experts from Harvard University.
In spite of these changes, and because of the upsurge of interest and global growth and development in Technology, Nigerian’s educational planners did not rest as there was yet another call to revise the curriculum.
The response to this call resulted in the National curriculum Conference held in 1969, out of which has grown a more acceptable National Policy on Education first published in 1977, and is being revised form time to time since then.
It was this document that brought about the educational system now referred to as the 6-3-3-4 system.
Details of this Conference and how the Policy was being implemented would be discussed in a subsequent unit on Curriculum Planning and Implementation Strategies.
Self Assessment Questions 1. Who and what determined what was to be taught in “schools” during the pre-colonial era in Nigeria?
2.
Mention some of the important features of the curriculum during the pre-colonial period.
15EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.
Name or list at least 3 areas in which pre-colonial curriculum development is different from the curriculum during the colonial period.
4.
Immediately after Independence, Nigerians felt the need to change the inherited curriculum from the colonialists.
List at least 3 areas of dissatisfaction with the curriculum designed by the colonialists, which necessitated the need for change.
4.0 CONCLUSION Tracing the history of curriculum development in Nigeria as can be seen already is an important exercise worth doing.
You must have seen that a nation that needs to develop as fast as other nations are developing need to design an appropriate curriculum which will meet her own needs.
The history of curriculum development in Nigeria is an important subject to study as it shows that society learns from the mistakes of the past and takes cognizance of the experience while planning new course of action.
By studying the history, you would have seen that curriculum development is an ongoing exercise as there are always needs for review from time to time.
This is important point to note by curriculum developers as well as students of curriculum design.
The following is a summary of what has been learnt, specifically, in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following major facts: i) That history could be written about various developments in a subject area, e.g in Medicine, in Law and of course in Curriculum Development ii) That studying the history of curriculum development is important as it help curriculum planners to make appropriate changes as the need arises; iii)that new materials can be produced and methodologies can change, in accordance with the growing trend in curriculum development; iv) that curriculum development during the pre-colonial era depended largely on the needs of the different communities and there were no uniform objectives.
The “subjects” were also learnt through observation and doing, as there were no formal schools; 16EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE v) that the curriculum design in use during the colonial period served the need, first of Christian Missionary Evangelists, and the Colonial Government.
Although there were formal schools, the subjects taught only encouraged rote learning and did not emphasize science subjects; vi) that there were clamouring for changes in the immediate post colonial era.
This clamour resulted in the invitation of experts from Harvard University, United States of America, (USA) who highlighted many of the shortcomings of the curriculum inherited from the colonialists and colonial periods have been the communities and the British respectively.
But during the post-colonial era not only Government but also professionals and the average citizen were the stakeholders, who were interested in what went on in the schools.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Explain, in some details, the reasons for studying the history of curriculum development; 2.
Briefly outline the differences in the curriculum designed for use from the pre-colonial to the post-colonial period in Nigeria; 3.
Identify the key stakeholders in curriculum development from the pre-colonial to the immediate post colonial period in Nigeria and comment on their contributions to the development of the curriculum in their respective eras.
7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READING Bishop C. (1989) Curriculum Development: Textbook for students.
Hong Kong: Macmillan Company Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1974) History of Education in Nigeria, Ibadan: Inter Printers Federal Republic of Nigeria, (2003) National policy on Education.
Abuja: NERDC Press Lawton D. (1983) Curriculum Studies and Educational planning, Seven Oaks: Hobber and Hogliton Ibrahim A. J. and Ajayi Y.
A.
(1996) Curriculum Development: Teachers as Curriculum Evaluators.
Ilorin: Gbenle Press Ltd 17EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Osokoya, I. O.
(1995) History and Policy of Education in World Perspective.
Ibadan: AMD Publisher Taiwo C. C. (1986) the Nigerian Educational System: Past, Present and Future, Ikeja; Nelson Pitman Ltd 18EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 3 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY LIKE NIGERIA Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Factors influencing Curriculum Development and Improvement in a developing Country such as Nigeria 3.2 Politics as a factor influencing Curriculum Development in Nigeria 3.2.1 Unemployment Affects Curriculum Development in Nigeria 3.2.2 Self-Assessment Questions 3.2.3 Bureaucratic Delays Influence Curriculum Implementation 3.2.4 Research Influences Curriculum Development 3.2.5 Self-Assessment Questions 3.3 How Nigeria came to have a National Curriculum 3.3.1 Self- Assessment Questions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last visit (i.e.
Unit 2) we saw the trend in curriculum development in Nigeria from pre-colonial to the immediate post-colonial period.
You will have found out that in the pre-colonial and colonial era, curriculum development was based on the needs of either the missionaries or the colonial masters respectively.
But from the immediate past-colonial period, the trend changed, as there were agitations to make the curriculum designed for Nigerian schools relevant to the needs of the society rather than those of the ruling powers.
It is important to understand that what informed this need to agitate for curriculum relevant to the Nigerian society is the desire by Nigerians, then a newly independent African State, to move with the rest of the world in an era or age of science and technology.
As a developing and large African nation, Nigeria occupies a leadership position in the hierarchy among other African nations.
Rapid industralisation of every part of the country seemed to be very paramount in the minds of the new African leaders and the educated citizenry.
To this end, the inherited curriculum from the colonial masters was found to be deficient and the desire for a new one that would meet the desires and aspirations of Nigeria and 19EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Nigerians became very necessary.
In this unit, you will further be exposed to the processes of curriculum development in a developing nation such as Nigeria.
You would see the changes made in the school curriculum by all the three regional governments in Nigeria after independence, and the first attempt to evolve a National policy on Education that was now usable in all parts of the country.
Please relax as you read on.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of working through this unit, you will be able to: (i) explain the factors influencing curriculum development in a developing country such as Nigeria; (ii) explain how a national curriculum for Nigeria came into being.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Factors Influencing Curriculum Development in a Developing Country such as Nigeria Developing a curriculum for use in a developing country such as Nigeria is not an easy task.
This is because in a developing nation, frequent changes take place in the society in many areas including politics, economy and manpower development.
The entire society usually moves gradually from an agrarian, subsistence farming level to one that is scientific and technologically oriented.
This usually necessitates frequent changes in curriculum design.
Thus, many important factors influence curriculum development in a developing nation such as Nigeria.
Some of the most important ones include: Politics research findings; international contacts/influences; Pressures from members of the society, societal and students’ needs and psychodynamic factors.
3.2 Politics as a Factor Influencing Curriculum Development in Nigeria It had been clearly shown that Nigeria’s educational system, which emerged in the immediate post-colonial era was modeled after the British pattern.
The British system of education then placed a levy emphasis on classroom teaching or cognitive learning at the expense of the child’s overall, welfare and personality development.
Thus, cognitive-oriented curriculum was put in place such that learning is regarded as having taken place when the learner is able to regurgitate some facts.
Those who were regarded as scholars then were those who studied literature and the Arts, classics, History, Geography and some 20EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE science subjects.
The struggle for independence and the creation of regional governments in Nigeria led to each regional government in the immediate pre- and post-colonial era to begin to make education a political issue.
Thus, in the old Western Region where the “Action Group” a political party led by late Chief Obafemi Awolowo was in control, education was made free at primary school level.
The curriculum however, did not drastically change, as special emphasis was not placed on science and technology.
The Eastern Region, also in 1962, two years after independence, joined the West in pronouncing also, free education.
In the West however, Yoruba language was taken seriously, as a subject in the school curriculum, so also the East developed Igbo language and the North Hausa language.
The curriculum was therefore influenced to some extent by the politics of the day in each of the then three regional governments of the immediate post-colonial period.
However, when the first Republic collapsed, and a military regime took over under General Yakubu Gowon, the second National Development plan (1970-1974) was published with five principal National Objectives upon which the education, and therefore, the curriculum rested.
These five national objectives were (and still are): (i) a united, strong and self-relent nation; (ii) a great and dynamic economy; (iii) a just an egalitarian society; (iv) a land of bright and full opportunity for all citizens; (v) a free and democratic society.
However, after the 1981-1985 Development Plan, which was the 4th National Development plan, another Government came and changed the nomenclature of Development plans, to a “Rolling Plan” apparently because the objectives of the previous Development Plans were fully achieved.
According to Ibrahim (2003), during the period of “rolling plans”, there were political slogans and jingles with promises, among others, of education for all by the year 2000.
This is yet to materialize even in 2006.
However, this is not to say that Government, especially the current civilian administration which came in 1999 have been making effort to make education available to all.
In fact, the Open University of which thousands of Nigerians are now beneficiaries (and you are one of them) is part of such efforts.
Currently, there is a vision 2010, conceived in all sincerity by the Nigerian Government (FGN, 1997) with the following major objectives: (i) attainment of high literacy rate and qualitative education at all levels; 21EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (ii) accelerated agricultural development to ensure food sufficiency and the provision of raw materials; (iii) full-fledged industrialization programme based largely on local raw materials input to enhance the exportation of manufactured goods; (iv) proper integration of science and technology into our development plans and programmes etc.
This vision of attainable goals for Nigeria to move forward and take her place among the developed nations of the world cannot be attainable without education.
In fact, it is clearly specified in the 4th Edition of the National Policy on Education (NERDC 2003) that “Education in Nigeria is an instrument par excellence for effecting national development”.
It was further specified in the policy that “the country’s educational goals shall be clearly get out in terms of their relevance to the needs of the individual and those of the society in consonance with the realities of our environment and the modern world” (NERDC 2004; 4).
From this statement of intention, the curriculum which the school must make use of was therefore clearly specified.
You should therefore be able to see that in Nigeria, as in other developing nations of the world, curriculum development is often influenced by political development and there polities do affect curriculum development generally.
3.2.1 Unemployment Facets Curriculum Development in Nigeria Many unemployed graduates and youths can be found in Nigeria at present.
The major reason for this could be traced to the kind of education offered before the introduction of the 6-3-3-4 system in 1977.
The kind of curriculum provided at that time conditioned school leavers and graduated from tertiary institutions to seek white-collar jobs.
Therefore the emphasis on liberal (especially liberal Arts) Education, to the disadvantage of vocational and technical education, was responsible for the seriousness of unemployment problem currently witnessed.
This has far reaching implications for the society.
Most of the problems of youth violence, armed robbery, thuggery and ethno-political clashes where youths are found in large numbers, could be traced to the high rate of unemployment among Nigerian youths.
Thus, the educational system, which did not provide adequate opportunity for skill learning and practical experience needed for self-employment and self reliance in 22EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE the curriculum cannot but result in high rate of unemployment among youths.
Vocational/Technical education is a way to equip youths for self- employment, and provide the basis for Nigeria’s technological breakthrough.
This kind of education is a sine qua non (i.e.
very essential and without which economic development can be achieved) to economic development just like in most developed nations of the world.
In short, vocational education provides the following benefits; (i) it reduces unemployment; (ii) it accelerates economic development; (iii) it imparts useful skills in the learner which helps him to become self-employed, and which in turn assist Nigeria to become a self- reliant nation; (iv) it puts Nigeria in the front-line among developed nations of the world; (v) it stimulates creativity and originality in the production of equipment, machinery and other technological tools.
Self-Assessment Questions 1.
Name 3 ways in which politics influence education and curriculum development in Nigeria; 2.
List the five Nigeria’s National goals, which influence Curriculum Development 3.
Enumerate the main focus of vision 2010 in Nigeria.
3.2.2 Bureaucratic delays Influence Curriculum Implementation Bureaucracy is the system by which Government operates.
There are strict laid down rules by which Government must function.
When Government takes decision on Education for example, there are various organs, which will be responsible for its implementation.
The highest of these organs is the Federal Ministry of Education, followed by the State and Local Government equivalents.
There are also Boards and Parastatals.
Each of these had channels of communications and no channel may be jumped.
Sometimes, it takes time before decisions are implemented because of the administration bottlenecks created, some of 23EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE which may even be human factors.
A good example is the 6-3-3-4 system of education introduced in 1977 but which did not start simultaneously in all the States of the Federation.
Also, when commissions were set up to look into the activities of the West African Examination Council (WAEC), before their decisions were implemented, another examination body.
The National Examination Council (NECO) had taken off.
Sometimes also the bureaucratic system is often misapplied by some cannot officials, creating unnecessary delays in implementing Government’s policies for selfish reasons.
The issue of corruption usually manifests in the area of funding and distribution of materials to schools and colleges.
Thus there is a wide gap, resulting in a breach of trust, between policy makers and policy implementers.
This affects curriculum development in that what ought to have been done in the schools were not done or delayed so much that it became outdated by the time it could have been done.
3.2.3 Research Influences Curriculum Development From time to time, educationists and scholars conduct research in education and their findings influence curriculum development to a great extent.
In Nigeria, research is constantly being done and as a developing nation, the research findings are usually incorporated into the curriculum in the schools.
One of the most notable of such research work is the Ife Primary Education Project led by Professor Babs Fafunwa.
The study’s major objective was to prove that if a child is taught in his/her mother tongue, he/she will learn new ideas better than if he/she is taught in a foreign language.
Specifically, the study was directed to the teaching of science and technology subjects in Yoruba while English language, Nigeria’s official language, was the only one taught in English.
According to Fafunwa (1989), the project supported the view that students who were exposed to teaching/learning in the mother tongue demonstrated greater manipulative ability and manual dexterity than their counterparts taught in English Language.
They even were reported to have performed better in English Language than their counterparts who were not exposed to the project.
The project was carried out in Yoruba land and was funded by the Ford Foundation of the United States of America.
The Institute of Education, University of Ife, housed the project, and it was on record that some scientific words normally used in English, were translated into Yoruba, such as “Sayensi” for “Science” and “Komputa” for “Computer”.
The project extended to schools in and around Ile-Ife town where the University was situated.
The findings from this study is still regarded as controversial, especially because an earlier study by the United Nations, Educational, Scientific 24EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) reported in 1953 showed that using any language other than the mother tongue as a medium of instruction damages the development of the child.
However, the Ife Project was successful and instead of damages to the school child’s intellectual development as the UNESCO (1953) study showed, the learners demonstrated greater manipulative skill, manual dexterity and even did better in English Language than those taught in English”.
This type of finding obviously affects curriculum development in that it changes the existing order in the area of language of instruction.
Many other such research findings usually affect curriculum development.
Self-Assessment Exercise Briefly summarise how Bureaucracy and Research Influence Curriculum Development in 2 sentences each.
3.3 How Nigeria came to have a National Curriculum Immediately after Independence, Nigerians began to agitate for an educational system which will serve the needs of individuals and the new Nigerian society.
This was as a result of the desire to become a technologically advanced nation like the developed nations of the world.
Nigerians therefore made a call for curriculum change.
Between September 8th and 17th, 1969, Nigerians from all walks of life converged to change the colonial orientation of Nigeria’s Educational System.
It was a major land work in the history of curriculum development in Nigeria, because prior to that time different parts of Nigeria operated different subsystems of education and the curriculum was not uniformed because Nigeria is a multi-ethnic and multicultural society.
The task was how to sort out and incorporate into the curriculum what would make Nigeria as a nation great, but without losing sight of the multicultural dimension.
For example, in an attempt to foster oneness in the multicultural nation, the language of the major tribes (Igbo, Hausa, Yoruba) were also to be taught in the tribes other than the tribe of origin of the learner.
The 1969 Curriculum Conference was attend by every member of each of the strata of the Nigerian Society: Medical Doctors, Artisans, Priests; Parents; Labour Unions; Legal Practitioners; Experts in Education; Teachers, Students, Engineers as well as representatives of the Ministry of Education and Businessmen.
However, foreign observers mainly from Europe and United States of America were present to share their experiences.
The Conference proceedings were edited by Professor Adeniji Adaralegbe and was published in a book form under the title “A Philosophy for Nigerian Education”.
Thus, is was the first time 25EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Nigerian would give unto themselves an educational system and curriculum that is solely a product of their own thinking as to what kind of society must Nigeria be, and what kind of educational system and curriculum must be put in place to attain the objectives.
In the discussion, seven (7) major educational aspects of the conference them and nine (9) specific decision area were identified as crucial to the attainment of conference objective.
The nine decision areas are: 1.
To have a National Philosophy of Education; 2.
To specify the goals of Primary Education; 3.
Goals of Secondary Education; 4.
Goals of Tertiary Education; 5.
The role of Teacher Education; 6.
Functions of Science and Technical Education; 7.
Women Education; 8.
Education for living; 9.
Control of Public Education.
In summary, the decision taken at this Conference eventually led to the publication of a National Policy on Education in 1977, which is basic to the provision of educational programmes in Nigerian schools at all levels till today.
An analysis of the policy would be a major subject of study in subsequent units.
Suffice it to say for now that as a result of the Policy, Nigeria now has a uniform system throughout the country, which is 6 years of Primary school, 6 years of Secondary school (until a division into Junior/Senior Secondary) and a Tertiary Education of 4 years, especially at the University level.
This abolished the differences at the various regions permanently.
Self-Assessment Exercises 1.
Explain why Nigerian from all walks of life has to attend the first post independence National Curriculum Conference (5 sentences only).
2.
Mention two major changes, which the conference brought to bear upon Nigerian Education.
3.
Lists the main decision areas of the 1969 National Curriculum Conference.
26EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, two major areas covered were factors influencing curriculum development and how a national curriculum for Nigeria came into being.
It would be seen that the task of developing a curriculum for use in a developing nation is not an easy one.
Several factors come into play and some of these have been discussed in the unit.
So what the schools are expected to do is not decided by the school personnel alone, as can be seen in this unit.
It is the task for everyone in the society.
It is the society members who determine what goes into the curriculum in schools, but the experts are important in the areas of research input into the decision-making and in the implementation of the curriculum.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: 1. several factors influence for the development of what learning experiences the school should expose learners to; (this is called curriculum development); 2. these factors include, among others, politics or political development; unemployment, bureaucracy and funding, and research findings; 3. the society can determine what is taught in schools as well as the type of educational system a nation wants.
The 1969 Curriculum Conference attests to this view; and 4.
Curriculum Development in a developing and cultural society such as Nigeria can be a complex process.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain how the Ife Primary Education Project influences Curriculum Development in Nigeria; 2.
Discuss how political influences can positively or negatively influence Curriculum Development in a developing country using Nigeria as a case study; 3.
Summarize how the National Policy on Education (1977) came into existence 27EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Adaralegbe, A.
(ed) (1969).
A Philosophy of Education for Nigeria: The National Curriculum Conference.
Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books (Nig.)
Ltd. Alazi, O.
(1990).
The Nigerian New School Curriculum: Issues and Insights.
Jos: Ehindero Press Ltd. Daramola, S.O.
(1995).
Curriculum Development in schools.
Ilorin, Nigeria:.
Lekan Press Fafunwa, B.
(1989).
“The Ife Primary Education Project,” in Nigerian Journal of Guidance and Counselling, Ilorin.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1977) National Policy on Education; Lagos, NERDC Press Federal Republic of Nigeria (2003) National Policy on Education (4th ed); NERDC, Abuja, Nigeria.
Ibrahim, A.I.
(2003) Principles of Curriculum: Planning and Implementation; Ilorin; Tajudeen Press.
Onwuka, Uga (1981) Curriculum Development for Africa.
Onitsha, Nigeria; Africana-rep Publications 28EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 4 AN INTRODUCTION TO CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT PROCESS: PLANNING Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Models of Curriculum Planning 3.1.1 Tyler’s Model 3.1.1a Explanation of Tyler’s Model of Curriculum Planning 3.1.1b Comments on Tyler’s Model 3:2 Wheelers Model 3:3 Taba’s model 3.4 General Principles of Curriculum Planning 3.5 Types of Curriculum 3.5 Formal Curriculum 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are processes involved in developing a curriculum.
In previous units, you would have been seen that to develop a curriculum in a nation is an ardous task involving several factors.
However, when the various contributions have been made by members of the society and decisions have been taken, it is now the turn of curriculum experts to put the ideas together and present a curriculum which would be in use in that society.
In doing this, there are processes involved.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the various processes experts use in developing a curriculum, scholars present various types and models of curriculum design, and these models need to be studied so that reasons guiding the selection of certain designs are known and understood.
It is my belief that, as usual, you will find this unit an interesting reading.
29EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES Just as in previous units, objectives are being specified in this unit to provide for you a focus and what is expected of you to have learnt by the end of the unit.
Basically therefore, the following are the objectives of this unit.
In other words, by the end of this unit, you would be able to: (i) explain each of the models of curriculum design presented; (ii) distinguish among the various models of curriculum design; (iii) explain the various types or classification of curriculum; (iv) distinguish among the various classifications (or types) of curriculum; (v) general principles of curriculum planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Models of Curriculum Planning In discussing the various models of curriculum planning, it is necessary for you to understand what is meant by a model.
Let me illustrate with the production of a motor car by various Car Manufacturing Companies.
First, all cars are connected together to facilitate movement.
While for example the car must have an engine to drive it, the engine has components such as piston/rings, engine block and engine seat, carburetor/injector as the case may be, a cooling system, etc.
Then, it must have the wheels to drive with controlled by a steering/steering rack, and of course a chassis etc.
Now, these are basic things, but there are variation of a car both in shape, size, colour, and arrangements of the internal construction system.
However, before one care type is produced, a model of it is first presented, usually small toy-like thing before the real big car that can contain p[people are produced.
Although there are different models of the same type e.g.
Mercedes Benz has various models, there are also various models of different types of cars, but all of them (whether Mercedes, Volvo, Toyota etc.)
go by the name “car” because the basic elements of what is called a car are in them.
30EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Self Assessment Exercise: What makes a car different from a bus or a truck?
Another illustration is the prototype of houses, which are being built at present by different Housing prototypes of a one-bedroom, two- bedroom or three bedroom bungalows.
These prototypes are models of the real houses.
When built, it would be exactly as the model presented, and as there are different house-models, all go by the name house.
This exactly what a curriculum model is all about.
There are some basic components or elements, which are combined together to make what is what is called “curriculum”.
Each part is connected to the other and without one, the others may not exist nor will what is presented be called “curriculum” so, a curriculum model consists of elements, which are in essence series of activities that are connected such that the whole is called “curriculum”.
A curriculum model therefore is a presentation of a design upon which curriculum planning is based.
In other words, there are series of steps to be taken in curriculum planning and each of these steps are connected and in series.
A complete series is a curriculum model or design, but there are different types of complete series that are called models.
So planning the curriculum therefore, the experts may prefer one model to another and vice versa.
In this unit, three important models will be discussed.
3.1.1 Tyler’s Model One of the earliest and well-known curriculum experts is Ralph Tyler.
According to him (Tyler,1971), in a planning curriculum, four basic questions must be answered.
The answers to these questions represent a design or a model for curriculum planning.
That is, anyone who must design a plan a curriculum must consider his model based on answers to the four questions, which are: 1.
What educational purpose(s) must the school seek to attain?
(i.e what are the ends being sought or objectives for educating the learners in the society?
2.
What educational experiences must be provided to attain these purposes or objectives (i.e.
the school subjects, activities or general content of the learning experiences) 3.
How can the educational experiences be effectively organized to achieve the objects?
(This includes personnel (teachers, etc.)
to be involved, and the instructional materials to be used and the methods etc).
31EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 4.
How can we determine whether or not the expected objectives are attained or being attained?
(This deals with the use tests, examinations and other methods of evaluation).
Fig.
1 Pictorial Presentation of Tyler’s Model Selection of Selection of Evaluation Organisation Aims and Learning of of Content Objectives Experiences Objectives 3.1.1 a) Explanation of Tylers’ Model of Curriculum Planning As can be seen from Figure 1,Tylers’ Model is linear.
The first component in the series is the Selection or Determination of Aims and Objectives.
In other words, why should the learners be exposed to the learning experiences?
What is the outcome expected as a result of the exposure to the learning experiences?
This outcome may be in terms of general society’s expectation for schools as well as specific outcomes of acquiring new skills, new knowledge or information by the learner.
At the second level, Tyler suggests that certain learning experiences must be selected to achieve the objectives specified.
Again there are important questions to be raised here, such as what are the criteria for selecting certain learning experiences and not selecting another?
This will be a subject of discussing in a subsequent unit.
Suffice it to say for now that this second level is important in that the school subjects and the co-curricula activities that will be crucial to the attainment of the objectives are selected at this point.
Thirdly, Tyler’s model suggests that what has been selected should be organized and coordinated if the objectives must be achieved.
This is a very important point because if various school subjects are outlined who would put them to use and with what materials will be content be imparted unto the learners.
Obviously, the content, the curricular content and activities cannot put themselves to use.
Teachers, after personnel and materials must be properly organized to get the contents taught.
The final stage is the evaluation.
Here, Tyler suggests that the curriculum planner must be interested in whether the curriculum objectives are being achieved or not.
So, he said that all the three components before evaluation experiences must be evaluated to see whether they have achieved their purposes or not.
32EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.1.2 b) Comments on Tyler’s Model Tyler suggests that the objectives must be clearly stated in behavoral terms.
That is, the objectives should be stated in terms of measurable and observable outcomes.
He was of the opinion that the curriculum objectives dictate the direction in which the other elements in the process would logically follow.
The emphasis of this model therefore is the statement of objectives behaviourally so that it may be measurable.
His major contribution to the curriculum planning process is the introduction into curriculum vocabulary what is now known as Behavioural Objectives.
In spite of Tyler’s contributions, his model of curriculum planning was severely criticized on the following grounds: (i) it present curriculum planning in a linear form, without showing the interconnected dress of the process; (ii) Each pf the elements are being presented as of they are discreet categories that is, as if there is no relationship among them; (iii) It presents evaluation, the fourth step, as a terminal point.
However, in spite of these criticisms, Tyler’s model has made a significant contribution to the field of curriculum development as it provides the foundation upon which others made improvement to the curriculum planning process.
3.2 Wheeler’s Model Another scholar who contributed to curriculum development is wheeler (1967).
He presented his model in his book curriculum process.
He seemed to further build upon the work of Tyler (1971) by presenting a model that shows the interrelatedness of each of the elements.
He argued that each step are interconnected and that evaluation can take place at any place in the development process, rather than at the last step.
Wheeler’s emphasis is an learning experiences, whereas Tyler’s was on learning outcome.
Wheeler’s major concern was how the learner will be provided with an opportunity to interact with the learning environment in order to bring about learning.
These are the major differences between Tyler and wheeler’s models.
Wheeler’s model consists of the following five steps, instead of four proposed by Tyler: (i) Determination of aims and objectives: The objective tell the planner the direction of educational development and forms the basis foe distinguishing between learning resulting from 33EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE classroom environment and learning resulting from other sources than the classroom.
Thus, in specifying objectives, wheeler goes a step further in specifying between what is learnt in the classroom and outside it respectively.
This leads to the second step; (ii) Selection of Learning Experiences: This is a major difference from Tyler’s model.
Here, wheeler is concerned with the learner and the learning environment with which he interacts.
For example, what kind of learning environment is provided for the learner involved in mental activities as opposed to those involved in physical activities such as in playing writing and construction projects; (iii) Selection of Content: This involves the preparation of content; the subject to be taught and the topics to be specified; (iv) Organisation and Interpretation of Learning Experience: This is as in Tyler’s model; (v) Evaluation: In this model, evaluation is considered as a broad concept, not in terms of paper and pencil tests.
It is something that can take place at any stage of the curriculum process, with the outcomes serving again as input into further development of the step.
Hence his model is considered cyclic and not linear like Tyler.
Fig 2 Wheeler’s Cyclic Model of the Curriculum Aims and Objectives Selection of aims and objectives Evaluation Selection of learning experiences Selection of Content Organisation and Integration of Learning experience Figure 2 show that wheelers model is cyclic.
At the last point of Tyler’s linear mode is evaluation, but evaluation does not end the process in wheeler’s model.
For him, evaluation results are ploughed back into selection of aims and objectives, so that the areas where the objectives 34EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE are not achieved are considered in selecting the next set of objectives.
Similarly, where the objectives are fully achieved, (which is not likely), the results of evaluation helps in determination fresh curriculum objectives.
Wheeler’s model may therefore be considered an improvement upon Tyler’s previous model and both of them have made significant contribution into the field of curriculum planning.
Self Assessment Questions 1.
Write down three clear differences between Tyler’s and Wheelers model of curriculum planning; 2.
How would you explain a model of curriculum planning?
3.3 Taba’s Model Taba (1962) also presented a cyclic model of curriculum planning and added additional elements.
Taba also built upon Tyler’s (1971) model.
The major contribution of this model is the attempt to bridge the gap between theory and practice.
She (i.e.
Taba) presented a seven step process of curriculum planning as follows: (i) Diagnosis of need (or needs assessment); (ii) Formulation of objective; (iii) Selection of content; (iv) Organisation of content; (v) Selection of learning experiences (methods/Activities; (vi) Organisation of learning experiences (Methods/ Activities); (vii) Determination of what to evaluate and ways and means of doing it.
In the model, as can be seen Taba had gone on to further modify the cyclic model, by adding two more steps.
One emphasizes the importance of diagnosing needs before formulating objectives – this is a kind of evaluation even as a first step in the design such that the needs identified formed the basis for stating objectives.
She also specified the ways and methods of carrying the evaluation at step seven such that it may be both summative and formative.
Much will be done on this in subsequent visits, towards the end of the entire course.
35EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Self Assessment Exercise Think of and write down five different questions, which can be used as a diagnosis of need before formulating curriculum objectives as in Taba’s model.
3.4 General Principles of Curriculum Planning Daramola (1995) suggests certain general principles of curriculum planning which seen to incorporate all the models already discussed.
These general principles are as follows: (i) Principle of Validity: The curriculum designed is as valid of it provides appropriate learning experiences towards a set objectives and capable of effecting the desired change in the behaviour patterns of the learner.
In other words, the curriculum is valid when the learning experiences provided is actually capable of achieving the objectives specified; (ii) Principle of Comprehensiveness: This deals with the scope of learning experiences provided.
For example do the learning experiences lead to the acquisition of various skills; e.g.
intellectual skills, motor skills, social skills and aesthetic capabilities.
In other words, the curriculum must not provide for intellectual development alone without catering for other aspects of the learner; that is to say the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains of educational objectives must be taken into consideration.
This will be thoroughly examined in the next unit; (iii) Principle of Variety: Curriculum planners are urged to include varied and wide range of experiences in the curriculum content.
The experiences to which learners are exposed should be diversified, not restricted to only on variety alone e.g.
classroom teaching alone when field experiences would offer a better variety; (iv) Principle of Suitability: The point being made here is that the age and level of the development of the learner must be taken into consideration so that learning experiences may not be above or below their level of understanding.
Foe example, what should be taught at Secondary school level should not be taught at kindergarten classes and vice-versa; (v) Principle of Relevance: The learning experiences selected must be suitably applicable to the learners’ daily experiences.
36EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Self Assessment Questions 1.
What are the general principles of curriculum planning?
2.
Do you think anyone of these principles is more important than others?
Give reasons for your answer.
3.5 Types of Curriculum When we talk about types of curriculum, the concern is no longer a concern for design but in what ways curriculum can be classified.
The issue of classification came about because scholars usually think of ways to make things clear in order to avoid confusion.
The word curriculum is a concept, it is subject to various interpretations and definitions.
However, do not forget that whatever is said about curriculum, the word still refers to the TOTAL EXPERIENCE used by the school in educating the citizens of the society.
But because some experts see differently, the issue of typology (classification into types) had to come up as a way to explain those other aspects of the curriculum that are already subsumed within the TOTAL LEARNING EXPERIENCE a child is exposed to.
For example, children learn some things outside the classroom where there are no structured subjects and timetables and whatever a child is exposed to and is learnt is also “curriculum”, so this type of curriculum had to be classified.
This is the essence of this segment, and although more will be written about this when we set the unit an “organization” of the curriculum, yet it is necessary to have an introduction to it at this point.
Two main types of curriculum that are presented here are: Formal/official curriculum and Informal/hidden curriculum.
(i) Formal Curriculum This deals with the subject offered in schools.
It is formal because all the are done are specified by Ministries of Education according to certain rules and regulations, with a formal testing or evaluation programme to find out if learning has taken place.
(ii) Informal Curriculum This is also called “hidden curriculum because students learn rather unconsciously in this type.
What is done are not specified with detailed or elaborate procedures as in form curriculum.
For example, students learn to speak good English and organize ideas participate in the Literary and Debating Society’s activities in the school.
Thus, such students associations, clubs and societies, which are out of classroom 37EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE activities, provide avenues for students to learn for example, social/interpersonal relationship skills, values and norms of the society, and correct attitudes and behaviours generally expected of learners throughout the educational process.
Self-Assessment Exercise: Would you say that there is any difference between Formal/Informal Curriculum and programme of studies/programme of activities?
Table 1: Major Difference between Formal/Informal and Informal/Hidden Curriculum S/N FORMAL/OFFICIAL INFORMAL/HIDDEN 1.
Learning intentions or objectives Learning objectives or intentions are formally stated are not formally stated.
They are implied.
2.
Learning activities are usually Learning activities are not included in the Teaching Time- included in the Teaching Time Table Table 3.
It involves subject matter offered It involves outdoor activities such in schools as Home Economics, as sports, quiz competitions, clubs Geography, Mathematics etc.
and associations etc.
4 Activities are most indoors e.g.
Activities are mostly outdoors.
classrooms, Laboratories etc.
5.
Experts (Teachers), Textbooks and This is initiated by the school other published materials are used authority according to situations to promote learning and there are no specific textbooks etc.
to promote learning.
6.
Evaluation is done by the teacher Evaluation is done by everyone including the staff coordinators and the students.
7.
Learning is generally under formal Learning is informal and and structured activity unstructured.
5 learners pick up what is to be learnt informally.
From Table 1 it would be seen that the hidden curriculum is so called only and simply because learning does not take place according to some prescribed modes.
Rather students learn unconsciously or informally, and such learning tends to be more permanent.
Other ways by curriculum is classified exist and this will be further elaborated upon in subsequent units.
38EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you would have learnt that curriculum development is done by experts when curriculum decisions have been taken by all the stakeholders concerned with the education of the citizens of the society.
You would also have seen that the experts develop the curriculum according to certain patterns or models, which they consider appropriate, and also following certain principles.
These principles are necessary in order to ensure that the curriculum eventually presented is balanced.
You will therefore have learnt the developing a curriculum is an interesting exercise, but can only be done by trained experts.
I hope you have enjoyed studying the unit.
The self-assessment question, I believe, have helped you to remember what you have learnt in the unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: (i) That the curriculum is designed or planned according to certain models with the model chosen depending on rationale which the experts have carefully considered; (ii) That the model provided by Tyler (1949) was a foundational one upon which subsequent curriculum experts have built over the years; (iii) That the cyclic model seems more advantageous than the linear one presented by Tyler; (iv) That expert still try to clarify the concept curriculum, through a classification into formal/informal/official or hidden curriculum; (v) That certain general principles are important to follow if a curriculum developer wants to do a serious/thorough work.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT i) Explain with the aid of diagrams, the three models of curriculum development discussed in this study; ii) Explain the similarities inherent in the classification of curriculum into formal/informal and programme of studies and programme of activities, studied earlier.
39EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Daramola, S.O.
(1995).
Curriculum Development in Schools, Ilorin, Nigeria.
Lekan Press.
Ibrahim, A.I.
and Aljassan, S.B.
(2003).
Curriculum Development and Classroom Instruction.
Ilorin, Nigeria.
Tajudeen Press.
Onwuka, U.
(1981).
Curriculum Development for Africa, Onitsha, Nigeria.
Africana Fep.
Pub.
Taba, H. (1962).
Curriculum Development: Theory and Practice N.Y: Harcourt, Brace and World Inc. Tyler, R.W.
(1971).
Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction; Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Wheeler, D.K.
(1978).
Curriculum Development Process.
London: Hodder and Stoughton.
40EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE MODULE 2 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: SELECTION OF OBJECTIVES Unit 1 General Objectives of Education Unit 2 Selection of Educational Objectives Unit 3 Curriculum Objectives at Classroom Level UNIT 1 GENERAL OBJECTIVES OF EDUCATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 General Objective of Education 3.2 Differences among “aims”, “objectives” and “goals” 3.3 Functions of Objectives 3.4 General Objectives of Education: The Three Domain of Education Objectives 3.5 Levels of Curriculum Planning with Respect of Objectives 3.6 Aims and Objectives of Nigerians Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Unit Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is important to know where one is going before setting out.
Educational objectives are descriptions of the ends being sought in educating learners in the society.
In other words, one might ask, “What are the general objective (or ends sought) for schools to be established and for what purpose are students being taught in the schools”?
While objectives may vary from society to society, there are general objectives of education that are normally being pursued in all societies.
In this unit, you are going to understand first, the differences among the words “aim” “objectives” and “goals”.
Thereafter, the general educational objectives will be clearly specified and discussed.
You will in fact discover by the end of this unit that it cannot be possible to develop a curriculum without first specifying the objectives, which of course must have its roots in the general objectives of Education.
41EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES Specifically, by the end of this unit, you would be able to: (i) Differentiate among “aims” “objectives” and “goals” as concepts in Education; (ii) Explain the general objectives of education in the three domains of educational objectives; (iii) Differentiate among the three domains of education objectives namely cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains; (iv) Explain the aims and objectives of Nigeria Education.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1General Objectives of Education 3.2 Differences among “Aims” “Objectives” and “Goals” These three terms are similar in that they all describe the ends being sought, in this case for education.
However, they are different in terms of period to achieve them and the general or specific things to be done, as the case may be.
(i) Aims: This is a statement of a general outcome or change expected in a learner after being exposed to learning experiences.
“Aim” is a word that describes a rather long-term, overall purpose which educating the learner is expected to serve.
Aims are rather open-ended statements of goals reachable but after a long time or in a distant future.
It is a general but realizable statement of intention of the purpose of schooling, a purpose which is expected to continue even well after the learner has left school.
Definitely, the aims of education vary from one culture to another and the understanding of the concept of education held by the curriculum planner.
Aims therefore connote the general intentions of what the school is expected to achieve in the learner after a period of schooling.
It is therefore an umbrella terminology for describing in general terms all of what purpose the school is supposed to serve in society with her values and needs being included in the statement.
42EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Examples of aims of education include: a) To develop the individual into a sound and effective citizen; b) To fully integrate the individual into the community.
These two examples show all the characteristics of aims of education e.g.
a) broad statement (not specific statements) b) long term but reachable goal; c) general intentions of what purpose society expects schools to fulfill; d) an umbrella terminology e) culture-specific.
(ii) Objectives: Educational objectives are descriptions of an outcome of action.
It is normally expressed in behavioural terms using action verbs.
Objectives are therefore more specific than “aims” and are also more action oriented.
This is to say that, while aims tend to describe a philosophy of education, objectives specify what is intended as observable and measurable, action- oriented statement of intention of an educational programme.
Another way of saying this is that while aims of education are broad, general and non-desired, objectives specify certain knowledge, skills, techniques or attitudes process.
There are two categories of educational objectives: a) Those which describe the school-wide outcomes, usually referred to as general objectives; b) Those which described behaviours to be attained and are usually referred to as specific objectives, (Onyike, 1985).
Specific objectives are usually recognised from the following types of question: “What will the learners be doing at the end of a course of instruction”?)
You will have seen therefore that specific objectives are derived from general objectives.
In general objectives, school-wide statements of what learners are expected to have become (i.e.
what general changes of behaviours are expected from learners) are expressed; but, specific objectives is a further breakdown of 43EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE what changes are expected from learners by the end of a course of instruction which have been designed for the attainment of the general objectives.
Let us look at the following examples from the National Policy of Education (NERDC, 2003:9).
The purpose of pre-primary education shall be to: a) effect a smooth transition from home to school; b) prepare the child for the primary level of education; c) Inculcate social norms.
The statements in a, b, and c above are general school wide objectives.
They are clear statements of intentions, but they are general.
From “c”, above, specific objectives relating to the course of instruction that are intended to be used to “inculcate social norms” must be stated.
Suppose folk tales were to be used to “inculcate social norms”?
A specific objective for this might be stated as follows: By the end of the story telling exercise the learners are expected to: (i) list the characteristics of a good citizen; (ii) explain at least two of such characteristics, (iii) without looking at their books; describe how they will put the characteristics into use within the society.
So, you will by now have seen clearly the differences between general and specific objectives.
Note that three components are identifiable in the statement of specific objectives namely: (a) An identifiable behaviour outcome of instruction, e.g.
to “list” or “explain” characteristics of a good citizen; (b)Condition under which the behaviours are expected to occur; e.g.
“explain … two of such characteristics without looking at their books”; (c) The standard level of acceptable performance by describing how well the learner must perform before he/she is regarded as having learnt.
In the example, the learners are expected to explain at least two of the characteristics.
So, the standard level of acceptable performance is the explanation of at least TWO of the characteristics of a good citizen!
44EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE These three components of behavioural objectives (as it is called) must be present in statements of specific objectives.
Have you noticed that action verbs are used in stating objectives of a course of instruction?
Such action verbs in the example above include, “list”, “explain”, “describe”.
They show what the learners will be doing by the end of the course of instruction!!
iii.
Goals: Educational Goals refer to an end in sight, which is sometimes time-bound.
They are similar to objectives, especially general objectives of schooling.
Goals may be interchangeably used with general objectives.
In the National Policy on Education, (NERDC, 2003), educational goals are specified for each level of schooling from pre-primary education to higher education levels.
That goals are time-bound could therefore be seen clearly from what is stated as expected end-result of schooling at each level of Nigerian education.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Write down one statement each which describes “aim”, “objective” and “goals” of education; 2.
Write a behavioural objective which specifies the three important components (for a course of instruction in your subject area).
3.3 Functions of Objectives Onyike (1985) describes the following functions of educational objectives.
(a) Defining the Direction of Educational Development: Objectives serve to distinguish good educational outcomes which children, teachers, parents and the society are striving to achieve.
They describe two things mainly; (i) What the learner is trying to achieve; (ii) What the educational programme is trying to achieve.
If you look back at the examples of objectives earlier given in this unit, you would discover these two major functions of objectives.
(b) Objectives help select content desirable learning experiences: 45EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE When objectives are clearly stated, it is easy for teachers and learners to select what learning experiences are to be used to accomplish the objectives.
Various subject areas have very vast areas of knowledge.
Stating what one wants before setting off on a learning experience helps in choosing from among the various vast areas of knowledge that are available to teachers and students; (c) Objectives help in knowing what to evaluate by the end of an exposure to a learning experience: Evaluation is judgement.
It is the judgement of how adequately the educational programme is achieving or has achieved the purpose for which it is meant.
When objectives are stated from the beginning it makes evaluation accurate so that wrong judgement is not made about the success or otherwise of the educational programme.
Thus, the programme of evaluation, reporting and promotion in the school should be dependent on the availability of a statement of objectives”, (Onyike 1985).
If objectives are not stated, evaluation may be faulty or the bases of that evaluation are not known.
Such evaluation reports may not be useful for anyone as there are no bases for it.
From the foregoing, you would have seen that it is important for teachers especially to understand how to state classroom objectives.
You would also have seen that objectives may be stated for an entire education programme (e.g.
what is to be achieved at the end of primary level education) or the end of an exposure to a learning experience within a school year, semester or term, or within a period of classroom instruction.
3.4 General Objectives of Education: the Three Domains of Educational Objectives In translating educational policies and general aims of education into objectives, curriculum experts normally take into consideration the various aspects of the learners’ growth to ensure that these are represented in the statement of objectives.
In other words, objectives are not narrow but comprehensive enough to cover the three major classifications (or Domains) of educational objectives.
These three domains are known as Cognitive, Affective and Psychomotor domains of educational objectives respectively.
Each of these domains stand for the three important aspects of every learner’s growth, for example, the cognitive domain describes intellectual and mental abilities that are developed in the learner; the affective domain describes the development in the area of learners’ feelings and emotions, while the 46EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE psychomotor domain describes the development of the learners’ physical skills and abilities.
Thus, each time objectives of education are stated, these three areas: cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains are usually taken into consideration in order to ensure balanced development, especially at the instructional level which is the last stage in curriculum implementation.
Another name educator’s call this classification of objectives is Taxonomy of Educational Objectives e.g.
Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives.
Each domain has sub- categories or levels, which shall be explained presently: (a) Cognitive Domain There are six levels of the taxonomy in the cognitive domain.
A scholar known as Benjamin Bloom and his associates was the first to divide the cognitive domain into six levels namely; 1.
Knowledge 2.
Comprehensive (understanding) 3.
Application 4.
Analysis 5.
Synthesis 6.
Evaluation.
Let me explain these, though you will study them in detail at the last module of the entire course under curriculum evaluation.
Knowledge level implies that in developing mental or intellectual learning in a child/student/teacher, such a learner must first possess the facts.
This is the lowest level of learning.
To know that the learner possesses the facts of the lesson taught, a curriculum evaluator asks him questions on recall of the facts e.g.
list two characteristics of living things” Comprehension Level (Understanding) At this level, the learner does not jus demonstrate, the mental ability to recall the facts, but also is able to explain by making possible comparisons of the facts with other facts.
For example: “Okptai, the characteristics of living things”.
“Translate the following English words into Yoruba”.
Application: Here the learner is expected to be able to make use of the facts he has recalled and explained in the previous levels to solve specific problems.
For example, a student/learner may have ability to recall and explain a mathematical formular, but at application 47EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE level, he is expected to be able to use the formula to solve specific problem/equations Analysis The learner at this level is being expected to be able to explain the relationship between one thing and another, or explain the composition of an element.
Analysis means, put or “pull the parts apart” so one can see what elements it is composed of.
An example is: “Composition of gas”.
This will be done by analyzing the component parts and their percentages.
Synthesis This simply means putting together the parts of a thing as to form a distinct whole.
It is a higher level of mental processes.
It involves the ability of the learner to put facts together, to compose new knowledge etc.
The simplest example is in the writing of a composition by a student.
Such a student may be given an outline, but it is his/her duty to put the facts together and compose meaning from them.
Another example is composition in music, poetry etc.
It is applicable to all subjects, Science, Social Sciences or the Arts.
Education This is the highest level in the development of the cognitive or mental processes in the learner.
This involves ability to make judgments.
The learner will have to decide here the value of the pieces of ideas he/she has learnt.
It is an appraisal based on two main criteria: internal criteria or external criteria.
For example, a candidate in an examination will have to decide (or judge) which of the methods of performing on operation in mathematics will more suitable for solving the current problem.
(b) Affective Domain This domain deals with developing learners feelings and emotions, especially in modifying their attitudes towards things and persons.
It also deals with interests, appreciations and modes of adjustment (Ndubisi 1985).
Some level of cognitive is involved in development of feelings emotions and attitudes.
For example, learners can only develop what they know or perceive, conceive and think.
However, unlike the cognitive domain, the affective domain has five levels which comprise the following: 1.
Receiving 48EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.
Responding 3.
Valuing 4.
Organisation 5.
Characterisation by a value or value complex The affective domain was developed by a man called David Krathwohl.
The appropriate way to describe it is “Taxonomy of Educational Objectives in the Affective Domain”.
Now let me explain to you what each level means: 1.
Receiving: This refers to willingness to attend to or listen to a given stimuli.
For example, before one can develop a feeling of or emotion of courage, one may have to be willing to watch a movie or listen to a story of the courageous exploit of someone else.
This is the first level in the inculcation of a spirit of courage in a learner; 2.
Responding:This refers to the response that comes from the learner as a result of attending to or receiving stimuli presented.
As in the example given, the learner could respond to the story in various ways e.g.
staying through the story while it is being told, etc.
3.
Valuing: This refers to the acceptance of the value being taught as ‘courage’, ‘honesty’, by the learner.
It is an internalizing process involving accepting the value to one that is contrary to it, and commitment to live the value.
For example, having received and responded positively to, say, a story telling lesson on “honesty is the best policy”, the learner may internalize or imbibe the value, preferring it to any other opposed to it, and be ready/willing to commit himself to living the value of honesty; 4.
Organising/Organisation: This is the bringing together of different values and organising them into a value system which eventually leads to character formation.
In other words, this level is important in that the learner is able to put together different values of honesty, perseverance, handwork and organize them into a value system that may result in producing in him/her, the character expected of a good citizen; 5.
Characterisation by a value or value Complex: This is the last stage and the final or end result of what learners is expected to become as a result of exposure to the learning material in the affective domain.
It is expected at this stage that the learner’s behaviour would have been modified or his/her attitude changed 49EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE for the better, and that the new behaviour learnt becomes a permanent feature or aspect of his/her character.
(d) Psychomotor Domain This domain deals with physical skills training.
It involves getting learner to coordinate the hand, eye and ear in such a skillful way as to result in the performance of certain motor skills.
Such physical skills may include playing games such as football, tennis etc.
Great dribblers in football such as the world renowned Diego Maradona or Nigeria’s Austin “JayJay” Okocha, or people involved in acrobatics, or a racing cars etc.
are people who have developed great manufacturer/physical dexterities Music performers, drummers, saxophonists etc.
combine great physical/manual dexterity with aesthetics to produce great music.
All these belong to the psychomotor domain of educational objectives, and as you can see from the illustrations, it is a performance objective but combines elements of both the cognitive and affective processes.
In other words, both the mental as well as emotional (feelings) processes are involved in psychomotor objectives.
For example, the great football dribblers use their intelligence, combined with their love for football in learning various “dribbling” skills, which are put to use on the field of play.
This domain was developed by Anita Harrow in 1972.
Like the cognitive domain, the psychomotor domain of educational objectives has six levels.
These six levels are: 1.
Reflex movement 2.
Basic fundamental movements 3.
Perceptual abilities 4.
Physical abilities 5.
Skilled movements 6.
Non-discursive communication These are briefly explained below: (1) Reflex Movements: This pertains to movements that are as a result of biological reflex actions, e.g.
a person automatically closes his eyes when an insect is flying towards his eyes.
This is the lowest level of movement controlled by biological instincts; (2) Basic Fundamental movements: Performing complicated dance steps, for example, involve certain basic movements which must be learnt first.
To play tennis well, involved a combination of 50EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE various movements which cannot be learnt all at once, but step by step from the basic/fundamental component parts of the complex movements; (3) Perceptual Abilities: This involves the combination of perception, a mental process, in learning physical skills; (4) Physical Abilities: To perform physical abilities, physical skills training are necessary, e.g.
the development of muscles through certain physical fitness exercise; (5) Skilled Movements: This involves learning or combining various basic movements into a pattern that becomes a skill; (6) Non-Discursive Communication: The body can be used to communicate, i.e.
they include movements which are learnt for communication purposes using the body.
The body has a language, the body can speak.
Actors learn how to use their bodies to communicate feelings or other messages.
Summary on the Domains of Educational Objectives It has been shown that educational objectives have three major domains or are classified into three major domains.
This had implication for teaching (Instruction) as well as evaluation.
This will be studied in the unit on curriculum evaluation in some detail.
Suffice it to know for now that all three objecting must be involved in stating objectives at classroom or teaching level.
3.5 Levels of Curriculum Planning with Respect to Objectives As was learnt in previous units, curriculum planning is done at many levels depending on the society.
Three main levels are however clearly distinguishable in Nigeria, although there can be more than three.
The three basic levels are: (i) National level; (ii) Other intermediate level; (iii) Classroom level.
(i) National Level: An example of planning at National level is the national curriculum conference of 1969, which had already been studies in previous units.
Various segments of the society come together to decide what purpose the schools must fulfill in the society.
Educational decisions at this level became crystalised 51EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE into the National Policy on Education where broad goals of education in Nigeria had been spelt out for various levels of schooling; (ii) Intermediate Levels: This includes all levels where curriculum is planned before the classroom level.
Here, communities may specify objectives relating to special needs of members of the communities, though these objectives are generally in line with the objectives already specified at National levels.
Also, different States in Nigeria may specify educational objectives to handle specific needs.
Even at School level, educational objectives can be specified to meet certain needs of students in the school; (iii) Classroom Level: This is where educational objectives at any level before this are implemented.
The teacher is the main actor at the classroom level.
He is the one who will carefully breakdown broad educational objectives into specific instructional objectives indicating the behaviours expected of learners at the end of instruction.
This level will be studied further in the last module on curriculum evaluation.
Self Assessment Questions 1.
What are the functions of educational objectives?
2.
List the six levels of both the cognitive and psychomotor domains of education objectives; 3.
At what level are broad curriculum objectives are translated into specific objectives?
4.
Explain the differences among the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains of educational objectives.
3.6 Aims and Objectives of Nigerian Education The aims and objectives of Nigerian Education are contained in the National Policy on education; a document that was first published in 1977 and is being revised every now and then since then.
According to the 4th edition published in 2003 by the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) the aims and objectives of Nigerian Education are tied to Nigeria’s philosophy of education as follows: (a) The development of the individual into a sound and effective citizen; (b)The full integration of the individual into the community and 52EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (c) The provision of equal access to educational opportunities for all citizens of the country at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels both inside and outside the formal school system.
In sub-section 6 of Section 1 of the document, it was specified that education in Nigeria has to be geared towards self-realization, better human relationship, individual and national efficiency, effective citizenship, national consciousness, national unit as well as towards social, cultural, economic, political scientific and technological progress.
In sub-section 7 of Section 1, four main national educational goals which tend to incorporate the various desires of the planners on what education is expected to achieve in learners, are clearly specified as follows: (a) The inculcation of national consciousness and national unity; (b) The inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society; (c) The training of the mind in the understanding of the world around; and (d) The acquisition of appropriate skills and the development of mental, physical and social abilities and competencies as equipment for the individual to live in and contribute to the development of his society.
Consequent upon these broad nation education goals for Nigeria, the planners specified in Section 1 sub-section 8, the objectives expected to be achieved with the quality of instruction as follows: (a) Respect for the worth and dignity of the individual; (b) Faith in man’s ability to make rational decisions; (c) Moral and spiritual principles in interpersonal and human relations; (d) Shared responsibility for the common good of society; (e) Promotion of the physical, emotional and psychological development of all children; and (f) Acquisition of competencies necessary foe self-reliance.
53EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE You will see from all these that a Nation does formulate broad goals which are results of decisions taken by several sub-groups which cut across the various strata of society.
You will also have seen that a nation gives unto herself the kind of education that she thinks will best meet her society’s as well as the needs of individuals within that society.
You will need to buy for yourself a copy of the National Policy on Education and study it.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you would have discovered that stating educational objectives are very important because it assists educational planners to know the direction of the education of her citizens.
You would also have learnt that educational objectives at the National levels are broad statements of goals and that every segment of a society are involved in the process of formulating objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY I believe you have learnt very useful facts about educational objectives in this unit.
Specifically, you must have learnt the following: (i) Meaning and differences among “aims”, “objectives” and “goals” of education; (ii) The educational objectives oat the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domain; (iii) The different levels of each of the domains of educational objectives; (iv) The levels of curriculum planning in relation to formulating objectives; and (v) The aims and objectives of Nigerian Education.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain each of the six levels of educational objectives in the cognitive domain; 2.
Get a copy of the National Policy on Education and revise the objectives of primary and secondary schools levels in Nigeria; 3.
Explain the imp0ortance of the major objectives of secondary education as contained in the National Policy on Education 54EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Bloom, B.S.
et al (1971) Handbook on Formative and Summative Evaluation of Learning.
N.Y. McGraw Hill Book Company Ibrahim, A.I.
and Alhassan, S.B.
(2003) Curriculum Development and Classroom Instruction.
: Ilorin: Tajudeen88 Press Harrow, A.J.
(1972) A Taxonomy of the Psychomotor Domain N.Y. David McKay Co. Inc. Krathwohl, D.R.
et al (1970) Taxonomy of Educational Objectives.London: Longman Group Ltd. Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) 2003.
National Policy on Education.
Abuja : Federal Government Press Onwuka, U.
(ed) 1985.
Curriculum Development for Africa:.
Onitsha, Nigeria: Africana – Rep Pub, Ltd. Onyike, I.O.
(1985) “Steps in Curriculum Development”In, Onwuka, U.
(ed) 1985.
Curriculum Development for Africa: Onitsha: Nigeria.
Africana -Rep Pub Ltd. 55EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 2 SELECTING EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Selecting Educational Objectives: Important Considerations 3.2 Needs Assessment as a Prerequisite for Selecting Objectives 3.3 (i) Students’ needs and interests (ii) Students’ needs and Interests (iii) Input from academic specialists (iv) Community Sources of Educational Objectives 3.4 Psychodynamic factors as sources of Curriculum Objectives 3.4.1 General Implications of the Piagetian Theory of Cognitive Development for Education of the Child 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall from what you have learnt in previous units that the first step in curriculum panning or development is the formulation of appropriate objectives.
You will also recall from the last unit you studied, that educational objectives are broad statements of goals or ends being sought after a period of schooling.
Finally, you will also recall that educational objectives can be stated at different levels of curriculum planning, the last of which is the classroom level.
Now, in this unit, our major concern is how are educational objectives derived?
What are the things considered in selecting broad goals of education, which later are translated into curriculum objectives at the classroom level?
In this unit, you will find answers to the questions raised.
You will understand how educational objectives are derived in some detail, so relax and enjoy your study.
56EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES By end of this unit you would be able to: (i) Describe what is meant by needs assessment and how this is done; (ii) Explain how the outcome of needs assessment of a society are translated into curriculum objectives; (iii) Explain how curriculum objectives are derived from society needs; (iv) Explain how other factors such as national philosophy, student needs and interest, teachers and academic specialist, and psychodynamics factors/result from psychology of learning, influence the formulation of curriculum objectives.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Selecting Educational Objectives: Important Considerations 3.2 Needs Assessment as a Prerequisite for Selecting Objectives An assessment is an evaluation procedure to determine decisions to be taken on any enterprise.
An assessment of needs therefore is an evaluation of what is required in society in educating the learners.
In other to conduct good needs assessment, a validated method of collecting data on opinions of various segment of the society are required; such data are found useful when they are done experts in curriculum planning.
Such information or data are good sources of curriculum objectives.
A few areas from where data could be obtained for selecting educational objectives include the following: (i) Societal Needs/National philosophy (ii) Student Needs and Interest (iii) Academic specialists (iv) Study of community Needs (v) Psychology factors 57EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (i) Societal Need/National Philosophy: The needs of every nation differs from one another, similarly, the needs of a nation at any point in history differs from another period in her history.
In previous units, you have learnt the different needs of the Nigerian society across three eras namely, the pre-colonial, colonial and immediate post-colonial era.
However, the needs of society keep changing.
These needs are usually stated as ideologies, value system or a national philosophy.
For any programme to make an impact, it must reflect the values/beliefs or philosophy of nation.
In the National Policy on Education (4th edition) for example, Nigeria’s National philosophy have been expressly stated.
In fact in section 1 sub- section 1, it was clearly stated that ‘no policy on education-can be formulated without first identifying the overall philosophy and goal of the nation’.
Thereafter, it is stated in sub-section 2 (a) and (b) that the overall philosophy of Nigeria is to: (a) Live in unity and harmony as one indivisible, democratic, indissoluble, and sovereign nation founded on the principles of freedom, equality and justice; (b) Promote inter-African solidarity and world peace through understanding.
Thus, the overall philosophy is translated into fine main national goals which are the buildings of: (a) A free and democratic society; (b)A just and egalitarian society; (c) A united, strong and self-reliant nation; (d)A great and dynamic economy; (e) A land full of bright opportunities for all citizens Therefore, it is quite clear from the forgoing that no curriculum planner can ignore these cardinal goals of a nation while formulating curriculum objectives, especially because education is a major tool for realizing national goals.
It is pertinent to know, for example that Nigeria’s major national priority is to live in unity and harmony as one indivisible, indissoluble, democratic nation founded on the principles of freedom, equality and justice.
If education is a major tool for achieving, this, then educational objectives need to be formulated to achieve the overall philosophy of the Nigerian nation.
Nigeria’s national philosophy 58EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE of course could not have been formulated in a vacuum, but as a result of certain economic, social and political background experiences of the Nigerian nation.
It is because of these important needs in every society that has prompted some experts to advocate that curriculum should be society-oriented.
Thus, the educational objectives of the Nigerian nation are directly related to the needs of Nigerian society.
In the previous unit you would remember that the objectives of Nigeria’s education were presented.
This has been based on the overall national philosophy of the Nigerian nation, from her needs based on her political, economic, social and even religions background and experiences.
(ii) Students’ Needs and Interests: Consideration for the learner’s needs and dispositions are very crucial in selecting curriculum objectives.
A survey of the learners’ needs can be carried out through a study of the past learning situations and examination results.
This would go a long way to help in deciding objectives that are achievable and of course the contents of the discipline that are to be included in the curriculum.
Formulating objectives in line with the needs and interests of learners assists curriculum planners to produce the desired results, because appropriate content, based on the objectives, are selected.
Learners can make very useful contributions in formulating curriculum objectives, in the following ways: (a) Suggesting what is to be taught in line with their needs, interests, maturation and background; (b) Suggesting what materials will best enhance effective leaning.
Taking the learners into consideration before formulating curriculum objectives is the view of “progressives” or people who advanced progressive ideas on education.
They included educational philosophers such as John Dewey and Maria Montessori.
(iii) Input from Academic Specialist: Subject specialists are also very crucial in formulating curriculum objectives because they are the ones to implement all school programmes.
Subject specialists are teachers whose roles are vital 59EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE because they interact with learners and they know their needs better than other personnel.
Teachers’ responsibilities extend beyond the classroom because they exert tremendous influence over the learners.
The also act as in loco parent is for students.
They therefore know students well and can give advice or suggestions on various ways to adequately educate the learners.
They are therefore very much relevant in formulating curriculum objectives and policy on education even at that level.
Generally speaking, teachers are expected to play the following roles in curriculum planning; (a) Assist in formulating curriculum objectives and policy; (b) Selection and determination of learning activities that will be necessary for the achievement of the stated objectives; (c) Use their knowledge of complex nature of child psychology and children development in planning learning activities; (d) Maintain high standard of conduct and discipline as an effort towards meeting the goals of education; (e) Carry out the evaluation of student performance which are useful in formulating future curriculum objectives.
Thus, teachers as subject-matter specialists are expected to put in their best because of the belief that it is through the subject- matter that society can effect philosophical and psychological changes in the learner.
This is the view of ‘Essentials’, a school of thought in education is to inculcate discipline of the mind.
In formulating educational objectives, therefore, such philosophical though or views need to be considered.
(iv) Community Sources of Educational Objectives: A community is a group of people living together in a given geographical area, and sharing common culture and a way of life, and acting collectively towards achieving a common goal.
Of course, it is expedient that a school teaches the norms and values of the community where it is situated.
So, in formulating curriculum objectives, community advisory groups might be set to present proposal based on the peculiar problems and experiences of community members.
These are then ploughed into the curriculum objectives being specified especially curriculum planning at the community level.
60EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE There are community resources available in educating a child.
Such resources include input form parent, input from certain vocational groups, and suing field trips as important aids to learning.
In the National Policy on Education, (2003), part of the objectives and policy statement on secondary education, include the fact that the ‘junior secondary school shall be planed as neighborhood schools’.
In section 4 sub-section 20d, it is also stated that secondary education shall ‘develop and promote Nigerian languages, art and culture in the context of the world’s cultural heritage’.
Certainly community input in formulating educational objectives cannot be overemphasized in fulfilling these general national objectives of education at community level.
Onyike (1985) strongly suggested that Nigerians culture should be thoroughly analysed and taken into account in formulating objectives.
He opined that it is important to analyse those ways of thinking and behaving, teaching and acting that is peculiarly related to our cultural ways of life.
He maintained that these have values in our society.
It is from the community that these cultural ways of life can be sourced and so the community values, especially those ones that are in line with standard world moral codes, should be made part of the educational objectives at even national levels.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
List at least five at least five community values from your locality and incorporate them into the secondary school curriculum objectives at your community/local level.
That is to say: translate those values into statement of objectives.
2.
List some of the ways in which society’s needs and interest are important in formulating curriculum objectives.
3.3 Psychodynamic factors as sources of curriculum objectives Before a child can learn appropriately, he must adequately develop physically and mentally.
Thus, the complex nature of child development has implication for curriculum planning even from the selection of objectives.
Educational Psychologists have made significant contributions through their studies, into the factors which influence learning.
As Onyike (1985) puts, it, ‘the consideration of the child underlies curriculum planning’.
An English educational philosopher known as John Locke stimulated investigation into how children learn.
He posited that the human mind 61EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE is a tabula rasa (bank tablet) that merely registers what come into it from both experience and its own workings as it deals with material sensation.
In other words, this great philosopher believed that every child is born into the world with a mind blank as a white sheet of paper and merely ‘register impressions that come to it from the outside world through sensory receptors’, (Smith, 1963).
This idea was interpreted to mean that the child is in no position to contribute to his own education and therefore he is a passive agent.
It is therefore believed that the child only needs to be ‘filled’ or ‘fed’ with knowledge and there was no need to consult them with respect to what they need to learn.
However, his ideas were rejected but it provided an impetus for further ideas about how children learn.
Modern psychology has broadened and modified perspectives on how children learn.
For example, the principle of biological inheritance and Intelligent Quotients (IQ) can set a limit to how much a child can learn.
In such a case, there will be need to cater for individual differences in ability to learn when developing curriculum.
Another issue is the issue of readiness, maturation and learning.
Here the age of the learner has considerable influence on what or how much be can learn.
Again until a child’s cognitive development reaches a certain point which corresponds with certain ages, the child may not be able to learn certain materials.
Thus, before selecting curriculum objectives, all these factors must be taken into consideration, especially because of the realization that the objectives much be realizable or attainable to be regarded as good curriculum objectives.
Jean Piaget, a renowned educational psychologist, propounded a theory of cognitive development which supports the view that educational or curriculum objectives trust be formulated with due consideration for the age of the learner, if the objectives must be attainable.
He proposed that cognitive development in a human being takes place at four levels or stages as follows: 1st Stage: Sensor Motor Stage (0-2 years) Piaget postulated that a child at this stage of life relies more on the five physical senses of seeing, hearing, touching (or feeling), smelling and tasting to explore his environment.
The child’s activities at this stage appear to be more of reflex actions.
Thus, the child cries, grasps, and sucks activities which he performs without involving thinking or mental processes.
62EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE At this stage, they cannot learn any ideas, so it is wasteful and indeed useless to design a curriculum with objectives for any serious cognitive learning.
Learning here is only by reflex.
2nd Stage: Pre-operational Stage (age 2-7 years) At this stage the child has developed further than merely responding to his environment by reflex.
He could understand better shapes and sizes, but he could not grasp such important concept as conservation or reversibility yet.
Dolls stand for babies in their conceptualization.
The child is preoccupied with himself and no one else.
It is self-centered, as adult may say.
At this stage, the child is still not capable of learning ideas.
This usually falls within the pre-primary school year.
3rd Stage: Concrete Operations (7-11 years) Children at this stage can grasp and apply basic concepts but only when they have concrete materials to work with.
This period falls within the primary school period.
At this stage children can describe rather than explain what they see or what operate in their environment.
A classical illustration is here presented: Fig 1: Illustration of Concrete Operations - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - A B A glass of juice (1 pint) A glass of juice (1 pint) Now, when children at this stage had to pick the glass with more juice, they tend to pick Glass A.
They cannot understand that the contents are the same, but the glass which appear longer (or taller) seem to contain more juice.
This is concrete operations.
Children at this stage know only what they see; they cannot extrapolate ideas.
Designing a 63EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE curriculum for them would involve selecting objectives that are appropriate to their ages.
4th Stage: Formal Operation: (11 years and above) At this state, the child is capable of understanding ideas.
They can begin to do logical things and can work with abstract symbols.
This period usually begin with the onset of adolescence.
Although the child’s thinking may not be as deep as the adults, it begins to resemble it.
So, from this stage, curriculum objectives that would task children’s logical thinking can begin to be formulated.
3.3.1 General Implication of the Piagetian Theory of Cognitive development for Education the child 1.
Children’s ages must be considered when selecting curriculum objectives.
Objectives are intended but attainable learning outcomes.
Any objectives that will be impossible to achieve should not be stated at all as it constitute a mere waste of time, energy and resources when trying to put it to work; 2.
In selecting instructional materials, which again are guided by curriculum objectives, the level of cognitive development as already presented by the Piaget is an important consideration.
Children at the concrete stage of cognitive development, for example, would learn better using appropriate concrete learning materials.
Let me suggest a statement of objective for you that will take this point into considerations; “By the end of the lesson, the pupils would be able to subtract 19 from 26, using appropriate counters that are provide”.
Now, note that the counters are the instructional materials and they have been built into the statement of objectives.
Suppose an objective such as the next one below is stated.
“By the end of the lesson the pupil would be able to subtract 19 from 26”.
What do you think is wrong with this statement of objectives in a primary one mathematics class?
3.
The idea that a child’s basis of interpreting natural phenomenon is usually different that of adults should be considered so that teachers 64EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE should learn to communicate with learners according to the level of their development and age; 4.
The factor of individual differences, already established by psychologists, should be considered when selecting objectives and when planning curriculum generally.
There is need to give individuals work to be done according to their level and capacity.
In summary, knowledge from the field of psychology has been proved to be useful in curriculum planning, and especially relevant in formulating curriculum objectives.
Self Assessment Questions 1.
Without looking at the study material, describe Piaget’s theory of cognitive development; 2.
Explain the general implication of this theory to curriculum planning, especially in formulating objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION Selecting curriculum objectives, as can be seen from what you have studied so far, involves efforts.
Curriculum planners do not just sit down, and out of the figment of their imaginations, begin to draw statements of objectives.
The effort put into selecting appropriate objectives is therefore necessary because it is what guides the selection of appropriate learning content and materials as will be seen in subsequent units.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: (i) The meaning of needs assessment and its important in selecting curriculum objectives; (ii) The fact that this assessment is carried out by experts, or at least, coordinated by them; (iii) That it is the outcome of needs assessment that are transformed into curriculum objectives; 65EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (iv) That the needs of Nigerian have been articulated as a national philosophy and this forms the bedrock of formulating national educational objectives; (v) That other needs include those of the learners themselves, input of curriculum experts as well as psychodynamic factors, and that; (vi) Each of these have influence on curriculum objectives selected; (vii) That curriculum objective would be meaningless, irrelevant and useless if it does not take cognizance of these inputs.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Get yourself a copy of the National Policy on Education and itemize the national objectives for Secondary and Technical Education pointing out the input from the National philosophy of Nigeria in formulating the objectives; 2.
Explain the importance of psychodynamic factors in selecting curriculum objectives.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Alexander, W. M and Saylor, J. G. Planning Curriculum for schools (M.
A.)
N. Y. Holt Ibrhim, A. I and Alhassan, S. B.
(2003) Curriculum Development and Classroom Instruction: Ilorin: Tajudeen Press.
Ibrahim, A. I. and Ajayi, Y.
A.
(1996).
Curriculum Development Teachers as Curriculum Evaluators.
Ilorin: Gbenle Press.
Onwuka, U (1985 Curriculum Development for Africa Onitsha: Africana Pub Ltd Ltd. Fep Onyike, I. O.
(1985) Steps in Curriculum Development.
In Onwuka, U.
(Ed.)
Curriculum Development for Africa Onitsha: Africana Fep Pub Ltd. Piaget, J. and Inhelder, B.
(1958).
The Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolecence.
London: Rontledge Kegan Paul.
66EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 3 CURRICULUM OBJECTIVES AT CLASSROOM LEVEL Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The teacher as important personnel in Curriculum Implementation 3.2 Function of the Classroom teacher in Selecting Objectives 3.2.1 Learner’s entry behaviour 3.2.2 Selecting of Objectives based on new knowledge 3.2.3 Selection of objectives at Classroom level based on practical applicability 3.2.4 Selecting Objectives at Classroom level based on practical applicability 3.3 How to state objectives at classroom level 3.4 Functions of Objectives at Classroom level 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Unit Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit we discussed important considerations for selecting educational objectives at national and community levels, and only made passing references to classroom level objectives while discussing the piagetian theory of cognitive development.
In this unit, our focus is on classroom level objectives and it shall be discussed in some detail.
First of all, you will realize that the most important curriculum expert at classroom level is the classroom teacher.
He is the last “bus-stop” so to say, in curriculum implementation.
You will therefore agree with me that his role is very important in making a success of the efforts of Curriculum Planners.
So, in this unit, focus shall be on the teacher and his function is selecting curriculum objectives at classroom level.
As usual, I suggest that you prepare yourself very well for another interesting study.
67EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you will be able to: 1. state the functions of the classroom teacher in implementing curriculum plans at classroom level; 2. explain important considerations for selecting classroom objectives by the teacher; 3. discuss the functions of objectives at classroom level; and 4. state objectives at the classroom level accurately.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Teacher as an important Personnel in Curriculum Implementation The teacher is the most important single factor in curriculum implementation.
When curriculum planners have put in their best to present a curriculum for use in schools; when facilities and other materials needs have been provided; the resource person who would ensure that the curriculum objectives are realized is the classroom teacher.
Although there are other personnel whose work are quite as important as the teacher’s, (for example, the school counselor), it is the teacher who is solely responsible for the implementation of curriculum objectives and content especially the programme of studies component of the curriculum.
Among the important functions of the teacher in curriculum implementation are: (i) Breaking down of the syllabus presented by curriculum planners into smaller segments such as schemes of work, modules and unit; (ii) Selecting and organizing learning content in such a way as to make learning meaningful and easy; (iii) Selecting appropriate learning objectives; (iv) Evaluating student’s performance in the programme; (v) Reporting or communicating student’s performance to parents, school administration and bodies needing them; 68EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (vi) Recognize the complex nature of school children’s development and reflect this in planning classroom activities; (vii) Act as loco parent for the learners in order to earn their respect as he shows concern for their wellbeing.
Thus, you will have seen that performing these function entail the fact that the teacher must possess some very important personal characteristics which will enhance student’s learning.
Onwuka (1985) listed a few propositions which should constitute these personal characteristics.
They are listed as a set of do and don’ts, with the (a) part as the do’s and the (b) as the don’ts.
They are reproduced below for you 1.
(a) A teacher should bring cheer and sunshine into the classroom each morning, then he can infect his pupils with them; (b) Even if he is ill, unhappy or sad, he should not let his physical and emotional state become apparent and so spoil (ruin) the day for his pupils.
He must take care of his problems with maturity; 2.
(a) A teacher must bring humour and humanity into every dealing with his pupils in and out of the class; (b) He should never forget that humour including laughing at himself, ease many a tense situation; 3.
(a) A teacher should get to his class properly dressed- modestly, simply yet comfortably.
He must be an example in good taste; (b) A teacher should never be overdressed in the class as if he/ she were going for a fashion parade or some other entertainment show; 4.
(a) A teacher should make friends with his pupils as one human being with another, not as a horse rider and his horse; (b) He should never exploit his pupils/learners in any way.
His relationships should be clean with no strings attached; 69EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 5.
(a) A teacher should always be kind, considerate and reassuring in his dealings with his pupils.
(b) At the same time, he must be firm, direct and to the point in discipline.
No conflict is involved in this respect; (a) A teacher should be judicious in his use of authority and power.
There is no need to exhibit or dissipate them unless he does not trust himself in the proper use of them.
He should be democratic; (b) A teacher should never show favour to some Children to the exclusion of others unless he can explain and justify his action; (a) A teacher should be judicious in his use of authority and power.
There is no need to exhibit or dissipate them unless he does not trust himself in the proper use of them.
He should be democratic.
(b) A teacher should not be an authoritarian.
Authoritarian teachers usually incur the displeasure of their pupils.
Consequently, the wholesome relationship which is a condition for effective teaching becomes unattainable.
Moreover, (and this is, perhaps, a more serious obstacle to learning) pupils handled by such teachers tend to be difficult.
When this is the case, they lose self-respect; (210 – 211).
So, the sum of these do’s and don’ts prescribed by Onwuka (1985:210-211) is that teachers must develop correct attitudes towards the pupils they teach.
As the one who implements all that the curriculum experts have decided upon, he has very crucial roles to play, as has been pointed out, to ensure that the society gets what it wants from the school system, it must be remembered that while learning can take place without a teacher, teaching cannot take place without a learner.
So, to keep his job and profession intact, the teacher must also recognize the invaluable position of the learners towards making them the professionals they (teachers) are.
70EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Write down at least five other qualities of a good teacher not in the list in 3.1; 2.
Write down what you consider as your won personal behavioural dispositions that are likely to enhance your attitude as an effective teacher.
3.2.1 Functions of the Classroom Teacher in Selecting Objectives Teaching begins with the selection of appropriate lesson objectives by the teacher.
The Teacher needs to clearly spell out what learning outcomes he expects from the learners.
In doing this, however, he would need to take certain things into considerations.
So, just as the curriculum planners at national or community level conduct needs assessment, the teacher must do the same at classroom level.
The preparations for teaching, say a 40 minutes lesson may take a lot more time than the time of actual classroom interaction.
A successful lesson must be adequately prepared for.
Although selection of objectives is crucial, it cannot be done without due consideration of the following factors: (i) Determination of the learner’s entry behaviours; (ii) Determination of which new information or new knowledge is to be included as facts; (iii) Determination of the relevance of the objectives to philosophy of the school; (iv) Determination of materials available; (for example stating an objective which seeks to enable students perform an experiment where there are no laboratories or laboratory materials to use is an unattainable objective) 3.2.2 Learner’s Entry Behaviour Entering or entry’s behaviour is made up of what the learners already know or are supposed to have already known or learned in or outside the classroom, which should form the basis for new learning.
It is important to consider this before selecting objectives because learners can hardly learn new things unless it is based on previous learning.
It is like building a house from foundations.
No house can be built from the roof.
A great philosopher of the 18th century known as Johann Friedrich 71EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Herbart (1776 – 1841) was the one who insisted that “all new knowledge to be imparted to children should be connected to what is known to what is not known, (simply referred to by many educators as “known to unknown”).
So, “entry behaviours” is where the instructors begin, and “terminal behaviours is where it ends.
However, in between entry and terminal behaviours are the enabling behaviours, i.e.
the series of learning activities that will bring about the desired outcome.
An objective is a statement of learning outcome, but before stating an attainable or achievable objective or outcome of instruction, the knowledge of entry behaviours of learners will go a long way to help in deciding what learning outcome is to be desired.
Here is an example: “By the end of the lesson, the learners should be able to distinguish the different parts of a computer, and state the function of each part”.
Now, suppose the learners have never seen or known what a computer system is before, or is there one available to use as instructional material?
Such an objective as this one would be difficult to attain.
At best, the learners would only memorize the parts but may never be able to distinguish the different parts in reality.
So, it is important that new learning based upon previous knowledge and this must be considered in stating objectives at this classroom level.
3.2.3 Selection Of Objectives Based On New Knowledge It is important to be current.
What the teacher knows is important as no one can give what he does not have.
Teachers need to update their knowledge; especially in these modern times when knowledge increases by leaps and bounds every year.
New knowledge therefore should be an important consideration in selecting curriculum objectives at classroom level.
Currently in Nigeria, this task seems to be simplified for primary and secondary school teachers as new textbooks are produced to replace the old ones.
3.2.4 Selection of Objectives at Classroom Level Based on School Philosophy Onyike (1985) argues for taking into consideration the philosophy of Education of a School in selecting objectives at classroom level.
He maintained that every school has an idea of what kind of young people do, the schools want to develop taking the current thinking in the society into consideration.
For example, a school may wish to develop learners who are able to solve their own problems or individuals who will realize that they are not self sufficient and so would need others.
Onyike (1985) maintains that clarifying school values is a basic step in curriculum planning and in the 72EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE selection of objectives, because teachers can teach in such a way that those values or ends are maintained or denied.
Selecting Objectives at Classroom Level Based on Practical Applicability The society today makes a lot of demand on young people.
Emphasis, especially in Nigeria currently, seems to be on what recipients of education can do.
So, do schools teach such that students would continue to apply the knowledge they receive in new situations?
Are students well-equipped enough to become active knowledge and skill searcher after leaving school, such that they can fend for themselves?
These must be regarded as very important considerations in selecting objectives at classroom level.
3.3 How To State Objectives At Classroom Level You will recall that this segment was briefly considered in a previous unit.
Here, however, we would look into some essential points which would make you able to write classroom level objectives very correctly.
This segment will also be practical in nature, but first, what do we mean by objectives at classroom level?
As it has been said earlier, in this unit, the teacher is the most important personnel who write statement of objectives.
They are the objectives he writes for any given lesson.
Although, curriculum objectives have been stated at national, community, or even school levels, the teacher has the responsibility to step down the broad objectives to smaller, achievable lesson objectives, because, it is by each of the lessons taught that the general objectives are expected to be achieved.
As the learning experiences have been broken down into various subject contents or topics, so then must he write objectives that are appropriate to the overall curriculum objectives specified for a programme?
At the classroom or instructional level therefore, objectives must be clear, achievable, measurable, observable and in the direction for general curriculum objectives involving taking into consideration the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
Fore example, what should be the general objectives of teaching “Nigerian dresses” in a social studies class in JSS1?
The answer is that students should be able to not only identify those dresses, but also to admire and with to war them and be proud of them as Nigerians.
Thus you could have seen from here that both cognitive and affective objectives should be stated in this case, and this will be in line with a supposed overall objective of producing good citizens who would be proud of their country”.
In every lesson therefore, the 73EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE classroom teacher should not state objectives at only the cognitive domain but also in at least two of the domains of educational objectives.
Let us consider some examples based on types of learning desired, i.e.
whether cognitive, affective and psychomotor or any combination of three.
Let us take the topic on “Nigeria dresses” as an example.
Example 1: Statement of lesson objective at cognitive domain.
By the end of the lesson and with the aid of the real objects, the pupils should be able to: 1. identify two types of Nigerian dresses, namely “ the complete Agbada” dress and “complete Buba and Iro” dress in Yoruba land; 2. explain the differences between the two; 3. state on what occasions these dresses are worn.
Example 2: Statement of lesson objective at affective domain By the end of the lesson, and with the aid of the real objects, the pupils would be able to: 1. learn to put on the Nigerian dresses; 2. demonstrate by walking around the classroom with it, how beautiful the dresses are.
Example 3: This example is a combination of both cognitive and affective domain using the same Nigerian dresses By the end of the lesson, and with the aids of the real objects provided, the pupils should be able to: 1. identify the Nigerian dresses; 2. explain the differences between the two types; 3. state the occasions in which the dresses are worn; 4. learn to put on the dresses; 5. demonstrate how beautiful the dresses are by walking around with them.
Self Assessment Exercise 74EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Try and state a lesson’s objective to include the cognitive and psychomotor domains and another one to include the Affective and psychomotor domains of educational objectives.
3.4 Functions Of Objectives at Classroom Level Stating objectives clearly at classroom level assists both teachers and students in many ways.
These include what has been stated in previous units, but applied to classroom level as follows: (i) Teachers and students have a direction, a focus or an expectation of what is to be learnt during the lesson presentation; (ii) It stimulates student’s interest and gets them to pay attention to the different stages of the lesson; (iii) Teachers are able to select appropriate learning experiences; i.e knowledge content and activities which will enhance achievement of the goals (objectives) of the lesson; (iv) Teachers and students will find classroom learning interesting because what they have to do is clear from the beginning.
(v) Both teachers and students will have a sure base for evaluating learning outcomes.
In fact evaluation becomes easier; (vi) It helps teachers not to lose focus or digress to much away form the content during presentation; (vii) What is learnt in a lesson where objectives are clearly stated is more likely to be permanent.
There is no learning if there is no change in behaviour, and a change in behaviour is enhanced when the change expected is known from the beginning.
(viii) Objectives help in preventing student’s boredoms with the lessons; (ix) Teachers are better prepared for their task.. 75EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 4.0 CONCLUSION Teaching is an art but the art begins with careful selection of statement of objectives at the classroom level.
This is solely the job of a classroom teacher.
The modern teacher is a guide; one who acts as a director learning by providing very suitable learning environment for learners.
This job cannot be properly done without first knowing the learning outcomes expected for each lesson.
As subject’s specialists or curriculum experts at the classroom level, the implementation of the lofty aims and objectives of education rests squarely on the teachers’ shoulders.
There is no doubt that learning how to select appropriate objectives as already studied in this unit, will have gone a long way in stimulating your interest in classroom teaching and learning.
5.0 SUMMARY You would have observed that you have studied a very important aspect of curriculum development and practice in this unit.
We may summarize the present unit as follows: (i) The teacher is a very important factor in curriculum implementation; and that he needs to develop certain personal characteristics in order to enhance his effectiveness as a teacher; (ii) Selecting appropriate objective is the first step in curriculum implementation at the classroom level; (iii) There are important considerations to take note of in selecting appropriate objectives; some of these considerations include the learner’s entry behaviour, new knowledge, practical applicability of the objectives and school philosophy; (iv) Objectives stated should be comprehensive enough to cover the three domains of educational objectives; (v) Stating objectives at classroom level serve very useful pedagogical purposes.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the important criteria a teacher must consider before selecting a lesson’s objective?
2.
Explain why you think objectives should be stated at the three domains of educational objectives.
76EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Alaezi, O (1990) The Nigerian New School Curriculum: Issues and Insights Jos: Ehindero Press Ltd (1990) Grandwork of Teaching Strategies in Nigeria.
Jos: Fab Aniel (Nig) Ltd. Daramola, S. O.
(1995) Curriculum Development in Schools, Ilorin, Lekan Printing Press Onwuka, U.
(1985) Curriculum Development for Africa Onitsha; Africana Fed Publishers Ltd Saylor, J. G. and Alexandra, W. M. (1974) Planning Curriculum for Schools N. Y. Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc. 77EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE MODULE 3 LEARNING EXPERIENCES: SELECTION AND ORGANISATION Unit 1 Concept Clarifications Unit 2 Selecting Learning Experiences: Sources and Selection Criteria Unit 3 Organisation of Curriculum OR Learning Experiences UNIT 1 CONCEPT CLARIFICATIONS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Curriculum, Learning Experiences or Educational Programmes?
3.2 The Three Educational Programme 3.2.1 Programme of Studies 3.2 Programmes of Activities 3.3 Programmes of Guidance i) Vocational Guidance ii) Educational Guidance iii) Personal-Social Guidance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having studied the selection of curriculum objectives in the previous units, the next thing to be done is to understand how to select the learning experiences which will help being about the desired outcome.
Thus, the selection of appropriate learning content relevant to the identified or selected objectives is very important.
The task of selecting content however requires deep knowledge of various available options.
In other words, the issue of selection comes in because it is not possible to transmit all of the vast growing knowledge of mankind within the short period of schooling; choices have to be made as to what to include and what not to include.
Studying units after units, by now, you would have discovered the pleasure of being involved in molding and shaping lives through learning the various steps I curriculum development.
This current step, selection of learning experiences, is another study you will find interesting.
78EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you would be able to: i) better explain the term “learning experiences” ii) accurately describe and distinguish among the various educational programmes of the school.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Curriculum, Learning Experiences OR Education Programmes?
You had learnt in previous units that learning experiences embrace all the educational programmes provided for learners under the auspices of the school.
However, in this unit, it is important to further elaborate on the terms especially as they will now be studied in some more detail than was done earlier.
First of all, these terminologies have been interchangeably used in this course so far.
These terminologies are “curriculum”, “learning experiences”, and “educational programmes”.
You may probably wonder why we do simple use such words as “school subjects” e.g.
history, mathematics, and geography instead of “learning experiences”, “curriculum” or “educational programmes”.
Now, the reasons are not far fetched.
What is learnt in school is a total package of experiences (not only past human experiences) which go beyond school subjects.
These total packages have been carefully divided into three segments viz: programme of studies; programme of activities; and programme of guidance.
It was a curriculum expert name (Oliver 1965) who first suggested the word “educational programme” for use in place of “curriculum” because of the narrow conception of curriculum as “school subjects”.
In other words, “curriculum” does not consist of school subjects alone.
It is wider in conception than school subjects and so a much better nomenclature for it, according to Oliver, should be “educational programmes”.
Again, as people go through various experiences in life, in and out of school, it becomes to restrict the experiences a child is exposed to in school, to the term “learning experiences”.
Thus, a child who is exposed to the procedure for baking a cake is said to be undergoing a learning experience.
The same is true of a child who is learning a skill in Physical Educational programmes or curriculum are therefore terminologies that are interchangeably used to refer to the same thing, namely what goes on in schools in educating the learners.
Sometimes, as you read various textbooks on curriculum – this is being specific as to what exactly is taught to learners in the school setting especially with 79EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE respect to school subjects.
So, I believe you now have a clearer understanding now of these terminologies.
This is important before you study the next segment in this unit.
3.2 The Three Educational Programmes Since learning experiences include the three major educational programmes, you will now need to study each to them in some detail, before going further.
3.2.1 Programme of Studies Programme of studies refers, once again, to school subjects, such as Mathematics, English Language, Social Studies, Secretarial Studies, Biology, Physics, Chemistry etc.
These are bodies of knowledge or specific disciplines.
Because knowledge is not static, it does not consist of past human knowledge alone but current ones being brought to light through research.
Take for instance knowledge of crop production e.g., maize, or cassava.
Through research, maize or cassava can now be grown in varieties, and produced within a shorter time than it used to be produce by the forefathers.
In the National Policy on Education, various subjects were included for teaching in order to achieve the Educational goals specified in the policy document.
Some of these school subjects for the Junior Secondary School level for example include the following: Group A: Core subjects (i.e.
Compulsory subjects because it is basic) 1.
English 2.
French 3.
Mathematics 4.
Language of the environment to be taught as L1 5.
One major Nigerian Language other than that of the environment to be taught as L2 6.
Integrated Science 7.
Social Studies and Citizenship Education 8.
Introductory Technology Group B Prevocational Electives 1.
Agriculture 2. Business Studies 3.
Home Economics 4.
Local Crafts 5.
Computer Education 80EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Emphasis on subject in Group B Shall be on practice.
Group C Non-Prevocational Electives 1.
Religious Knowledge 2.
Physical and Health Education 3.
Fine Arts 4.
Music 5.
Arabic 3.1.2 Self Assessment Exercise Study the National Policy on Education (Section 4) very well and try to relate the subjects in each of the three categories to the objectives specified for the JSS level in the Policy Document.
3.2 Programmes of Activities It has already been said in previous units that the programme of activities is also a learning experience.
Emeruwa (1985) defined it as “a programme which embraces all the activities capable of enhancing the academic experiences of students”.
This programme is designed as a concomitant to the intellectual knowledge acquired in the classroom.
It is designed to enable learners see the practical applicability of what is learnt in the classroom situation.
In short, it is a method of enabling learners to relate learning to everyday life experiences so that they may be able to face life’s experiences in reality.
It is therefore not an “extra” curricular activity but an important component (part) of the curriculum without which “curriculum” is not complete.
It is therefore an “educational” programme because students learn through participation in those activities.
Thus, tours, visits, excursions, participation in school club activities e.g.
Agricultural Club, Drama Club, Girl Guides, Boy Scouts, The Choir, etc.
are all educational programmes.
They provide what psychologists call “social learning” opportunities for learners, so they are educational programmes.
Every school is expected to include this programme as part of the formal daily activities of the school.
As a matter of fact, when learners are guided into embarking on projects e.g.
collection of data on local history, or growing maize in different types of soil in the agricultural club, they learn more informally and better than in classroom situations.
In the school setting, there is no limit to the number and variety of activities that can be included in a programme of studies.
There are no rules as to how it should be operated although each staff in charge of such activities may organize the students in particular way for the students to be able to participate more meaningfully in those activities.
81EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Thus, programme of studies enrich what is learnt in the classroom.
As Oliver, the expert who first used the term “educational programme” to describe “curriculum” puts it: “a child may learn civics from his teacher but he learns citizenship education from his playmates”.
Thus, if the child mentally absorbs facts on democracy and cooperation in the classroom, it is among his playmates that he would learn to be cooperative or democratic.
3.4 Programme of Guidance This last component of the curriculum is very important and very crucial to the achievement of school and society’s objectives.
It is important, however, to clarify the term “guidance” and “counselling” before continuing with this segment so that you can have a fuller understanding.
Guidance is an activity that had existed long in society’s history as a social service.
It is however brought into the school setting to serve a need; to help the school fulfill the objectives of schooling.
It is concerned with the individual leaner.
It is self-understanding and self- direction necessary for adjustment to home, school and the larger society.
It is a self-enhancement programme to learners see themselves clearly and to know what exactly they want or need form life and how to get it within the ambits of societal norms.
The ultimate goal of guidance is to help students live a happier and more fulfilling life as they are encouraged to find meaning in living and cooperate with societal rules to achieving their personal objectives.
In the National Policy on Education, Section 9, Guidance and Counselling is prescribed as part of the Teacher Education programme so that teachers might learn rudiments of guidance, and use such knowledge to assist their students.
It is also specified that Guidance Counselors must be provided in private schools.
Counselling is a sub-set of guidance.
It is the very heart of a school guidance programme.
It involves a person-to-person interaction based on verbal and non-verbal communication between the Counsellor and the counselee.
In a programme of School Guidance and Counselling, students are regarded as “clients” coming to see the “counselor” or “helper”, who would use specific psychological and counseling skills to assist the clients in handling their personal concerns, worries and anxieties.
These concerns, may be in the area of academic (or educational), vocational or personal (person-social) areas.
Counsellors help students in school to develop a wholesome personality in accordance with societal expectations.
In section 9 of the National Policy on Education, it is specifically mentioned that school counselors 82EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE are expected to help students (clients) who may be maladjusted in behaviours.
According to Oliver, a programme of guidance is better than a programme of studies (which tend to emphasize the past), and a programme of activities (which emphasizes the present) because it cuts across the time barriers.
He said further that a programme of guidance recognizes the past ….
of an individual, as well as the present because the present is when the problem or crises occur, though it may have its roots in the past.
It then looks into the future so as to assist the students (clients) to become increasingly able to face his own problems and to make his own decisions.
Guidance in the school is therefore a service function.
A one-time Nigerian Minister of Education, once declared guidance as a third force mediating between Teaching and Administration in the school system.
This indeed is true.
It has a unique integrative influence both on the individual student and the entire educational system.
A programme of guidance can therefore be organized, (and is currently being organized in Nigerian schools) from Elementary to Higher Education Levels.
Three aspects of a programme of School Guidance are distinguishable.
They are: • Vocational guidance; • Educational guidance; and • Personal-social guidance This is service in which students are assisted to select vocations or careers which are appropriate with respect to their individual personal characteristics and through personal counseling with the School counselor.
The outcome of this exploration is to assist the student to understand his won unique characteristics, interest, motivations or desires, abilities, likes and dislikes etc which are then unique characteristics, interest, motivations or desires, abilities, likes and dislikes etc which are then related to a vocation or career best suited for him.
There are many other competencies and skills used by the professional counselor to assist students, but these are out of the scope of the present study.
i Vocational Guidance: This is a service in which students are assisted to select vocations or careers which are appropriate with respect to their individual personal characteristics and interests.
This is done professionally through the use of various psychological tests, and through personal counselling with School Counsellor.
The outcome of this exploration is to assist 83EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE the student to understand his own unique characteristics, interest, motivations or desires, abilities, likes and dislikes etc which are then related to a vocation or career best suited for him.
There are many other competencies and skills used by the professional counselor or assist students, but these are out of the scope of the present study.
ii.
Educational Guidance: The selection and choices of course study, especially at the Secondary School Level, cannot be haphazardly done.
Because educational guidance is concerned with the overall growth and development of the school child, he is therefore guided in making appropriate subject selection best suited to his intellect, interest, future educational goals and career aspirations.
ii.
Personal-Social Guidance: This segment of the guidance programme is all embracing in orientation and function.
Unlike vocation and educational guidance which have specific focus (i.e.
vocation/education), personal-social guidance is concerned with the development of a wholesome personality.
Youths and adolescents are in their developmental stages.
They go through various experiences at home, in, and out of school, which have implications for their behaviours.
While society emphasizes conformity with its norms, it does not recognize certain individuals with special personality needs.
Thus, some individual students who deviate from acceptable social norms tend to be labeled and disciplined without an understanding of the factors that have been responsible for the behaviour with a view to helping them to become better adjusted.
Guidance and counselling is an answer to the adjustment problems of school children generally.
It tends to enable students recognize their own potentialities, abilities and limitations so that they may be consciously aware of the implications of their present decisions and actions on their future lives.
Again, as it has been said before, it is a professional area, details of which are outside the scope of the present study.
Self Assessment Exercise List the three educational programmes of the school and show how each one is related to the other.
4.0 CONCLUSION You would have seen from the study of this unit that it is essential to clarify some terminologies that are crucial to selection of learning 84EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE content.
One most have a deep knowledge first of what he is to teach others, before going on to select curriculum content.
That is why it is expedient to explain the three interchangeable terminologies namely: curriculum, learning, experiences, and educational programmes.
I believe that you have fully understood each of these educational programmes.
In the next unit, you will undergo a study of how to select learning experiences.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been able to undergo a study in which you must have learnt the following: 1.
The term learning experience is the broad terminology used in describing all the educational programmes offered by the school.
The term also describes the interaction of the learner with the external environment to which he can react; 2.
Educational programmes are three, but the three are integrated and constitute the total package of what the school gives to the learners, which we call “education”; 3.
Programme of studies constitute the subject matter of various disciplines taught to students in the classroom, the curriculum is not balanced unless the two other components are present; 4.
Programme of guidance is singled out as one that tends to integrate all that is due in the school system to educate learners.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
In what ways, in your own opinion, is the programme of guidance an integration of all that is provided as learning experiences for students in the schools; 2.
Show the relationship between programme of studies and programme of activities.
7.0 REFERENCES FOR FURTHER READING Alexander, W.M and Saylor, J.G.
Planning curriculum for schools (M.A) N.Y, Holt i.e Holt Rinehart & Winston Inc. Onyike, I.O.
(1985) Steps in curriculum Development.
In Onwuka, U.
(Ed.)
Curriculum Development for Africa.
Onitsha: Africana – Fep.Pub.
Ltd., 85EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Onwuka, U (1985 Curriculum Development for Africa Ontisha: Africana – Fep Pub.
Ltd. 86EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 2 SELECTING LEARNING EXPERIENCES: SOURCES AND SELECTION CRITERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1 What Schools Teach 3.2 Sources of Curriculum Content 3.2.1 Examination Bodies 3.3 Criteria for selecting appropriate Curriculum content 3.3.1 The Principle of Validity 3.3.2 The Principle of Comprehensiveness 3.3.3 The Principle of Variety 3.3.4 The principle of Suitability 3.3.5 The Principle of Cumulative Tendency 3.3.6 The Principle of Multiple Learning 3.3.7 The Principle of Relevance 3.4 Other Important Criteria for selecting subject Matter 3.4.1 Validity 3.4.2 Utility 3.4.3 Interest 3.4.4 Learn ability 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Clarifying terms and concepts is an essential aspect of learning because it helps to make further discussion very clear instead of confusing.
This is what has been done in the last unit.
So, whichever of the three terms “Curriculum”, “Learning Experiences” or “Educational Programmes” is used hereinafter, there will be no confusion in your mind as to what is being referred to.
Having to select appropriate learning experiences, however, involve some effort as important criteria normally guide the selection.
Because there are many options to choose from, curriculum experts have derived methods such that, since not all possible content can be selected, whatever is finally selected satisfy certain criteria.
Basically therefore, this unit is trying to answer the following questions “what must the school teach”?
What are the sources for getting what is to be taught?
What criteria must guide the selection of what is to be taught?
Once again, relax to enjoy your study.
87EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you would be able to: (i) explain what the schools teach; (ii) state the source of the learning experience to which students are exposed in the school; (iii) discuss the important criteria used in selecting learning experiences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What Schools Teach In the last unit, you have learnt that all schools learning rests on three legs namely programme of studies, programme of activities and programme of guidance.
However, the programme of studies or content that are taught definitely emanates from somewhere.
But what exactly is taught?
The answer is not far-fetched.
Educational philosophers had taught that schools transmit knowledge and the cultural heritage of the society for the purpose of survival and continuity of the society.
Educational philosophers during the ancient Greek period (e.g.
Socrates, Plato and Aristotle) left with the modern world a legacy of knowledge in logic, mathematics Arts, Music and Poetry etc.
Today there is vast array of subject-matter to be taught in schools.
Research is still continuing such that new knowledge will continue to be transmitted for as long as the earth exists.
Several decades ago, computer education was not part of the subjects taught in Nigerian schools, but now, it is clearly specified in the curriculum of even the Junior Secondary School by the Federal Government in the National Policy on Education.
So, schools teach past and present knowledge – transmitting this to the young ones in order to preserve the society, protect its norms and its cultural heritage.
Schools employ a variety of activities, and expose students to a variety of experiences to foster the integration of the individual with the society.
Schools exist to keep society going, and schools depend on the society to decide for it, what is to be taught.
The Nigerian National Curriculum Conference of 1969 points up this fact.
However, after the society had generally suggested what the schools should teach, curriculum experts must meet to actualize these suggestions.
Such a meeting of experts was held in Nigeria in 1973, (NPlE: 4) and the result was the handing down of a National Policy on Education, which was first published in 1977.
Various subjects to be taught in schools have been outlined in the document, as you can see in your previous study units.
88EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.2 Sources of Curriculum Content In this segment, the emphasis is not on subjects that have already been specified as we have it in the National Policy on Education.
The emphasis is on what should be the contents or course outline or topics that are contained in each of these subject areas.
3.2.1 Examination Bodies In Nigeria, there are examination bodies such as the West African Examination Council (WAEC) and National Examination Council (NECO) who specify curriculum content.
It is a syllabus-oriented curriculum.
Major outlines of what to be taught in schools are published in book form for candidates sitting for the end-of-course programmes in Secondary School.
There are also other bodies at the Tertiary levels, but they do not examine the students on an end-of-course assessment.
They merely specify what to be taught as minimum standards expected for that level of education.
While they act mainly as quality control organisations to ensure uniform standards at that level of education.
Such bodies include the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) and National Universities Commission, (NUC).
(i) Subject Associations These also specify curriculum content in terms of syllabus or major outlines of topic to be taught in schools.
Such bodies include Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria (STAN), Mathematical Studies Association of Nigeria (MSAN), and Social Studies Teachers’ Association of Nigeria (SOSTAN) etc.
Recently, the Counselling Association of Nigeria (CASSON) published a curriculum, for the programme of Guidance at the Secondary School level.
The contributions from these subject Associations go a long way to improve curriculum content in schools because they usually move recent knowledge arising from current research findings in their specification of content.
(ii) Existing Body of Knowledge in Books, Journals and Newspapers New books in various disciplines are being currently produced and from these books, a lot of new information that can form adequate sources of curriculum content can be found.
There are also workbooks and teachers’ guides to most of the books produced nowadays for use in schools.
Reading through these books can provide the teacher adequate information for teaching 89EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE and the workbooks are guides to the teacher in respect of what is expected of the learners.
(iii) Expert Opinion Updating one’s knowledge as a classroom teacher is necessary for successful teaching.
From time to time, experts may be assembled to present seminar papers on various topics.
Attendance at such seminars provides an opportunity to update knowledge of content, so as to keep abreast of what is happening in the field.
(iv) Mass Media The mass media, especially the Electronic media, is a good source of curriculum content especially for the teacher.
Many educative programmes are sometimes presented on this media.
Also, sometimes, experts are invited to speak on some specific knowledge area that can be of great usefulness to teachers in content selection.
In Nigeria, both the Nigerian Television Authority NTA and the Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (FRCN) are recognised for featuring many educative programmes in their networks.
These are good sources of curriculum content.
(v) Field Experience of Individual Teacher A personal working experience of individuals can be a useful source of curriculum content.
An experienced teacher in a particular field would understand better from success or failures from the past and this experience can be brought to bear upon current content selection.
For example, a teacher of Social Studies, who is very active in his subject organisation, is likely to be able to know what to select as curriculum content for a particular class than a beginning teacher in the same field.
Self Assessment Exercise List some subject Associations you know and explain how they can be possible good sources of curriculum content in schools.
3.3 Criteria for Selecting Appropriate Curriculum Content Selecting curriculum content is an important exercise.
It cannot be done haphazardly.
There are many topics/areas to choose from.
Not all available content can be selected because there will never be time enough to teach everything nor is it even wise, and cost-effective to do 90EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE so.
However, the important point to note is that the curriculum objectives determine the basic criteria for selection.
Other things that must be taken into consideration is the abilities of the prospective learners, the availability of appropriate learning facilities and the competence of the curriculum implementers.
However, in addition to the basic criteria already enumerated, selection of appropriate learning content is dependent upon the following established principles.
3.3.1 The Principle of Validity Findings from the field of psychology have shown that unless a significant change in behaviour of a learner takes place as a result of exposure to some learning experiences, learning can not be said to have occurred.
Thus, the principle of validity may be explained as the ability of a learning experience to bring about the desired change in the learner.
For example, if a learning outcome desired is for music students to learn how to play the piano and other musical instruments, but have no actual piano to use in training, such a learning experience cannot be said to be valid.
That is, it cannot bring about the desired change in behaviour which the acquisition of the skill of playing the piano.
So, there must be a corresponding relationship between the learning experiences provided and the learning objectives stated.
3.3.2 The Principle of Comprehensiveness A curriculum is designed to provide opportunities for learners to acquire different skills in all the three domains of education objectives.
If only cognitive skills or intellectual skills or mental abilities are emphasized in a learning experience provided by a school for her learners, such a curriculum is narrow; and it is not regarded as a balanced curriculum.
Learning must take place in all three areas.
Every topic taught, must be taught with a plan that includes the achievement of the three domains of education objectives.
3.3.3 The Principle of Variety Variety, they say, is the spice of life.
Findings from developmental psychology have shown that before desired changes can take place in a learner, he must be exposed to a variety of learning experiences and methods.
Thus, curriculum implementers, i.e.
teachers, should learn to diversify their methods and also present learners with a variety of learning activities on the same topic in order to facilitate the achievements of the stated objectives.
The greater the variety, the more the learner will find satisfying activities which will speed up his progress towards the learning outcome.
91EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.3.4 The Principle of Suitability The learning experiences provided must be suitable for the age and present level of experience of the learners.
That is to say that the teacher should begin at the point where the learner is at the moment.
Interest in new learning is stimulated first from what is known and is carried onto the new learning.
The known therefore serves as a bridge for crossing to the unknown.
If a learning experience is not linked with what the pupils currently knows, such may not be regarded as suitable for the particular group of students.
3.3.5 The Principle of Cumulative Tendency Learning experiences provided must lead to a cumulative experience for the learner.
In other words, the learning experiences must be progressively arranged to create a movement from one level of difficult to a higher level; from simple to more complex ideas; from a more limited use of ideas to a greater breadth etc.
In other words, whatever is learnt at one point is used to build up on to a higher level; a simple skill is used as a foundation for learning more complex skills.
Since the acquisition of skill is cumulative, the learning of a skill in one are helps the learner to move on to other areas.
Thus, conscious attempts must be made by the curriculum implementer to ensure that learning experiences selected are cumulative.
3.3.6 The Principle of Multiple Learning A learner is a complete organism.
Many learning does occur simultaneously when a certain learning experience is presented, and such learning outcomes may not even be intended.
Thus, in planning experience the teacher must be conscious of the fact that other learning outcomes may occur, and so must be prepared for this as he selects learning experiences.
Another major reason why the teacher must take cognizance of multiple learning outcomes when selecting experiences is that some learning outcomes may tend to produce negative outcome in the learner that is not intended by the teacher.
For example, in teaching some aspects of reproductive health, a student may develop such interest and a learning outcome such that he/she makes up his/her mind to become a medical doctor or a nurse.
This is a positive learning outcome.
But negative learning outcomes which may occur include having a wrong desire to try out several experiences that may be inimical to his/her health and the health of others.
Therefore, in planning learning experiences to include in a class, the teacher must first assess the likely effects of each possible learning experience upon a wide range of objectives.
Secondly, he 92EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE needs to eliminate all learning experiences, which though may lead to the attainment of the desired objectives, but may result in negative consequences.
Finally, the teacher should choose from among the remaining objectives those which are likely to bring about the attainment of more objectives without including negative side effects.
3.3.7 The Principle of Relevance Learning experiences that have relevance to day-to-day activities are more likely to be found very meaningful by learners.
The major objective learning is related to application of what is learnt in real life situations.
Therefore, learning experiences selected must have direct relevance to everyday living in the life of learners.
3.4 Other Important Criteria for Selecting Subject Matter As you have seen in subsection 3:0 of this unit, most of what is taught in Nigerian secondary schools are prescribed by examination bodies such as WAEC/NECO/JAMB.
However, the selection of content or subject matter to be taught by these bodies could not have been done anyhow.
Some important criteria guided the selection.
These criteria will be examined briefly in this segment.
3.4.1 Validity Again validity comes as the most important criterion for selecting subject matter here.
For example, why would a school teach history or why do WAEC stipulate the content of what is to be taught in English Language?
Of course the answer is not far-fetched.
Any content or subject matter must be chosen because it relates to the achievement of educational goals specified by the society.
History of Nigeria for example, is chosen because Educational Planners believed that we need to know how our society comes to be and the forces that have kept us together as a nation.
Studying British History may not be a valid subject matter in this case because it cannot directly inform us of our own existence as a nation.
Similarly, the specific outline in the subject, in this case History, must equally be those that relate with an educational objective already specified.
Another aspect of validity is authenticity of the subject matter.
This is an age of explosion of knowledge.
Subject matter content needs to be reviewed and updated from time to time in line with new knowledge or else the content could no longer be valid.
93EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.4.2 Utility The question that makes this criterion clear is “Is the content useful” Will it serve any useful purpose in any areas of living?
Some of the areas of human activity which content must serve is: (a) Language activities such as social, interpersonal communication; (b) Health activities; (c) Citizenship activities, etc.
So, one may ask “What purpose will teaching “English Language” in schools serve?
Of course, it will serve the purpose of social interpersonal and other levels of communication because it is the official language of Nigeria.
3.4.3 Interest The criterion of interest is equally important.
If the learner feels that the content will genuinely solve his problems or help to fulfill his plan, he would certainly be interested in the subject.
A student who wants to become a medical doctor would naturally want to study Human Biology among others.
The criterion of interest, sometimes, may be transitory in nature, as students’ interest sometimes changes.
That is why this criterion needs to go along with some others.
However, it is still an important criterion to take into consideration in content selection.
3.4.4 Learnability This criterion stresses the inherent characteristic of the subject matter to be learnable.
That is to say, will the students be able to learn this content?
Another way of putting it is to say whether the subject matter content has a level of difficulty which would facilitate learning by the students themselves.
If any concept or idea must be learnt by students, it must be brought down to their own level of understanding.
For example, complicated mathematical topics such as differentiation from first principles cannot be learnt (or easily learnt) by JSS1 secondary school students.
This criterion, therefore, is equally crucial and important.
Self- Assessment Questions (1) In not more than three sentences, attempt to distinguish between learning experiences and curriculum content; (2) Explain why learning experiences must be selected (use two sentences only).
94EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 4.0 CONCLUSION By now, you would have already learnt that schools exist to fulfill the purposes of education as specified by a nation, or community.
So, after educational objectives are specified, the appropriate curriculum to bring about the achievement of the objectives must be selected.
What we have seen from the study of this chapter is that the curriculum cannot be haphazardly chosen.
It must follow certain criteria which have already been enunciated in this unit.
I hope you will find the study interesting.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: 1.
What schools teach.
2.
How they get what they teach.
You have learnt that at secondary school level in Nigeria, schools do select what to teach from Examination Bodies such as WAEC or NECO.
3.
You also learnt that the Examinations Bodies in turn, do not just select what they specify for teaching, but have followed some criteria in doing so.
4.
Finally, you now know that even classroom teachers must follow certain principles in selecting learning experiences to which students are exposed in the classroom.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt the following questions: Chose any subject matter of your choice (e.g.
History, Geography, Biology etc) and specify a few topics you would like to teach giving the criteria you have taken into consideration, before making your selection.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Onyike, I..O.
(1985) Steps in Curriculum Development in Onwuka, Uga (1985) Curriculum Development for Africa Onitsha: Africana- Fep.
Pub.
Ltd. Olorundare, A. S. (1997).
Notes on Curriculum Planning and Development: Unpublished Monograph: Ilorin, Department of Curriculum Studies and Educational Technology, University of Ilorin.
95EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Tanner, D & Tanner, L.N.
(1980) Curriculum Development: Theory into Practice.
N.Y; Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc. 96EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 3 ORGANISATION OF CURRICULUM OR LEARNING EXPERIENCES Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organisation of Curriculum 3.2 Criteria for Organising Curriculum Effectively 3.2.1 Continuity 3.2.2 Sequence 3.2.3 Integration 3.3 Issues emanating form Curriculum Integration 3.4 Emergent Patters of the Curriculum Due to Organisation 3.4.1 Subject or Discipline-Centered Curriculum 3.4.2 Broad fields Curriculum 3.4.3 Core Curriculum 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt that to achieve curriculum objectives, appropriate learning experiences must be selected by curriculum developers.
Now, after selecting the learning experiences, it is also important to have them properly organised in such a way as to facilitate the achievement of the objectives.
So, in this unit, you will be exposed to the way learning experiences are organised in order to facilitate the achievement of the objective.
You will see that it is not sufficient to have learning experiences selected without appropriate ways of organising them.
Learning will be so haphazard or may not take place at all if what is to be learnt is not properly organised in an order, or based upon some principles.
So, educators, especially the teachers, need to learn how to arrange learning materials in an economical way such that nothing is included that will not serve a distinct purpose.
Also, in a very well organised learning environment, learning is expected to take place in the learners without loss of much effort and time.
So, this unit will address the issue of how you can organize learning experiences such that objectives are achieved without loss of much time and effort.
As usual, I urge you to relax as you enjoy your study.
97EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: (i) Explain what it means to organize the curriculum; (ii) Describe the two main kinds of curriculum organisation, namely the vertical and the horizontal organization; (iii) Explain the three main criteria upon which curriculum organisation is based; (iv) Describe the emergent patterns of the curriculum due to organization; (v) Organize the curriculum of your school following the two major ways of organising the curriculum.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organisation of Curriculum A further step towards achieving desired educational goals is to properly organize the curriculum that has been selected.
This is necessary because learning takes place over time and also because the educational goals cannot be achieved through exposure to a single learning experience.
This is to say that, learning is cumulative and a series of learning content, carefully arranged or organised and presented in a series over time, is what will eventually bring about the achievement of educational objectives.
Learning is change in behaviour over time.
Changes in ways of thinking, habits and attitudes develop relatively very slowly.
This is why organisation of content is important so that one experience reinforces another over a period of time until the goals are achieved.
In organising curriculum, two kinds of relationships have been identified: these are vertical and horizontal relationships among subject matter.
In the vertical relationship, consideration is given to organising a particular subject matter according to level of difficulty between the years of schooling such that what is learnt in one year serves as foundation for building upon what is learnt in the second year, and so on, in the same subject.
For example, what is learnt in English Language in the first year of Junior Secondary School, will serve as foundation for what is learnt in the second year at a higher level of difficulty than what was learnt in the first year, although, the topic may remain the same.
Or, 98EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE another topic may be learnt in the second year in the same subject, but such a topic will have a relationship with what is learnt in the first year.
This is vertical relationship, and a method of organising curriculum.
The second method of organising curriculum is called horizontal relationship.
This is relationship among different subjects, programmes or courses and between the content and delivery methods in such a way that the learner can see the link between the school learning and the community, the home or community realities.
According to Alaezi (1993:113), the concept of horizontal curriculum organization rests upon three main arguments: (i) that, according to Derrey (1916), life provides the basis for learning, that life processes and experiences are sources of learning, which are at least as important as schools and should therefore be integrated into formal school learning opportunities; (ii) that schooling is no longer an end in itself, but an aid to living, with living being seen as involving all aspects of life where learning occurs; recreational activities, relationships with other people and social institutions, and so on; (iii) school subjects, programmes and courses should be organised in such a way that the relationship between one subject and another (e.g.
between Chemistry and Biology; Physics and Mathematics; Geography and History, etc.)
becomes apparent and reinforces one another in the interest of community realities, attitudes, skills, knowledge, etc.
needed to live effectively in the community where one finds himself.
Self-Assessment Exercise Attempt to draw up a scheme of work in your subject area, for the first Terms of each of the first and second years of Junior Secondary School, following the vertical and horizontal relationship in organising the content.
3.2 Criteria for Organising Curriculum Effectively The two major ways of organising curriculum have been discussed in the last sub-section of this unit.
Here now, you need to know that there are criteria that must be followed or considered if curriculum is going to be effectively organised vertically and horizontally.
These criteria are three in number and they are: Continuity, Sequence and Integration.
Each of them will be explained in some detail below.
99EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.2.1 Continuity Continuity is an aspect of vertical relationship.
It describes the repeated presentation of learning material so that the cumulative effect of learning the material helps the learners to master the concept or develop the attitude, or acquire the skill that has been specified in the educational objectives.
Again, it arises from the principle that learning develops slowly over time and the repeated (or continuous) presentation of same learning experience at different levels of the educational programme will help to achieve the stated goals of education.
For example, if an objective of curriculum is to enable students develop good, correct communicating ability with the “use of verbs” in English Language, then, the curriculum planner should repeatedly bring in the use of verbs in various aspects of the English Language course such as in Composition, or Essay Writing, Comprehension Passages and also in Lexis and Structure etc.
Thus, by the time the learners come across the same material (use of verbs) in various parts of the English Language course, the cumulative effect produced must lead to ability to use verbs correctly in communicating with others whether in speaking or in writing.
3.2.2 Sequence This is another aspect of the vertical relationship.
It refers to the practice of arranging both the content and material into a kind of order of succession.
In other words, as in “continuity”, the curriculum material is repeated again and again, but this time, at higher levels of difficulty and complexity than previous ones.
This facilitates more mature learning.
Sequence, as a criteria, is therefore, important because not only is there continuity in what is being learnt, but there is also a progression that makes the learner acquire higher levels of competence.
The emphasis of sequence therefore, is not on continuity but on higher levels of treatment of the successive learning experiences.
This is the criteria, which emphasizes the sequential arrangement of subject matter according to the principle of simple to complex, known to unknown, concrete to abstract and so on.
(Do you remember the Piagetian theory of cognitive development).
As learners progress in age and years of schooling, they need to learn the content of the curriculum in a sequential order or progressive manner which matches the age and years of schooling.
Thus, both continuity and sequence are important in achieving educational goals which are overall statements of the type of individuals the school system is expected to turn out.
100EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.2.3 Integration Integration is a criterion, which describes the horizontal relationship among subject areas.
Horizontal relationship, as studied in the earlier sub-units, is important to avoid compartmentalization of knowledge.
In other words, horizontal relationships among subject areas help learners to see how what is learnt is related to solving problems (for example), in real life and not just an isolated set of facts.
For example, in developing quantitative skills (i.e.
ability to add, subtract, multiplying or divide numbers) in learners in order to help them solve quantitative problems in real life, integration of the elements in various other subjects would be necessary.
Let us consider that the teacher starts with giving the learners problems in simple arithmetic, the skill (quantitative ability) would be reinforced if the teacher brings in this same element to solve problems in science, in economics, in accounting, in commerce or even in geography, so that, the learners sees the wider application of this simple arithmetic skill and is able to make use of it in solving problems in the varied, real life situations.
Self-Assessment Exercise (i) Differentiate between the criteria of “continuity” and “sequence” in curriculum organization; (ii) In your own words, explain what you understand by the criteria of integration, in curriculum organization; (iii) List two types of curriculum organization and briefly comment on each of them.
3.4 Issues Emanating from Curriculum Integration Experts have agreed about the limits and possibilities arising from the criterion on integration in curriculum organisation.
Those who propose curriculum integration have argued that it contrasts with the compartmentalization of knowledge, which is a feature of the traditional syllabus.
They say that division of knowledge into distinct subject areas is artificial, and does act agree with the natural method of inquiry, which tends to see the unity in reality.
However, a third school of thought, moderated the two extremes (i.e.
those who favour compartmentalization of knowledge into subject areas and those who believe in integrating knowledge) and suggested that some subject areas can indeed be integrated, while some cannot.
For instance, it has now been possible among science curriculum developers to integrate Physical (Physics), Chemical (Chemistry) and Biological (Biology) concepts into a whole now called Integrated Science.
Similarly, History, 101EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Geography, Civics, Economics and Citizenship Education are now integrated as Social Studies and studied at the Junior Secondary School level.
However, it is not possible nor will it serve any useful purpose to continue to study different subject areas as integrated disciplines at higher levels of education.
Thus, there is still an argument therefore in favour of advocate of single subject disciplines.
So, as a result of these issues in curriculum organisation, three patterns of the curriculum has emerged, namely the Subject or Discipline centered curriculum, the Broad fields curriculum and the Core Curriculum.
Now, go to the next sub-unit to find out about these three emerging patterns of the curriculum, which has come about as a result of issues generated by the criteria of integration in curriculum organisation.
3.5 Emergent Patterns of the Curriculum Due to Organisation 3.5.1 Subject or Disciplines-Centered Curriculum: This is the traditionalist view of curriculum, in which disciplines are identified and compartmentalized into subject areas such as History, Geography, Mathematics, Economics, Biology, Physics, Chemistry and so on.
Sometimes, each subject are organised into sub-division such as Mathematics into Algebra, Geometry and Arithmetic, Trigonometry, Calculus etc.
Major advantages of this type of organisation are as follows: (a) Orderliness: Each subject has its own design and method.
Learners can readily build their store of knowledge; (b) Development of Students’ Intellect: Learners can develop their mental abilities very well as this is favoured by this approach to organising curriculum; (c) Convenient for Teachers: Teachers train in specific subject area, so they find it easier to follows approach especially as most textbooks used by them (teachers) follow this approach; (d) Easier for examination purposes.
In Nigeria, subject syllabus is presented by examination bodies such as WAEC, so it is easier for them to examine; (e) Employers find it useful: Employers employ school leavers on the basis of subjects which they studied in schools, so it is an advantage especially in Nigeria; 102EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE However, the subject curriculum has some disadvantages as follows: (a) It prevents interrelated learning, as learners fail to see the relationship among the subjects, and their application to real life.
Each subject is seen as in dead end track; (b) Limits the development of broad idea and life application; (c) Information is easy to forget, especially because it encourages mere acquisition of facts.
3.5.2 Broad Curriculum This is the opposite of the subject-curriculum.
This type favours interdisciplinary approach to curriculum organisation.
It is an approach to introduce learners to a synthesis of knowledge as a means of introducing pupils to the methods of enquiry and generalization.
Thus, learners are encouraged to see whole field of learning rather than narrow, unrelated parts.
So, it is an attempt to overcome compartmentalization and inability of subject curriculum for life application.
Thus, there is Social Studies (a combination of History, Geography etc.
), Integrated science, Humanities (Language, Literature, music, Arts etc) and so on.
When, subjects are seen this way, the proponents of the Broad fields curriculum (i.e.
those who see curriculum from a wider or broad perspective) say that they have better life applications than the single subject advocates.
This also has advantages as follows: Advantages (a) It promotes understanding; (b) It enables learners to grasp a total field of learning and not its parts, hence “broad fields”; (c) It bridges the gaps between different aspect of subjects; (d) It makes for greater integration of subject matter; (e) It encourages greater flexibility in the choice of content.
Disadvantages (a) Teachers need to be specifically trained to handle it as most of them tend to stick to their formal old ways; 103EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (b) Knowledge in Science, Social Studies and Humanities, still fall short of promoting interrelations of all field of knowledge, so true integration of all knowledge is yet to be effected; (c) Superficial treatment of concepts or lack of depth is usually a characteristics of this approach.
3.5.3 Core Curriculum This is another aspect of integration.
It is designed to serve the needs of learners and promote active learning.
It is used in two main senses.
(a) As a subject which all students are required to take, e.g.
English Language at Secondary School level; (b) As a unit of work where broad problems or unifying theme are treated.
For example, Living in a Community may be selected as a unit of work where a variety of subjects such as History, Geography, Language, Economics, Mathematics and Science may be taught.
Generally, the care curriculum can be seen as a kind of general education to stimulate young people into ways of inquiry that can be of benefit to them as members of a community or society.
Often times, the care curriculum is organised around the problems and needs of adolescents e.g.
“problems of growing up”, “role of youth in the society” or to explain the problems of living in the contemporary society to the young learners.
Important features of the called curriculum organisation include: (i) Grouping learners heterogeneously.
(ii) Having a greater period of time for class activities.
(iii)Cuts across subject matter lines.
(iv)Highlights social and life problems.
(v) Attempts to make what is learnt relevant to a child’s life.
The Main Advantages are (i) It does not offer significant and systematic knowledge.
(ii) Teachers are not sufficiently prepared for it.
(iii)Time is not always enough on the School Time Table.
104EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you will have seen that the school curriculum needs to be organised if it must produce the desired result.
For example, what is to be taught in the first year of JSS 1 will be found too elementary and unchallenging in an SSS 1 class.
Also, it is reasonable for example to teach “Parts of a flowering plant” first before teaching “Reproduction in plants”.
It is obvious that if what is to be taught last was taught first, learning will be haphazard as students will certainly get confused.
So, organising the curriculum is a sine qua non (i.e.
very necessary) for achieving curriculum objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY Having gone through this unit I believe that you have learnt what it means to organize the curriculum.
However, in order to assist you as you try to recall what you have learnt, here is a unit summary.
(i) Because learning takes place gradually overtime, curriculum content must be properly organised so that one learning experience reinforce another, e.g.
after learning “the parts of a flowering plant”, it will not be difficult to go on higher levels e.g.
“Reproduction in plants”.
But if it is the other way round, learning may be difficult and the objectives may not be achieved; (ii) Curriculum is organised basically in two main ways: vertically and horizontally; (iii) Three main criteria are, however, generally followed in organising the curriculum and they are: continuity, sequence and integration; (iv)As a result of organising curriculum, three patterns of curriculum have emerged and they are: subject-centered or discipline centered curriculum, broad fields curriculum and the Core Curriculum, with each of them having its advantages and disadvantages.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Differentiate, with specific examples, the Broad fields curriculum from the Core Curriculum; (2) Plan the scheme of work for a term of ten weeks in your subject area and for a JSS one class following the criteria of “continuity” and “sequence”.
105EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Alaezi, O.
(1993) Educational Research and the Nigerian New School Curriculum Jos: Fab Education Books.
Daramole, S. O (1995), Curriculum Development in Schools.
Ilorin: Lekan Printing Press.
Olorundare, A. S. (1997).
Notes on Curriculum Planning and Development: Unpublished Monograph: Ilorin, Department of Curriculum Studies and Educational Technology: University of Ilorin, Nigeria.
Onwuka, U.
(1985), Curriculum Development for Africa.
Onitsha: Africana – Fep.
Pub.
106EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE MODULE 4 CURRICULUM EVALUATION Unit 1 Concepts, Meanings and Types of Evaluation Unit 2 Curriculum Objectives and Evaluation Unit 3 Evaluation Devices Unit 4 Uses of Curriculum Evaluation UNIT 1 CONCEPT, MEANINGS & TYPES OF EVALUATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept/Meaning of Evaluation 3.2 Types of Evaluation 3.2.1 Formative and Summative Evaluation 3.2.2 Advantages of Formative Evaluation 3.2.3 Advantages of Summative Evaluation 3.3 Other Types of Evaluation 3.4 General Purposes of Evaluation in Education 3.5 Model of Curriculum Evaluation 3.6 General Steps to Follow in Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the last module in your study of curriculum development.
This module is concerned with evaluation.
It is an important, concluding module because evaluation determines whether the objectives have been achieved or not.
It must be properly done.
The evaluation instrument must be well designed though in this case it is in form of questions which are used as observation instruments to assess how far or how well the curriculum objectives have been achieved.
You will learn that evaluation of the curriculum is important especially because it aids decision making about the curriculum, and such decisions may include ways of improving or revising the curriculum that has been implemented.
I hope you still remember the cyclic models of the curriculum, which you learnt in previous modules?
So, I urge you to 107EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE relax and enjoy this first unit, which is an attempt to help you understand some concepts and meanings pertaining to curriculum evaluation in order to facilitate your understanding of the remaining part of this concluding module.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you would be able to: (i) explain the different concepts/meanings of evaluation; (ii) differentiate the various types of curriculum evaluation; (iii) distinguish among the models of evaluation; (iv) identify the purposes for evaluation; (v) identify the general steps to follow in evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept/Meaning of Evaluation Looking back at the history of human culture, it is not difficult to see that human being have evolved a culture of judgment.
In other words, human beings at every level, group, institutions or government have devised systems or process by which they may pass judgment such as “good” or “bad” on something or somebody.
For example, people have ideas of pronouncing a work of art as “beautiful” or “not beautiful”; a dress as “fitting” or “not fitting”, a performance in music as “excellent” or “very good” or “not good” etc.
These are various outcomes of evaluation procedures.
In other words, some criteria were used in coming to the conclusion about whether something is good or bad.
The words “good” or “bad” therefore, shows final judgment passed upon that thing after considering certain qualities it possesses and using certain criteria to measure these qualities.
This is a correct way to illustrate the concept of evaluation.
In curriculum development, however, evaluation, or the process of passing judgment on educational programmes, is technical as it employs systematic and scientific methods before arriving at the conclusions.
Simply put, one may say that evaluation in education is “a process of appraising educational programmes to determine whether or not, programme goals has been achieved”, (Daramola, 1995).
However, there are other definitions, as you would have already known that scholars often define concepts differently because of the perspectives from where each of them views the concept.
Let us look at some of these definitions: (i) Lewy (1977), defined evaluation essentially as the provision of information for the sake of facilitating decision making at various stages of curriculum development; 108EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (ii) Bloom (1971), viewed evaluation as “the systematic collection of evidence to determine whether in fact certain changes are taking place in the learners, as well as to determine the amount or degree of change in individual students”; (iii) Johnson (1978), said that evaluation is “the process of delineating, obtaining, and providing useful information for judging decision alternatives.
You will have seen from these definitions that, evaluation in curriculum is a scientific process involving the expertise of professionals.
Curriculum evaluation is not general but specific, using specific methods based on certain criteria.
If you critically look at the three definitions above, you will have seen some similarities between (i) and (iii), which are both different from (ii).
These are the similarities and differences: (a) Definitions (i) and (iii) tend to emphasize the role of evaluation or what evaluation is used for.
In other words, curriculum evaluators embark on the process because of the usefulness or function the outcome will provide for them, which in this case is decision-making; (b) Definition number (ii) on the hand is concerned with the goal of evaluation.
Questions such as the following are asked: Are changes taking place in the learners or not?
Is the purpose of curriculum being achieved as evidenced from the learners’ performance?
Is the curriculum doing what it really is expected to do?
These two categories have been selected from among numerous definitions available to show that all of them are concerned either with roles which curriculum evaluation is being expected to perform or goals of curriculum evaluation.
However, Stake (1967), tried to strike a balance between the goal-oriented definition and the roles of evaluation definitions.
He said that, evaluation is comprehensive, giving a full description (of performance) with statistical support, showing what happened, highlighting the merits and shortcoming of a programme and offers generalization for “the guidance of subsequent educational programmes”.
In summary, it may be concluded that evaluation has both quantitative and qualitative aspects.
The quantitative aspects pertain to the assignment of scores to performance based on certain criteria, and the qualitative aspect refers to the value placed upon the scores assigned to 109EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE the material.
For example 40% in a mathematics test is quantitative, but the value attached to it (e.g.
fair) is qualitative.
3.2 Types of Evaluation The classification of evaluation into types emanates naturally from the purpose, which the curriculum planner has in mind before evaluating.
For example, one classification has been identified as Direct and Indirect Evaluation by Daramola (1995).
Let us take them one by one.
(a) Direct Evaluation: This is the evaluation of the educational programme itself.
This is done to determine whether the programme is adequately serving its purpose or not.
It involves the assessment of goals to determine its suitability, the adequacy of the subject content and the appropriateness of instructional materials and personnel.
So, it is the programme that is being evaluated NOT the students.
This type is done by experts, who judges each of the constituent parts of the educational programme against some criteria to determine whether the educational programme will serve or is serving its purpose or not.
(b) Indirect Evaluation: This involves the assessment of students’ performance in the programme.
The purpose of this is to find out whether or not the desired behaviour change has taken place (Don’t forget that, learning is said to occur only when a relatively permanent change takes place in the behaviour, skill or attitude of the learner).
Usually, evaluation tools such as test (oral or written) examination and other measuring devices are used in this type of evaluation.
Whether direct or indirect, evaluation of the educational programme is important in order to determine the strength and the weaknesses inherent in the programme so that appropriate or necessary modifications may be made if the programme is found to be inadequate.
If, however, the outcome of evaluation shows that the programme is adequate, such programmes may be retained.
So, evaluation is an integral part of the development of an educational programme.
You should understand what is being said in (a) and (b) above very well.
What we are saying is that the educational programme can be evaluated to determine its suitability for the achievement of overall purpose of the programme, and that, this can be done either directly as in (a) or 110EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE indirectly as in (b).
In other words, through students’ performance in the programme, the curriculum developer can evaluate the educational programme as well.
However, evaluating students’ performance in the programme serve may other useful purposes as you will see in your study of subsequent units.
3.2.1 Formative and Summative Evaluation These are two other types of evaluation.
They are very useful in determining either the usability (formative) or suitability (summative) of an educational programme.
(a) Formative Evaluation: This is the type which is done at the planning stage of curriculum development.
The outcome of such an evaluation is used as an input to improve on the programme before its final adoption.
In other words, it is a kind of tryout method to enable the curriculum developer tell whether or not the programme goals and materials provided are usable and to make necessary changes where possible.
Thus, the curriculum developer uses formative evaluation to detect flaws in the programme so that necessary adjustment to the programme can be made.
Four basic questions such as proposed by Tyler (1971) are still relevant in formative evaluation of a curriculum that is being developed and these are: (1) What educational purposes should the school seek to attain?
(2) What educational experiences can be provided that are likely to attain these purposes?
(3) How can these educational experiences be effectively organised?
(4) How can we determine whether these purposes are being attained?
As the curriculum developer attempts to answer the questions in each step of the curriculum development process, he is undertaking formative evaluative.
Formative evaluation is also done at instructional or classroom level.
The classroom teacher gives continuous assessment in order to ascertain the weaknesses of his teaching method, materials used, and other learner 111EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE variables, which hinder leavening.
The result of such evaluation is taken into consideration in designing or planning the next lesson.
(b) Summative Evaluation: This is a systematic attempt to determine if a fully developed programme in use is meeting its objectives or not.
Thus, this type of evaluation usually takes place at the end of the process when the curriculum has been put into use in a given period.
It is like an evaluation of a finished product already placed in the market.
It usually takes the form of quizzes, tests, tern papers, reports, personal observations of students, class contributions especially when lessons are taught and end-of-term or end-of course examinations are given.
So, students performance in the programme can be used as summative evaluation of that programme as well as determine how well students have learnt the materials presented.
Now, if you have been following the study, you would probably have realised that both formative and summative evaluation are complimentary to each other.
For example, when evaluation is done at the end of a programme, course or lesson, the result provides feedback, which forms an input into the planning of the next programme or lesson as the case may be.
Thus, what was done at the end (summative evaluation) now serves again as input data (formative evaluation) to improve upon or retain the educational programme.
In summary, let me highlight for you the advantages of each type of evaluation.
3.2.2 Advantages of Formative Evaluation (1) It provides reassurance for curriculum developers that the programme will be more of a success than a failure, because it is being tested or proved.
That is, it rules out guess work as to whether the programme will succeed or not, because, the outcome of the evaluation will show, and modifications can be made before the programme is put out for use; (2) It allows materials and methods to be fully tested under varying conditions; (3) At the instructional or classroom level, formative evaluation especially in the form of continuous assessments, provide feedback to the student himself (he/she can see his/her own performance and judge for himself/herself whether she/he is making progress or not); 112EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (4) It also provides feedback to the teacher to know what aspects of his instructional plan require modification; (5) It serves as feedback to curriculum experts concerning learning success and failures; (6) It helps students (and parents too) to avoid failures which may occur at the end of a schooling period as students performance is constantly being monitored through tests so that corrections can be made along the way before the end of the period.
3.2.3 Advantages of Summative Evaluation (1) It is the sum (i.e.
evaluation of the totality of the programme and is useful in making judgements or decisions about the programme; (2) It shows the quality (i.e.
fair, good, very good, excellent) of students’ performance in the programme through various forms of measurement and evaluation procedures; (3) The exercise carried out (i.e.
summative evaluation) is done with the use of statistical tools, which are objective, and the result is regarded as valid and reliable.
Such statistical tools include processing test results using mean scores, percentages, percentile rankings and others.
The result of the evaluation is taken as authentic and having been interpreted, decisions can be taken (e.g.
Pass/fail/repeat or withdraw) based on the proven interpretations.
3.3 Other Types of Evaluation: There are many other types of evaluation, but they are named according to the purposes which they serve.
For example, there are: (i) Diagnostic evaluation, to find out what is wrong with a learner or learning programme.
So it diagnoses problems; (ii) Placement evaluation, the result of which is used to place (put in place) a student in a class or an educational programme.
It is also used in job interviews to place a worker in certain job positions; (iii) Advisory evaluation, whose result is used to provide useful advice for decision makers; 113EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (iv) Predictive evaluation, used to predict performance in the next class or next level.
3.4 General Purposes Evaluation in Education Whether evaluation is formative or summative, direct or indirect, it serves some general purposes of: 1. providing information about students’ progress; 2. rendering judgement about the worth of a programme; 3. serving as motivation for students; 4. allocating and selecting students into various courses or classes; 5. providing feedback to both students, teachers, school administrators and government.
Self – Assessment Exercise 1.
If you were a teacher posted to a new class at the beginning of a session, state what type of evaluation, you would carryout before you begin to teach your subject in this new class.
Answer only in one word; 2.
Give at least Two reasons (in two Sentences only) why you would use that type of evaluation.
3.5 Models of Curriculum Evaluation In this segment, you will have for your understanding mainly, that experts provided models by which we must carry out curriculum evaluation – just as we have models of curriculum planning generally.
A few of these models are hereby itemized for you: (1) The Research and Development (R&D) Model: This was developed by Lawton (1982).
This model is taken from the industrial setting where products are tested before it is marketed, as well as when it is already in the markets to see whether it is achieving the stated objectives for manufacturing it.
When used in educational settings, curriculum goals are translated into specific behaviour objectives and thereafter a relevant test is designed to test it before use.
Also, while in use, students’ performances according to the stated objectives are also 114EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE assessed to find out if the programme is fulfilling its stated objectives.
(2) Goal Attainment Evaluation Model: Lewy (1977) developed this model based on Tyler’s (1971) four basic questions already studied in subsection 3.1.1(a) of this unit.
In this model, an evaluator sends feedback in the shortcomings of the curriculum to the designer so that he can continue to vary the treatment or methodology until the learners’ behaviours matches the specified objectives.
(3) Stufflebeam’s CIPP Model: Stufflebeam (1969) designed this model.
The full meaning of CIPP is context – input – process – product.
It sees evaluation from a holistic standpoint, a further development of Tyler’s model.
Thus, from planning, through designing and implementation, evaluation takes place to identify specific problems at each level.
For example, context evaluation involves analysis of problems and needs in a specific educational setting so as to provide rationale for how adequate and relevant the curriculum objectives are: The input evaluation is concerned with obtaining information on personnel (e.g.
teachers) and materials, to be used in attaining the educational objectives.
Process Evaluation is meant to identify the implementing decisions taken to control, utilize and define procedures in order to detect the strength and weaknesses of the programme and see if the goals have been achieved or not.
So, it is done after curriculum implementation.
Product Evaluation measures and interprets what has been achieved by an educational programme.
The outcome is useful in providing information and suggestions for continuing, modifying or terminating the programme.
3.6 General Steps to Follow in Evaluation These include: (1) Determination and clarification of what is to be evaluated in behavioural terms; 115EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (2) Selection of suitable tools, materials, devices etc.
to be used in evaluation.
The tools must be both valid and reliable; (3) Measurement using the tools with particular care during the administrative and scoring to avoid errors; (4) Comparing the result of the measurement with what is to be expected; (5) Passing judgment on the basis of the information collected by showing the difference between the expected and actual outcome.
4.0 CONCLUSION To evaluate is to pass judgment.
It involves a process and it can be an interesting exercise.
You would have seen that it is a necessary concluding aspect of the curriculum development process, especially more so at the instructional level.
If we do not evaluate, how do we know if our programmes are successful or not?
If students were not tested, how can educators be sure that students have learnt?
This unit therefore, has provided you with on interesting introduction to an adventure into evaluation of curriculum programmes.
I believe you must have found the study useful and interesting.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, what you have learnt may be summarized as follows: (i) Evaluation has different concepts and meaning, but whatever definition is given by experts, three major emphasis is noted; (a) Definitions emphasizing roles which evaluation plays in education; (b) Definitions which emphasize goals of evaluation; (c) Definitions which combine both.
(ii) Various types of evaluation, out of which two are the major ones namely formative and summative evaluation; (iii) The major advantages of formative evaluation is to provide feedback for modifying curriculum in order to achieve the objectives, while the major advantage of summative evaluation is to determine how far an educational programme has achieved the 116EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE stated objectives, especially judging from students performance in the programme; (iv) The major differences between formative and summative evaluation is that the former is done at any stage of the curriculum design especially the beginning, but the latter is done at the end of curriculum implementation.
Summative evaluation is also the evaluation of the total programme while the formative one is the evaluation of part of the programme; (v) You also learnt in this unit the general steps to follow in evaluation.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt to provide a working definition of evaluation for yourself, based on what you have studied in this unit, and explain your reasons for giving the definition.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Alaezi, O (1993) Educational Research and the Nigerian New School Curriculum.
Jos: Fab Educational Books.
Bloom, B.S; Hastings, J. T & Madans, G. F (1971).
Handbook on Formative and Summative Evaluation of Student Learning.
N. Y; Mcgraw Hill Book CN.
Daramola, S. O (1995), Curriculum Development in Schools.
Ilorin: Lekan Printing Press.
Johnson, M (1967), Definitions and Models in Curriculum Theory.
Education Theory, (17) (1), 125 – 140.
Lawton, B (1982), The Politics of Curriculum Evaluation in McCormic, R. Calling Educator to Account.
London.
Heinemann Educ.
Books, ltd. Lewy, A (1977), Handbook of Curriculum Evaluation.
N. Y. Harpernad Row Stake, E (1967) The Countenance of Evaluation.
Teachers College Records; 68, 452-540.
Stake R. E. (1967) “Towards a Technology for the Evaluation of 117EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Educational Programme” in Tyler, R.W etal.
Perspective of Curriculum Evaluation.
Chicago: Rand McNally & Co. Tyler R. W (1971), Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
118EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 2 CURRICULUM OBJECTIVES AND EVALUATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Making Clear Statements of Objectives as Prerequisites for Curriculum Evaluation 3.2 Stating Clear Objectives for Evaluation Purposes 3.3 Behaviour Words Corresponding to the Taxonomy of Educational Objectives 3.2.1 Table 1: Behaviour Words in the Cognitive Domain 3.2.2 Table 2: Behaviour Words in the Affective Domain 3.2.3 Table 3: Behaviour Words in the Psychomotor Domain 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As it has been said at the beginning of this module, the final step in curriculum development is evaluation.
Without carrying out an assessment of curriculum, it would be difficult if not impossible to confirm or disconfirm its worth in fulfilling the goals of the curriculum designers.
So, if we say that education is a process the outcome of which is expected to be a change in behaviour, attitude or skill of the learner, then we can only seek to know if this change has been possible through the objectives set out at the beginning.
This unit is set to examine therefore, the role or importance of objectives in relation to evaluation of the curriculum.
If you would remember, you studied in Module II Unit 1 that objectives are very important in curriculum planning because one should know where one is going before setting out.
In the same way when one has arrived at the destination, it is important to verify whether or not one has indeed arrived there.
Evaluation provides the means of ascertaining the attainment of educational objectives.
So, relax once again, and enjoy this interesting study.
119EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you would be able to: (i) State educational objectives specifically in behaviour terms; (ii) Apply the behavioural objectives in assessment and evaluation of the curriculum; especially as it concerns the classroom teacher; (iii) Identify behaviour words or action verbs that correspond to each level of each of the three domains of educational for objectives purposes of providing adequate evaluation questions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Making clear statements of objectives as prerequisites for Curriculum Evaluation It has been said, and it is being repeated here once again that, objectives form an important basis for curriculum evaluation.
Without the knowledge of the objective of an educational programme it is impossible for anyone to judge how adequate or otherwise that programme is for example the first question to ask in evaluating a programme is what are the objectives which the programme is seeking to attain?
Then, the question “how well or how far has the purpose has been fulfilled, an evaluation question, is based upon the objectives.
It will be an error for example to assess particular programmes based upon the objectives of another one.
However, to be able to take one of the numerous decisions an evaluation outcome can provide and offer useful suggestions for the assessment tools to be used, the objectives must be very well stated in clear, behavioural terms.
In classroom instruction for example, it is important to state the lesson’s objectives in a manner that is not likely to be misinterpreted by the learners.
The objectives, of course, are in form of the end behaviour or terminal behaviour that the teacher expects at the end of a period of instruction.
It is when the behaviour to look for at the end is clearly stated that the teacher can prepare an adequate measuring tool to test whether the behaviour change has actually taken place or not.
Thus a clear and precise statement of educational objective is the first step in curriculum evaluation.
3.2 Stating Clear Objectives for Evaluation Purposes This has been studied in Unit 1 of module II, but some of the important aspects will be repeated here and related to evaluation procedures.
You 120EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE will remember therefore that three important components of a clear statement of objective were studied earlier.
This is being re-stated below: (i) The objective must specify what students are to do.
An action verb must be used to specify this.
such verbs include: tell, speak; write; demonstrate; show; illustrate, etc; (ii) The situation or circumstances under which the behaviour must occur must also be stated.
Look at this example, “By the end of the lesson, students will be able to draw an appropriate map of Nigeria and identify the rain forest zone”.
This is a two-dimensional statement.
This is a typical lesson objective.
Unarguably, without the map, the students cannot be adequately tested: so, two things are being taught here: ability to draw the map of Nigeria, and to identify the rain forest zone on the map drawn.
This is very clear.
An evaluator knows what exactly he is looking for here and the judgement he would pass at the end of an assessment of the students’ work in this case, can not but be in accordance with the stated objectives.
In evaluation question such as this one below is likely to be drawn in order to test if the objective is realised or not.
“Draw an appropriate map of Nigeria and identify the rain forest zone”.
Can you now see the relationship between the objective and the evaluation statement?
(iii) The third part is the minimum acceptable level of performance required before it can be said that the objective has been satisfactorily stated.
Again, consider the following example: “By the end of the lesson the students will, without the use of a calculator or mathematical table, be able to find the square root of 12 without making more than one mistake”.
Again, a corresponding evaluating question must incorporate the minimum acceptable level; in this case, only one mistake is allowed to specify minimum level of performance.
In other words, if during evaluation, the student makes more than one mistake, he/she has failed the test.
These examples prove the point that, clear statements of objectives are crucial to appropriate evaluation of an educational programme.
121EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Self Assessment Exercise 1.
State two objectives of a lesson in your subject area and two corresponding evaluation questions 3.3 Behaviour Words Corresponding to the Taxonomy of Educational Objectives If you remember in your earlier study in Module II Unit 1 subsection 3.3, we looked at the three domains of educational objectives.
Now, when you have to state objectives at each of the three domains you need to use specific, behaviour words or action verbs, as already explained before.
Now, samples of some typical behaviour words or action verbs which express objectives at each of the three domains and at the various levels in each domain are hereunder provided for you.
3.3.1 Table 1: Behaviour Words in the Cognitive Domain 1.00 Catalogue, count the number of, define, enumerate, label, Knowledge name, recall, recite, recollect, remember, reproduce, say, select, state, tell, measure, conjugate.
2.00 Abridge, characterize, compress, convert, defend, describe, Comprehension distinguish, estimate, exemplify, explain, express, identify, illustrate, infer, narrate, paraphrase, precise, report, represent, retell, summarize.
3.00 Arrange, assemble, compute, construct, decipher, Application demonstrate, detect, draw, forecast, mend, modify, operate, relate, solve, use, utilize.
4.00 Break down, classify, diagram, differentiate, discriminate, Analysis disseat, grade, group, identify, illustrate, isolate, outline, rank, reduce, select, separate, simply, sketch, specify, split, and sub-divide.
5.00 Categorize, compile, compose, create, design, devise, Synthesis generate, initiate, innovate, invest, make, model, modify, plan, predict, produce, project, re-arrange, reconstruct, reorganize, and revise.
6.00 Assess, choose, compare, conclude, contrast, criticize, Evaluation deduce, defend, grade, infer, interpret, judge, justify, match rank, rate, select, support.
122EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.3.2 Table 2: Behaviour Words in the Affective Domain 1.00 Accept, ask, attend, choose, contribute, follow, give, Receiving identify, listen, locate, name, select, speak, uphold.
2.00 Assist, comply, conform, demand, discuss, help, invite, Responding recommend, report, request, seek, tell, use.
3.00 Argue, defend, describe, from attitude, differentiate, Valuing explain, imitate, share.
4.00 Adhere, classify, combine, compare, create, defend, Organisation generate, integrate, modify, order, produce, relate, show, sort, synthesize.
5.00 Act, conduct, discriminate, display, dwell, mark, mark, Characterization participate, perform, practice, propose, qualify, question, by a value serve, show, solve, typify, use, verify, work.
3.3.3 Table 3: Behaviour Words in the Psychomotor Domain 1.00 Level, 1.00 not included because it concerns Level spontaneous movement not taught by teachers.
It is concerned in instituted natural motor activities.
i.e.
all the Reflex Movements.
2.00 Basic-fundamental Ascend, bend, bounce-pass, button, catch, chalk, mvts.
construct, descend, handle, jump, lace, land in both feet together, paint, pull, push, roll, sun, shift, slide, stoop, stretch, pull, push, roll, sun, shift, slide, stoop, stretch, sway, throw, tie, twist, walk, zip.
3.00 Catch, categorize, classify, co-ordinate, copy, dance, Perceptual Abilities.
demonstrate, differentiate, distinguish, draw, group, identify, kick, maintain, balance, recite, recognize, remember, reproduce, see, select, tract, translate (Branlle).
4.00 Physical Abilities Add, bend, decrease, endure, increase, manipulate, move fast, stop, sustain.
5.00 Skilled Movements Catch, decrease, hit, perform, punt, serve, type.
6.00 Non-Discursive This is also not included.
Communication.
From Table 1-3, you should have seen that, writing clear statements of objectives using action verbs is crucial to evaluating and that all three 123EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE domains of educational objectives can be assessed.
One other important point to mention, however, is that the clear statements of objectives is equally important in choosing the right type of evaluation tool!
In the next unit, you will undergo a study on evaluation tools or devices, and you will be able, once again to see clearly the relationship between objectives and evaluation.
4.0 CONCLUSION It cannot be overemphasized that, evaluation of a curriculum or an instructional programme is crucial so as to determine whether the objectives are being achieved or not.
It has been shown in this study that the evaluation can only be done if and only if the objectives are clearly stated because it is specific to the type of evaluation questions and tools to be used.
This fact is applicable at all levels of curriculum evaluation.
The practical examples provided, I believe, will stimulate you to further practice making clear statements objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY At the end of this unit, I believe you have learnt the following: (i) That evaluation can hardly be done without first considering the objectives set out at the beginning of the development process; (ii) That these objectives must be clearly stated and with precision using action verbs, because it is the basis for the evaluation procedure; (iii) That action verbs, samples of which have been provided, must be used and evaluation done at the three domains of educational objectives.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Study Table 1 which contains behaviour words at the six levels of the cognitive domain of educational objectives and answer the following questions: (1) Demarcate the lower and higher levels respectively among the six levels of the cognitive domain; (2) Write an objective for a lesson in your subject area at anyone of the lower and higher levels; 124EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (3) Write a corresponding evaluating question for each of the objectives you have written.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Alaezi, O (1993) Educational Research and the Nigerian New School Curriculum.
Jos: Fab Educational Books Bloom, B.
S; Hastings, J. T & Madans, G. F. (1971), Handbook on Formative and Summative Evaluation of Student Learning N. 4; McGraw Hill Brok Coy.
Harrow, A. J.
(1972), A Taxonomy of the Psychomotor Domain.
N. Y. David McKay Co. Inc. Krathwohl D. R et al (1970) Taxonomy of Educational objective; London, Longman Group Ltd. Ndubisi, A. F (1985), Curriculum Evaluation.
In Onwuka, U (1985) Ed.
Curriculum Development for Africa.
Onitsha: African-Feb Publishers.
125EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 3 EVALUATION DEVICES Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts and Meanings of some Evaluation Terminologies 3.2 Measurement 3.2.1 Assessment 3.2.2 Evaluation 3.3 Measuring or Evaluation Devices 3.3.1 Objectivity of Measuring Devices 3.3.2 Reliability of Measuring Devices 3.3.3 Validity of Measuring Devices 3.3.4 Practicability of Measuring Devices 3.4 Measuring Devices commonly used in Educational Evaluation 3.4.1 Tests 3.5 Constructing Appropriate Classroom Tests 3.5.1 Constructing Good Essay Tests 3.5.2 Advantages/Disadvantages of Essay Tests 3.6 Constructing Good Objective Tests 3.6.1 Table 1: A Test Plan (Blue Print) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION If you recall, you will remember that, the two distinct classifications or types of evaluation done in education are the evaluation of the entire educational programme and the evaluation of students’ performance in the programme.
Both are referred to as curriculum evaluation, but the term is usually restricted to evaluation of the entire educational programme itself.
The evaluation of the entire educational programme, involves an appraisal of the stated objectives to ensure that they are in line with the government policies on Education, the adequacy and relevance of the content, the appropriateness of instructional strategies and materials and the personnel recommended for curriculum implementation.
However, evaluation at classroom level, which is the focus of this unit, concerns students’ performance in the educational programme and it is 126EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE done by using well-constructed measuring devices.
Without these evaluation tools, value judgment such as “good” or “bad” of students’ performance may not be regarded as valid.
Thus, these measuring tools provide a basis for making sound and valid judgments on students’ performance in the educational programme.
This unit is a focus on these evaluation devices and as before, I believe you will find the study interesting.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you would be able to: (i) Clearly distinguish between the terms measurement, assessment and evaluation; (ii) Explain the various measuring devices that are commonly used in educational evaluation; (iii) Construct appropriate tests as devices for measuring students’ performance in an educational programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concepts and meaning of some Evaluation Terminologies Curriculum evaluation, especially at classroom levels, involves the use of assessment tools.
However, it will be necessary, first of all, to clarify some terminologies, which students often find confusing so that learning may be easy.
These concepts include: measurement, assessment, and evaluation.
3.2 Measurement This means the assignment of number or a given score to students’ performance to show what the performance is worth quantitatively.
For example, teachers assign scores of 20%, 40% and 60% etc to students’ performance to show students’ level of performance in terms of amount of mark allocated to it.
Measurement is the first step in the evaluation process.
Without first measuring students’ performance, no further step can be taken to judge the students’ performance.
Measuring devices must therefore be appropriate, valid and reliable.
127EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.2.1 Assessment This is the next step in the evaluation process.
It involves the comparison of one students’ score with another.
Through the comparison, the evaluator is able to see the performance of students relative to others.
It is an important step because it is useful in assigning positions such as 1st or 2nd etc.
Thus, it is the interpretation of the scores in relation to other students score to explain relative performance.
3.2.2 Evaluation This is the final stage in the process of evaluation of students’ performance.
It is at this point that values are attached to the scores such as “good” “pass” “passed with distinction”, “fail” “bad failure”, and so on.
You will see from here that, evaluation is a process; that is, the evaluator does not just pronounce final judgment without going through some process which begins with measurement.
So, all three terms are subsumed in the terminology called “evaluation” 3.3 Measuring or Evaluation Devices You will have discovered that the first step in the evaluation process, which is “measurement”, is the most crucial.
It is so because when the device is not properly constructed it will yield wrong scores and this in turn will lead to wrong judgement, or inaccurate evaluation.
To avoid this, measuring devices must possess certain very important qualities, which are validity, reliability and objectivity.
We may also add practicability though this is no less crucial.
3.3.1 Objectivity of Measuring Devices If two different persons competent in the use of the evaluation or measuring instrument obtain similar results from using the device, then such a device is said to be objective.
However, if the two such experts obtain different results, then the instrument or device is said to be subjective.
Such an instrument or device should be improved upon to yield more objective scores.
This can be done through clarifying the specifications for scoring.
If it is a device for observing a behaviour or skill, e.g.
serving the ball in a game of tennis, then specification of a required record of the behaviour must be made.
128EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.3.2 Reliability of Measuring Devices The device must be consistent in measuring what it measures overtime and on different occasions.
In other words whether the device is used twenty times and on twenty different occasions or whether it is used in three or ten months interval of time, the result must always be the same.
This is consistency of measurement.
An example is a one-foot ruler.
The small spaces in between the small lines on the ruler must be the same and a one-foot ruler must not be different in length from another one- foot ruler.
So, each time, or as many occasions as the ruler is used to measure objects, it is expected to yield the same results or the instrument (in this case the ruler) cannot be said to be reliable.
In using paper-and-pencil tests, such as we use in the classroom, efforts must be made to ensure that they are reliable.
3.3.3 Validity of Measuring Devices Validity refers to the capacity of the device to measure what is stated in the objectives.
If the device does not measure what it purports to measure, then it is not valid.
For example, if students were to be tested in spoken French, the test to ascertain this behaviour must be based on oral performance, so that students’’ behaviour/performance can be directly observed and measured against the criteria of performance.
If however, students were given a written test to write the phonetics of the sounds when in fact an oral production of sounds is required, then the written test is NOT valid.
A good question which may help you to understand this concept very well is: does the device measure what it sets out to measure and nothing else other than behaviour expected to be measured?
That is, if it measures something else other than the behaviour expected to be measured, then the instrument is not valid.
3.3.4 Practicability of Measuring Devices This deals with many things including the administration of the test.
Practical questions such as the following need to be asked to determine the practicability of a test: Is it economical in terms of cost or time?
Is it convenient?
Can it be easily scored and interpreted?
Teachers and test experts must seriously consider these things.
3.4 Measuring devices commonly used in Educational Evaluation There are various types including tests, direct observations, interviews, questionnaires and rating scales etc.
129EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.4.1 Tests There are many types used in the classroom but the four main types that are being studied in this unit are: oral, objective, essay and performance test.
a) Oral Tests Oral tests include those requiring oral performance as in the languages or singing, or wherever the oral productions of sounds are required.
These tests are measured according to the criteria set out for performance by the tester.
(b) Objective Tests These include the multiple choice and the alternative forms.
Others include the short answer type in which words or phrases are supplied.
It is commonly used at instructional level to measure students’ achievement in an instructional programme.
(c) Essay Tests This involves writing freely in sentences, responses to the question asked by the instructional evaluator.
So, the student is free to choose his words, embellish them the way he likes, and organise ideas the way he wants, that would reflect his own unique style of writing.
Both the essay and objective tests are most commonly used by teachers.
(d) Questionnaire/Rating Scales These forms of evaluation involve responses to questions which seek to assess the curriculum.
They are usually on a response pattern of Yes/No, True/False, or a Likert – type scale ranging from Strongly Agree to Strongly Disagree.
(e) Direct Observations Direct observations involve, as the name implies, a direct observation of learners or other implementers of the curriculum.
Students are observed to find out if certain skills or habits expected by learners are being demonstrated or not, e.g.
making ceramics from clay.
The implementers of the curriculum e.g.
teachers are also observed to assess their competence levels and to detect other flaws in the curriculum.
130EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE (f) Interviews Interviews involve oral questioning of students to find out if the change in behaviour, attitude or skills has taken place.
It is also used by the curriculum designer to find out from the implementers how the curriculum is being implemented and whether there are some problems in order to modify it.
Self Assessment Exercise Write down a list of five measuring devices you have seen before.
Explain what each of them is used to measure.
3.5 Constructing Appropriate Classroom Tests The most commonly used evaluation devices by the teacher to evaluate students’ performance in the educational programme are the essay and objective tests.
Although details of principles of test construction are not within the scope of the present study or course, you will be provided with some insight on how to construct good essay and objective tests.
3.5.1 Constructing good Essay Tests The following important points must be borne in mind in constructing good essay tests.
(i) The questions must be related to the objective of the course as well as the content; (i.e.
what was taught); (ii) The language must be concise or specific, not ambiguous so that students know exactly what is required of them; (iii) The students should be given opportunity of free expression; in order words the questions should require free response not one word or one sentence answers.
For example, “What is the capital of Nigeria” requires only one word answer, and this is not an essay-type of question.
Consider this: “Discuss the factors that have been responsible for rapid urban-rural drift in Nigeria in the last ten years”.
The latter is a question requiring free flow of students ideas and expression but the former is not.
The latter is a good example of essay questions; (iv) The time to answer the questions must be born in mind when constructing essay tests; students need to be given a specific time limit but which must be sufficient to answer the questions.
131EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.5.2 Advantages/Disadvantages of Essay Tests (i) It is easy to set but more difficult to mark than the objective test; (ii) Enables the teacher evaluate learners ability to interpret knowledge; (iii) It promotes writing skills; (iv) Scoring of essay tests may be subjective unless an adequate marking scheme is provided.
This is one of its major disadvantages.
3.6 Constructing Good Objective Tests Objective tests are more difficult to set but much easier to score than the essay type.
Also, objective tests permit the evaluator to test according to the taxonomy of educational objectives in all the three domains.
In constructing a good objective test, it is important to make a test plan which will cover the objectives of the lessons.
Study the test plan reproduced below for a discussion of test plan.
You will see that this plan is spread across the three domains of educational objectives.
3.6.1 Table 1: A Test Plan (or Blue Print) for testing on the topic: ‘History of the Kanem-Bornu Empire” Objective at the Three Domains Content 1 2 3 4 5 6 A: Knowledge comprehension Application Analysis Synthesis; Evaluation B: Receiving responding valuing Organisation Characterisation Non- C: Reflex moment basic f/mal Perceptual Physical By a value: Discursive movement Abilities Abilities skilled muts Muts Major A B C A B C A B C A B C A B C A B C Themes Growth of 1 4 0 8 6 0 4 6 1 3 2 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 the Empire Major Contribution 7 3 0 10 4 4 8 4 3 10 2 3 8 2 3 6 0 3 of the Empire Forces of the collapse of 10 2 0 6 4 0 6 2 0 6 2 0 2 2 0 5 0 0 the Empire Forces leading to the 10 8 0 5 6 0 3:6- 6 0 10 7 0 10 6 0 8 0 0 collapse of the Empire Effects of the collapse of 37 17 0 29 20 4 21 18 4 29 13 3 21 11 4 19 0 3 the Empire Total Source: Adapted from Ndubisi (1985) Curriculum Evaluation.
IN Onwuka, U (1985) (ed) Curriculum Development for Africa: African – Fep.
Pub.
132EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE If you had studied Table 1, very well, you would have seen the following: (i) That in constructing objective tests, all the domains of educational objectives plus the levels were taken into consideration; (ii) That A: B: C stand for cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains of educational objectives respectively; (iii) That number 1,2,3,4,5,6 across the Table represent the different levels of each of the educational objectives; (you studied this in earlier units, remember); (iv) That the major themes taught during instruction were under the “content” column; (v) That the number of questions (objective items) set was according to the emphasis laid by the teacher in teaching each theme.
For example, on the theme “Growth of the Empires” 10 tems were set under knowledge level of the cognitive domain while 4 were set on the corresponding first level of the affective domain and none was set on the corresponding first level of the psychomotor domain; (vi) That the total number of items in each showed the varying emphasis of the teacher during instruction.
Thus, you will have seen that constructing an objective test is much more laborious than constructing essay tests, but the objective test gives more room to cover all the domains of educational objectives.
Self Assessment Exercise Study Table 1 again very well and answer the following questions, giving reasons for your answer: (1) Which of the domains of educational objective was emphasized more than others during instruction?
(2) Which of the levels was more emphasized in all the three domains of the educational objectives?
(3) Why was there no level 6 of the Affective Domain in the Test Plan?
133EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 4.0 CONCLUSION You will have learnt in this unit that curriculum evaluation is a necessary but interesting exercise.
It involves expertise on the part of the evaluator.
Evaluation of curriculum also involves two aspects: evaluation of the programme and evaluation of students’ performance in the programme, the latter being a useful tool also for evaluating the programme.
I hope you have enjoyed the study.
5.0 SUMMARY I believe you have learnt in this unit, (i) That curriculum evaluation is a necessary but an interesting exercise.
Without it, the curriculum designer may not be able to ascertain how well the curriculum is succeeding or failing in achieving its goals; (ii) That it is important that evaluation devices be found to be valid, reliable, objective and practicable; (iii) That the major focus in this unit is evaluation at classroom level or evaluating of students’ performance in the programme; (iv) That objective and essay test, with each having their advantages and disadvantages, are the most commonly used type of tests in schools; (v) That the tests construction (objective test in particular) must be preceded first by drawing up a test – plan or a test-blue print as already shown in Table 1.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Study Table 1 again and afterwards, construct a test Blue Print or Test Plan for what you taught (would have taught) in a given class in your subject area.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Daramola, S. O (1995).
Curriculum Development in Schools.
Ilorin: Lekan Press.
Gronlund, N. E (1970), Stating Behavioural Objectives for Classroom Instruction.
N. Y: The Macmillan Coy.
134EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE Gronlund, N. E (1976).
Measurement and Evaluation in Teaching (3rd Ed.)
N. Y. Macmillan Pub.
Coy.
Ndubisi, A. F (1985).
“Curriculum Evaluation”.
In Onwuka, U (1985) ed.
Curriculum Development for Africa.
Onitsha: Africana – Fep.
Publishers 135EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE UNIT 4 USES OF CURRICULUM EVALUATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Why Curriculum Evaluation is necessary 3.2 Relevance of Curriculum Evaluation to Curriculum Revision 3.3 Relevance of Curriculum Evaluation to Curriculum Revision: STAN as a case study 3.4 Summary of Uses of Curriculum Evaluation 3.3.1 Other Uses of Curriculum Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References for Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit concludes your study of curriculum development process.
You will have seen, so far, the cycle nature of curriculum development.
In other words, evaluation is not the end of the process.
The outcome of evaluation is useful in determining the changes or revision that would be made in new curriculum plans and setting new objectives.
In a changing world, curriculum development cannot be a static process, but a dynamic one that will reflect the changes occurring in the environment; in new knowledge from research, and in new methodologies and materials for instruction.
Therefore, in this concluding unit, you will study the various uses of curriculum evaluation.
You will be able to see clearly, that without evaluating the curriculum, it is impossible to know of the objective were achieved or not, and it will equally be difficult to determine fresh objectives for the next plan in a fast changing world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you will be able to explain: (i) Why curriculum evaluation is necessary; (ii) The relevance of curriculum evaluation to curriculum revision; (iii) The various other uses of curriculum evaluation.
136EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Why Curriculum Evaluation is necessary?
One of the major purposes of developing a curriculum for use in Schools is to induct and integrate the younger generation in the society.
Thus, society determines what is taught in schools.
However, society is not static, but dynamic.
Changes occur from time to time in developing new knowledge and new methods of doing things.
The needs of society also changes from time to time.
You will recall, for example, that the needs of society during the pre-colonial period were different from its needs during the colonial era.
And in the immediate post colonial era, educational planners to effect, yet again, changes in the curriculum inherited from the colonial masters, which are no longer relevant to the needs of the new born nation in an age of science and technology.
Thus, in 1999, as you have already studies, Nigerians walks of life gathered to effect curriculum changes.
The outcome of the 1969 curriculum conference was the current National Policy on Education, that are being revised from time to time.
Curriculum revision is therefore a process through which changes are made in the existing curriculum in order to meet the new demands of society for a new social order.
Meeting the requirements of the new social order regards the formulation of fresh objectives or effecting changes in the selection and organization of learning experiences, or changes on methodology and instructional materials and personal, as the case may be.
In each of these aspects of curriculum revision or change evaluation is without doubt very important and relevant.
In other words, evaluation can take place at each of the stages in the curriculum development and the outcome leads to curriculum revision or change.
3.2 Relevance of Curriculum Evaluation to Curriculum Revision You will recall that the first stage in curriculum development is the formulation of objectives.
The evaluation mainly for the purpose of describing how well the curriculum has achieved the intended goals.
For example, the goals may be to find out if the objectives of the Junior Secondary Schools in Nigeria are being achieved or not.
This will require evaluation, either by observing the performance of the products of the Junior Secondary School System, or testing the students on same activities related to the goals of that level of education.
Another illustration may be the need to find out if graduates of Nigerian Universities perform creditably well in the job market in their respective fields.
If it is found that their performance is generally poor, it may call for a revision of the curriculum of Nigerian Universities at any of the stages of the curriculum planning process.
Furthermore, a School or 137EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE University may discover that students perform poorly in the use of English and this may necessitate a review of the curriculum of that school at any of the stages of the development process.
You will therefore see from the foregoing that curriculum evaluation is a useful tool in the dynamic changes that take place in the curriculum planning process.
The data gathered from such systematic evaluation process becomes and important factor in curriculum revision or change.
3.3 Relevance of Evaluation to Curriculum Revision: STAN as A Case The Science Teachers Association of Nigeria (STAN) once embarked upon a process of curriculum revision in Nigeria.
In carrying out this revision, eventually presented was workable.
As an ongoing process of the review, constant evaluation becomes necessary in the process of the review.
The process of review first started with the dissatisfaction with existing science curriculum and a desire for change.
STAN, a professional teacher’ organization, took up the challenge and set up panels for a review of the science curriculum.
The panel came up with the production of the Nigerian Integrated science Project (NISP) which was first put into use in 1966.
This was, and still is, an integrated approach to the study of science at the lower classes of secondary school.
You will recall that in your earlier study of curriculum organization, the Broad field curriculum was discussed, among others, as an integrated approach to curriculum organization.
STAN embarked upon this revision in order to make science education and activity related to life (or living) rather than a series of unrelated and irrelevant (to life) of bits of information.
Thus, a new focus for science education was to relate it to daily life and pupils’ experiences.
The materials eventually produced for school, integrated to major disciplines of science such as Biology, Chemistry and Physics, into Integrated Science which is still being taught today though further review are still being done.
There had to be a try-out stage before the curriculum could be used but STAN did not do this initially.
The try-out stage is a process of formative evaluation, the result of which could have been used then, in preparing the new curriculum.
The Integrated Science Curriculum, however, has come to stay at the primary and junior secondary school level, and it is being perfected from time to time as a result of fee received from evaluation outcomes.
Other bodies, such as Comparative Education Study and Adaptation Centre (CESAC), which was set up to the Federal Government in 1968 at the University of Lagos also engage in curriculum revision through 138EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE among other thins feed back obtained from evaluation.
They had embarked upon production of new curriculum materials – teachers’ texts.
Pupils’ tests, and emphasizing audio –visual materials in teaching.
They have, however, been merged with the Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC) to become Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council.
3.4 Summary of uses of Curriculum Evaluation In the last two sub-units; 3.2 and 3.3, you have seen clearly that evaluation plays important roles in curriculum revision.
You must have remembered from this also that curriculum development process is dynamic and changes are made from time to time to the curriculum from the planning to implementation stages.
So, central to these changes is the important roles of evaluation.
This is the type of evaluation described as evaluation of the educational programme itself.
It is the first type of curriculum evaluation.
The second type which is the evaluation of students’ performance in the programme had been studied in unit 3 of this module.
Do not forget that when students; performance in the educational programme is evaluated; the outcome is also useful in curriculum evaluation or evaluation f the educational programme itself.
However, there are still some other important uses of evaluation in education.
This is written to complement what you have already studied in this regard in unit 3 of Module IV.
3.4.1 Other Uses of Curriculum Evaluation 1.
Curriculum evaluation is an endless process.
It constantly goes on by various agencies or bodies set up by Government to monitor educational programmes within the school system.
For example, the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) constantly monitors the implementation of the curriculum in the schools in line with the National Policy on education publishes the outcome as a new edition of the 6-3-3-4 system.
2.
Bodies such as the National Commission of College of Education (NCCE) have also been set up by the Federal Government to harmonize the curricula for all disciplines in the Colleges of Education in Nigeria.
They also courses and supervise the award of the Nigerian Certificate in Education (NCE) in Nigerian Colleges of Education.
The reason for accreditation of courses is to ensure that standards are maintained in the Colleges.
The accreditation process is an evaluation of the curriculum materials, facilities, personnel and students to ensure standard.
Thus, institutions to ensure quality production of teachers.
Bodies which carry out similar activities at 139EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE the tertiary level are the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) and National Universities’ Commission (NUC).
3.
In Science Education, Daramola (1995) reported that scientific behaviours of learners are evaluated and the result is ploughed back into improving the science curriculum methodology in order to achieve the objectives for science education 4.
Formative evaluation, as had already been studied is useful in determining the strength and weaknesses of the designed curriculum.
Again, the information received is useful in curriculum revision.
5.
Summative evaluation, which had also been studied already, is also useful to take the decision whether to continue or discontinue with a curriculum or to specify the conditions under which it must be used if it was to continue.
4.0 CONCLUSION As it has been said earlier, this unit concludes what you have studied thus far in this course titled: “curriculum development: theory and practice”.
You must have known by the end of this study that curriculum evaluation is a very integral part of the curriculum development process to ensure that objectives are attained.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the fact that: (i) Curriculum evaluation is useful; (ii) Curriculum revision must necessarily involve curriculum evaluation; (iii) Bodies set up by Government such as NERDDC, NCCE, etc and Professional Teachers’ Bodies such as STAN, embark on curriculum in their respective areas of assignment (iv) That both formative and summative evaluation are very important for decision making purposes in the curriculum development process.
140EDU 201 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT: THEORY & PRACTICE 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Distinguish between curriculum evaluation (i.e.
evaluation of the educational programme) and evaluation of students’ performance in the educational programme.
2.
Explain at least TWO reasons why curriculum evaluation is necessary in the curriculum development process.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alaezi, O.
(1993).
Educational Research and the Nigeria New School.
Curriculum.
Jos: Fab Educational Books.
Daramola, S. O.
(1995) Curriculum Development in Schools.
Ilorin: Lekan Press.
Groulund, N. E. (1976) Measurement and Evaluation.
In Teaching (3rd ed) N. Y. Macmillan Pub Coy.
Ndubuisi, A.
(1985) Curriculum Evaluation.
In Onwuka, U.
(1985) Curriculum Development for Africa, Onitsha: Africana FEP Publishers 141
