 NATIONAL OP EN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 412 COURSE TITLE: PRINC IPLES 0F EDUCATIONAL MANAG EMENT  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE CO URSE GUIDE EDU 412 P RINCIPLES 0F EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Course Developer Mr. Timothy Ajadi Olugbenga School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Writer Mr. Timothy Ajadi Olugbenga School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Editor Dr. Ejieh, M. U.
C Faculty of Education Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife Programme Leader Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator Mr. Timothy Ajadi Olugbenga School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
NATIO NAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIG ERIA ii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-330-0 All Rights Reserved iii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction .. .. 1 What You Will Learn in this Course .
1 Course Aims .
.
2 Course Objectives .. 3 Working through this Course .. .. 5 Assessment .. .. 6 Tutor-Marked Assignment .. .. 6 Final Examination and Grading .. .. 7 How to Get the Most from this Course .
7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials .
.
10 Summary .............. 10 iv  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Introductio n EDU412: Principles of Educational Management is a 400 level, second semester course.
It is a two credit unit course for all students offering B.A (Ed), B.Sc (Ed) Education.
The course is also suitable for anyone who wants to learn about the management of education at any level.
The course exposes you to an understanding of many of the concepts of Educational management and its application in the administration of educational institutions.
It will also assist school administrators to be able to apply these concepts to the tasks and roles that they perform as school heads and chief executives in the education sector.
The course consists of sixteen units in three modules and a course guide.
The course takes you through the meaning and basic concepts in educational administration, the development of administration, leadership in educational institutions, supervision of instruction, educational law and control of education in Nigeria, organization of ministries of education, the functions of the state ministry of education, the functions of the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) and other boards of education in Nigeria, school plant, mapping and maintenance and planning of school plant.
So also the course take you through school records, the school time-table, school budget, discipline and the school community relationship.
This Course Guide tells you briefl y what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using and how you will work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you should spend on each unit of the course for its successful completion.
The Course Guide also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignment which will be available at the end of every unit.
There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course at designated centers throughout the country.
You are advised to attend tutorial sessions at designated centre close to you.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of EDU412:Principles of Educational Management is to introduce basic concepts of Educational management and acquaint you with some important skills needed for the application of knowledge of educational management to the day-to-day activities in educational organisations.
An understanding of this course is vital because it serves as a framework for the application of educational management knowledge to administration and other i  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE activities in educational institutions.
From time-to-time, Educational administrators need to make decisions, which may include interpretation of the policies and programmes of government of the country as they affect educational institutions.
During this course, you will learn about educational management as a concept and the roles expected of Educational Administrators in applying these concepts to daily school activities, such as school records, education law and control of education in Nigeria, functions of state primary education board and other boards in the education industry in Nigeria, school records and school budgets.
The course will expose you to an understanding of various types of management support systems available for educational managers which can assist in arriving at a decision without time wastage.
Specific reference will be made to other uses of educational management.
Course A ims The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: to provide students with an understanding of the concepts which underline the use of the knowledge of educational management to enable educational administrators to evaluate the appropriate usage of management techniques, to analyze the influence of educational management to educational organisations, and to plan and manage the available records in the school.
The course also aims to explain: i. the meaning of Management and basic concepts of educational administration; ii.
the functions of school administrators and qualities of school administrators; iii.
the various types of school administrators; iv.
the various types of leadership styles we have; v. the factors influencing the choice of leadership style adopted by a school leader; vi.
the concept of supervision and inspection; vii.
the history of supervision in Nigeria; viii.
the reasons why instructional supervision is a must in Nigerian schools; ix.
the various forms of inspection; x the challenges of supervision of instruction in Nigeria; xi the evolution of education laws in Nigeria; xii the functions of the Federal and States ministries of education in Nigeria; xiii the reasons for the establishment of State Primary Education Board xiv the functions of NUC, NCCE, and NBTE; xv the meaning of school plant, school mapping and management of school plant; ii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE xvi the principles of school plant planning; xvii the stages involved in the provision of school plant; xviii the solutions to the problem of school plant maintenance; xix the importance of school records; xx the reasons for keeping school records; xxi the various types of records kept in the school; xxii the importance of school time -table; xxiii the meaning of a school budget and methods of preparing school budget; xxiv the importance and challenges of school budget; xxv the meaning and causes of acts of indiscipline in our schools; xxvi ways of controlling the act of indiscipline in the schools; xxvii the roles of the school to the community and the roles of the community to the school Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives at the beginning of the unit; you should read them carefully before you start working through the unit.
You ma y want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should also look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In doing so, you will be sure that you have followed the instructions in the unit.
Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • define management, administration, organization and educational administration; • explain the functions of educational administration; • distinguish between management and educational administration; • explain the characteristics of organisation; • enumerate the principles of organisation • define leadership and leadership styles; • identify the various types of leadership styles that can be adopted by educational administrator; • distinguish between supervision and inspection; • define supervision of instruction and explain the purpose of supervision of inspection; iii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE • explain the various forms of inspection we have and the challenges facing supervision of instruction ; • suggests solution to the identified challenges; • distinguish between law and rule; written and unwritten law and statutory and customary laws • trace the history of education law in Nigeria; • distinguish between federal and state ministry of education; • draw the organogram of the federal and state ministry of education; • explain the functions of the federal and state ministry of education; • explain the reason why SPEB is needed; • explain the importance of NUC, NCCE, and NBTE in Nigeria; • trace the historical development of NUC in Nigeria; • define school plant, school mapping and management of school plant; • give reasons why school plant must be maintained; • highlight the various types of school plant maintenance; • define school plant planning; • list the principles of school plant planning and the process of arriving at logical school plant facilities; • mention the types of spaces expected to be provided for at the school site; • explain the constraints militating against school maintenance; • explain the meaning of a school record; • explain the reasons why records are kept in the school; • mention the various records on the statutory and non-statutory lists; • list some vital records in the school and their uses • mention the usefulness of admission register; • define the school time-table; • mention the importance of the school time-table; • mention the various types of time-table; • highlight the guidelines to be followed in constructing a school time-table; • explain the steps to be followed by school head to ensure school effectiveness through effective school time-table; • distinguish between budget and school budget; • list the purpose of a school budget; • explain the various method to be followed in preparation of a school budget; • highlight the challenges facing the school heads in preparing a workable school budget; • define indiscipline; • mention some act of indiscipline among Nigerian adolescence; • discuss the various causes of indiscipline in Nigerian schools; • suggest what school heads can do to ensure discipline in schools; iv  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE • give a brief definition of a school and a community; • list two types of community; • highlight the roles of community to the school; • highlight the roles of school to the community ; • discuss the factors influencing the school community relationship; Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read all the study units in the study material, read other related books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit has self assessment practice exercises, and at regular intervals in the course, you are required to submit assignments/exercises for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, is a final examination.
The course should take you about 16 weeks in total to complete.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Units Titles of Work Number of W eeks to Spend Module 1 THE CONCEPT OF ADMINISTR ATION AND INSTRUCT ION Units 1 Definition and Interp retation of Basic 1 Concepts Unit 2 The Development of Administration 1 Unit 3 Leadership in Educational Institution 1 Unit 4 Supervision of Instruction (1) 1 Unit 5 Supervision of Instruction (2) 1 Module 2 EDUCATION LAW S AND SCHOOL PLANT Unit 1 Education Law and Control of 1 Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Organisation of the Ministry of 1 Education Unit 3 Functions of the State Pr imar y 1 Education Board and Other Boards of Education/Commission in Niger ia Unit 4 School Plant, Mapp ing and Maintenance 1 Unit 5 Planning of School Plant 1 1 Mo dule 3 SCHOOL RECORDS AND ADMINISSTRATION Unit 1 School Record s (1) 1 v  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Unit 2 School Record s (1) 1 Unit 3 The School Time-Table 1 Unit 4 The School Time-Table 1 Unit 5 Discipline and the School 1 Administration Unit 6 School Communities Relationship To tal 16 Each study unit consists of one to two weeks work, and includes introduction, objectives, reading materials, exercises, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignments (TMAs), references/further readings.
In general, these exercise/practice questions, test you on the materials you have just covered and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Together with the tutor- marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course; the first is the self assessment/practice, the second is the tutor-marked assignments; and the third is the end of the semester written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises/practices; you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines set by the authority of the National Open of Nigeria (NOUN).
The tutor-marked assignments you submit to your tutor will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of two hours duration.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked A ssignment You are to contact your study centre to collect the approved tutor marked assignment for the semester.
You are advised to attempt and submit all the tutor marked assignments given to you at the study centre, the best three will be counted for you.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions/Practice Exercises for the units in this course will be contained in the Assignment Folder.
You will be able to complete your vi  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE assignments from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the course.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with the TMA (Tutor-Marked Assignment) form, to your study centre manager/counselor who will hand it over to the instructional facilitator appointed for the course at the study centre.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your study centre on or before the deadline set by the authority of the National Open University Nigeria (NOUN) which will be made known to you through your study center manager/counselor.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your study centre manager/counselor before the assignment is due for submission to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date except in exceptional circumstances.
Final Examina tion and Grading The final examination for EDU412 will be of two hours duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked assignments you previously attempted.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor- marked assignments and the comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
How to Get the Most from this Co urse In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study unit will tell you when to read other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, the study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate time.
Each of the units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
vii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from a Reading Section of some other sources.
Self-assessment practices are interspersed throughout the end of the units.
Working through these practices will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and examination.
You should do each self- assessment exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous exercises given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your facilitator or send an e-mail which will be replied in less than 72 hours.
Remember that your tutor s job is to assist you when you need help, therefore do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to assist you.
• Read through this Course Guide thoroughly.
• Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the Course Overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available through the study centre.
You need to gather all these information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working through each unit of the course.
• Once you have created your own schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please keep your tutor informed before it is too late for help.
• Turn to Unit I and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the "Overview" at the beginning of each unit; you will alwa ys need viii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE both the study unit you are working on and the one on your references, on your desk at the same time.
• Working through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to read sections from your other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
• Well before the relevant due date, check your assignment file and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignment not later than the due date.
• Review the objectives for each study unit; confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your study centre for onward submission to the facilitator to mark, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your facilitator's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on the comments written on the assignment.
Consult your facilitator as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are tutorial/facilitation hours provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of this tutorials/facilitation, together with the names and telephone number of your tutor/facilitator, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
ix  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Your tutor/facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must submit your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor/facilitator well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor/facilitator and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor/facilitator if: You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercise, or You have a question or problem with an assignment you have a question with your tutor s/facilitator s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials/facilitation provided by the NOUN.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor/facilitator and your mates and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials/facilitation, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary EDU412 ( Principles of Educational Management) intends to introduce the concepts and meaning of educational management to you.
Upon completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the important concepts of educational management and the importance of educational management to educational administration.
You will be able to answer these kinds of questions: • What is Management?
• What are the functions of educational management?
• What are the challenges of Educational management in Nigeria?
• What is supervision?
• What are the nexus between supervision and inspection?
• What are the factors that influence the leadership styles adopted by any leader?
• What are the challenges facing supervision in Nigeria?
• What are the differences between civil and criminal law?
• What are the functions of the Federal ministry of education?
x  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE • What are functions performed by SPEB in your state?
• What are the reasons for the establishment of NUC in Nigeria?
• Mention the various types of school plant maintenance • What is school plant?
• What is school mapping?
• What is management of school plant?
• What are the processes of arriving at logical school plant facilities?
• What are the constraints militatin g against school maintenance?
• List the principles of school plant planning?
• What are the solutions to the problems of school plant maintenance?
• What are the reasons why school records are kept by school heads?
• What is school time-table and its importance?
• What are the challenges facing the school head in the preparation of a school budget?
• What is school community relationship?
Indeed, the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above.
To gain the most from this course you should try to apply the principles and concepts of Educational Management to the practice of administration of educational institutions.
xi  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE EDU 412 PRINC IPLES OF ED UCA TIONAL MANA GEMENT Course Developer Mr. Timothy Olugbenga, AJADI National Open University of Nigeria Course Writer Mr. Timothy Olugbenga AJADI National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Dr. Ejieh, M. U.
C Faculty of Education Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife Course Coordinator Mr. Timothy Olugbenga AJADI National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UN IVERS ITY OF NIGER IA xii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-330-0 All Rights Reserved xiii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE PRINC IPLES OF EDUCAT IONAL MANAGE MENT EDU 412 CONTENTS Mo dule 1 THE CONCEPT OF ADMINISTRA TION AND INSTRUCT ION Unit 1 Definition and Interpretation of Basic Concepts Unit 2 The Development of Administration Unit 3 Leadership in Educational Institution Unit 4 Supervision of Instruction (1) Unit 5 Supervision of Instruction (2) Mo dule 2 EDUCATION LAWS AND SCHOOL PLANT Unit 1 Education Law and Control of Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Organisation of the Ministry of Education Unit 3 Functions of the State Primary Education Board and Other Boards of Education/Commission in Nigeria Unit 4 School Plant, Mapping and Maintenance Unit 5 Planning of School Plant Mo dule 3 Unit 1 School Records (1) Unit 2 School Records (2) Unit 3 The School Time-Table Unit 4 School Bud get Unit 5 Discipline and the School Ad ministration Unit 6 School Communities Relationship xiv  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE MODULE ONE THE CONCEPT OF ADMINISTRATION AND INSTRUCTION UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND INTER PRE TATION OF BASIC CONCEPTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Meaning of management 3.2 Meaning of Administration 3.3 The meaning of Educational Administration 3.4 Meaning of organisation 3.5 Classification of organisation 3.6 Characteristics of organisation 3.7 Princip les of organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction Management is often describ ed as a ubiquitous concept, which is p resent in ever y aspect of human endeavour.
Whether in business, hosp ital, religion, or even at home, management is ind ispensable.
Therefore, management is not only necessary, it is also compulsory, as ever y organisation needs to be controlled, ruled or governed.
The absence of management in an y organisation may not only lead to derailment of the ob jectives othfe organisation alone, it may also lead to breakdown of law and order.
It is in this regard that Ogunsaju (1998) contended that management b ecomes a crucial function in every organised society, especially when there are complex assignments to be performed and when two or more people are involved.
1  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to (i) Define management (ii) Distinguish b etween management and administration (iii) Explain what organization is 3.0 Ma in Contents 3.1 The Mea ning o f ma nagement Everyone manages something, even if it is just themselves, and their personal finances.
The essence of management is to achieve a goal as efficiently as possible.
One can also plan for holiday b y carefully planning how to sp end every d ay and make better time and get more out of the holiday.
Management is like investment.
Managers have resources to p lan with, their own time and talent as well as human and material resources.
The goal of management is to get the b est return on those resources by getting things d one efficiently and economically.
The term management means man y things to many people.
In mod ern general saying, the term management imp lies the process by which a cooperative group directs action toward s common goals.
But to a modern industrialist, management means getting things done through other people .
To the economist, management is just one of the factors of production ; to the sociologist, management is a class or status system .
However, in the modern organized context, management is viewed as a social process which is designed to ensure the cooperation, participation and involvement in the effective achievement of a given ob jective.
Management, to Peter Drucker (1999), is an organ of institutions, the organ that converts a mob into an organization and human efforts into p erformance.
Peretomode (1991) also defines management as the performance of executive duties, the carr ying out of policies or d ecisions to fulfill a purpose, and the controlling of the d ay-to-day running of an organization.
Nwadiani and Sokefun (1999) conceive management as a process concerned with creating, maintaining, stimulating, controlling and unifying (formally and informally), organising human and material, energies with a unified system, designed to accomplish pre-determined objective of the organisation.
Sherlekar (1984) defined management as the guid ance, leadership and control of the efforts of a group toward some common objectives.
It is a social/interactional and economic process involving a sequence of coord inated events- planning, - 2 -Page 2 of 132organising, coord inating and controlling or leading in ord er to use available resources to achieve a desired outcome in the fastest and most efficient way.
From the foregoing, management may be defined as a process of coordinating human and material resources is order to achieve an organisation s objectives.
It can also be said that management is a process of assessing and maintaining an environment in which individuals working together in groups, can accomplish pre-selected mission and objectives effectively and efficiency.
2  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The definition of management above has the following implications: 1.
Function: Management implies that managers have functions to p erform within organisations.
Even though such functions may vary from one organisation to another, the process involved is likely to b e the same.
Several authors like Henr i Fayol, Elton Mayo id entified the five basic functions performed b y management of all organizations as p lanning, organising, directing, coordinating and controlling.
Some scholars have add ed budgeting, leading, communicating and educating as other functions of the manager.
2.
Productivity: The essence of management is to produce.
It is interesting to note that most of the enterprises whether private companies, government agencies, or educational institutions (either profit or non profit oriented) are set up to produce either goods, product, people or services.
The ultimate objective of a manager is to create surplus.
In raw economic term, this is referred to as profit maximization.
Management therefore would want to use people and materials ver y efficiently to achieve this goal.
3.
General Application: Management applies to all kinds of organizations owing to the wide distribution of the enterprise which of course includ es all kind s of organisations goal might vary, materials used could be different and people within the organization may differ in age, sex, qualifications.
Whatever the differences, the essence of management is to put them into efficient and effective use.
Therefore, management as an organized body of knowled ge provides clear insight as to how to apply management techniques to achieve organizational goals.
4.
Applicable to all levels: Managements app lies to all levels of organizational life.
It is pertinent to ob serve that within each organization, there is a mapped out structure.
Tsthruec t ure so to say depicts the organizational hierarchy.
Both the structure and the hierarch y therefore depend on ind ividual responsibilities and authorities to perform.
The performance of these th erefore, at any level requires management.
Interestingly, not all group s b elieve that they need management, but it is undisputab le that management is essential in all organized cooperation as well as at all levels of organization in an enterp rise.
Self Assessment Exercise From what you have lear nt, what is the meaning of management and what are its imp lications to a manager?
3.2 Mea ning of Administ ration Administration is the ability to mobilize human and material resources towards achievement of organizational goals.
Ogunsaju (1998) op ines that administration is concerned with a variety of tasks.
Nwankwo (1987 ) in his own view describes ad ministration as the careful and systematic arrangement and use of human and material 3  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE resources, situations and opportunities for the achievement of specific objectives.
However, Campbell, Bridges & Nystrand (1984) said the main purpose of administration in any organization is that of coordinating the efforts of people towards the achievement of its goals.
Peretomode (1991) defines administration as the p erformance of executive duties, the carrying out of policies or decisions to fulfill a p urpose, and the controlling of the day-to-d ay running of an organisation.
From all the above, administration is a process and it is sometimes used synon ymously with management.
Beach (1975) corroborate the statement by saying that administration is a p art of management which is concerned with the installation and carr ying out of the procedures b y which p rogrammes, plans and targ ets are laid down and communicated, and the progress of activities regulated and checked against them.
Administration may be defined as a process of coordinating human and material resources in order to achieve organisational goals.
3.3 Mea ning of Educatio nal Administ ration The concept of educational administration may not be totally different from what we are familiar with in the concept of administration.
In Nigeria, education at d ifferent levels has its objectives as stated in the National Policy on Education, the most important of the objectives that cut across all the levels of education is teaching and learning.
It is tfhuen c tion of the school to produce educated and enlightened human beings who would be ab le to contribute positively to the development of the society.
This formed the op inion of Olaniyi (2000) who describes school as a social institution which does not exist in av a cuum.
He said further that a school is a micro-community, existing within a macro- community to mould the hab its, interest, attitudes and feelings of child ren and transmit from one generation to another.
The school also comprises certain personnel i.e.
teaching and non-teaching staff as well as the students.
These human resources in the school work with some materials, such as instructional mater ials, equipment, and financial resources in order to achieve the objectives of the school as stated in the National Policy on Education (2004).
Administration is very germane to the realization of the school s ob jectives indeed, the success of the school system depend s largely on the administration of the school is handled.
The teachers, students, non-teaching staff and resources must be efficiently arranged, monitored and controlled, so that they would work harmoniously accord ing to (educational plan).
Even the National Policy on Education (2004) emphasizes the success of the entire educational system on prop er planning, efficient administration and ad equate funding.
School administration is the process by which principles, methods and practices of administration are app lied in educational institutions to establish, maintain and d evelop such institutions in line with the goals of the institutions.
Akinwumi & Jayeob a (2004) d efine school administration as the scientific organisation of human and material resources and programmes availab le for education and using them systematically and meticulously to achieve ed ucational goals.
4  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Basically, ed ucational administration imp lies the arrangement of the human and material resources and programme available for education and carefully using them systematically for the achievement of educational ob jectives.
Thus ed ucational administrator, whether in the ministr y of education, the schools board, or in a school is essentially the organiser, the imp lementer of plans, policies and programmes meant for achieving specific educational objectives.
The ed ucational administrator may contrib ute, one way or the other, in planning, policy making and programme designing, yet his major role rests with the effective and efficient imp lementation of such plans, policies and programmes for the benefit of education.
Viewed from this angle, educational administration is concerned with organization and implementation it may be categorized under broad areas of i) Planning and Policy ii) Implementation Although such a categorisation is essentially arbitrary and broad and these aspects of management are closely tied, insep arable and inductive, it is possible to separate the functions of administration from that of planning and policy making in education.
For example the administrator at the ministr y of education (essentially a planner and a policy maker) is concerned with formulating general p lans and policies for education.
Self Assessment Test Distinguish b etween administration and school administration.
3.4.
The meaning of Organisa tion Every human b eing belongs to one organization or the other.
In Nigeria, government workers spend one third of the day i.e.
8 hours (except weekend s) out of the 24 hthoeu r s o rigna n isation where he/she works for a living.
All over the world, groups of pwehoop lseh a re common interests tend to come together to p lan and arrange for how they can actualise such interests.
Any such group of people working together in a coord inated manner to accomplish group results is known as an organization.
Organizations are not new creations.
The Pharaohs used organization to build the p yramids in Egyp t; in modern world, there are many organizations established to cater for daily needs of the society.
.
The word organization has as many definitions as there are perhaps writers in management.
Scholars define the concept differently depending on ind ividual circumstance, experience and / or b ackground.
To Frame and Horton (1996) organizations are social constructs created b y groups in society to achieve specific purposes by means of p lanned and coordinated activities.
These activities involve using human resources and other inanimate resources in ord er to achieve the aims of the organization.
Organisations most times are corporate and they have definite purpose (s) to achieve.
They also has some typ es of structure that delimit and d efine the behaviour of their members.
5  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Schein (1972) defined an organisation as the rational coordination of the activities of a numb er of peop le for the achievement of some common explicit purpose or goal, through division of labour and functions, and through a hierarch y of authority and responsibility.
From the foregoing an organisation could be said to b e a collection of human beings with a common goal.
It is a network of relationship s among ind ividuals and activities; it involves a process of executive function aimed at ensuring that resources, activities and authority relationship s are so coordinated to achieve a common goal.
It can also be said that organisation is a collection of people who have united together to pursue and achieve a common aim through collective effort and the pooling of resources.
Organisations are essential to mod ern life for a number of cogent reasons.
First, organisations enable us to accomplish things which we cannot achieve as individ uals.
Second , organisations help in p roviding continuity of knowledge through the keeping of records, and third, they provide job s or careers.
Consequently, every modern man or woman, for most of his/her life, is obliged to b elong to one organisation or the other, be it an age group, a town or ethnic union, a school or other educational institutions, a religious or civic society, a b ranch of the armed forces, 3.5.
Classificat ion of Organis ations Organisations may be classified into three types: i.
Formal Organisation: this is type of organization that has been intentionally planned and structured in such a way that its membership , the rights and ob ligations of memb ers, degrees of authority, mode of operations and activities are well defined and guided b y laid down rules and regulations which are often d ocumented and known to members.
Formal organization in the ed ucation industry includ es Federal and State Ministries of Education and their different parastatals.
Others include all institutions of higher lear ning e.g.
colleges of education, polytechnics and universities, and second ary schools, technical colleges and primary schools.
Formal organisations comprise groups of people with d efinite id entity, rules, authority and responsibility.
In essence ever y formal organization is set up for the explicit purpose of achieving specific goals and can therefore be distinguished by its task, position and authority relationships.
Each formal organisation is characterised by: (i) a specific task or mission for which it is established, (ii) a single executive head , (iii) a mechanism for p lanning and coord inating the human and materials resources available to it, (iv) a rational decision making mechanism, 6  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (v) the institution of documented rules and regulations for facilitating and enhancing discipline and common organisation b ehavioural standard, (vi) the practice of stimulating and motivating memb ers for op timal performance, and (vii) a structure with well d efined positions, authority r elationships and job s. ii.
Informal Organisation: An informal organization is the set of evolving relationship s and p atterns of human interactions within a formal organization which are not officially prescribed.
These are informal group s which emer ge within the formal organisation with a desire to protect the interest of members within the formal organization.
Factors that led to the formation of informal groups are the nature of work, the location of the staff, poor condition of service, government/management insensitive to workers needs etc.
Examples of informal organisations are trade union, pressure groups within the formal group.
To be a member of an informal organisation, one needs to first be am e mber of a formal organization.
Unlike the formal organizations, informal organizations are usually flexib le in that they rarely have clearly stipulated and documented rules and regulations to control their activities and operations.
Since the emer gence of informal organisations within the formal organisations is inevitab le, they constitute an integral part of every organisation.
They are therefore important in that they could both b e beneficial as well as harmful to the host organisation.
For examp le, since they grow out of the informal relationship s and interactions among members across the structure of the formal organisation, they can also assist in: (i) promoting coop eration among d epartments that have ind irect points of official contact, (ii) providing additional channel of communicating though the grapevine (iii) removing or correcting weakness in the formal structure, (iv) getting work done, (v) help ing members to satisfy their social needs, and (vi) providing emotional support for organization members.
It should b e noted that informal organisations could have negative influences on the formal organsation by: (i) pursuing goals which are contrar y to the goal of the formal organization, (ii) particip ating in acts that can increase the time required to complete formal organisational work, and (iii) operating as a protective shield against the management of the formal organisation 7  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iii.
Social Organisation This group arises out of spontaneous feeling without any hard and fast rules of behaviour and there are no clear cut ob jectives or goals.
This group comprises group s of people with the same social interest.
Example of social organizations are group of friend s, landlord association in a community, social club s etc.
3.6.
Cha racteristics of Organisations The following are some of the characteristics shared by organisations i.
Purpose, Objective or Goal: Organisations ar e set up to pursue certain objectives, goals or purposes.
This ser ves as a rallying point for all activities of its memb ers.
Ap art from serving as a common bond for unity, goals/objectives are means of ensuring organisation performance.
ii.
Task or Activity: There are job s or tasks to be performed or carried out.
Every organisation carries out a major task of one kind or the other that has a relationship to it and is directed towards the realization of its objectives/goals.
iii.
Resources: Organisations make use of human and natural resources to transform raw materials into finished products to achieve the set goals.
Human materials in an organization includ e both skilled and non skilled workers or teaching and non-teaching staff in ed ucational industries, while the material resources include physical facilities, school p lant, instructional facilities, lab oratories, libraries, etc.
iv.
Division of Labour: There is a structure within which various tasks are to be executed by these interacting individuals/group s b ased on the concept of division of labour.
For the achievement of d esired goals, division of labour can be vertical or horizontal.
It is vertical when somebody preferably a superior staff is appointed by the organization to coordinate group s work.
It is horizontal if at least two people work together to achieve the same objectives.
v. Dependence on Environment/Community: No organisation can survive without the community.
All organisations d epend largely on external environment both for the resources to use, and the consumers that would consume the product/services rendered.
Any organization that does not live in harmony with the host environment/community will find it ver y difficult if not imp ossible to survive.
vi.
Sub- Units: There must be sub-units in form of d epartments, divisions or units which are resp onsible for sp ecific ob jectives and tasks.
The activities of various sub-units within the organization are well coord inated towards a pre- determined goal.
3.7.
Principles of Organis ation 8  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE There are some princip les that are common to all organizations.
They are highlighted and discussed below: i.
Unity of Objective to avoid conflict between the employers and management staff of an y organisation the objectives of the organisation must be clearly defined.
Any organisation that wants to remain relevant in the society, shall clearly define the ob jective, and the recognition of these objectives is given serious attention in large and complex organisation because one of the principal functions of the chief executive of an organisation is to coordinate activities, interest and assignment.
ii.
Stability the policies and p rogrammes of an organisation must not be a toy in the hand of chief executives.
There is the need for continuity of the organisation s policies/programmes for a reasonable length of time before it is assessed.
An organization that changes its p olicies and programmes frequently is an ineffective one.
iii.
Flexibility there is the need to allow simplicity and flexibility in an organisation.
It should b e simp le to make it manageable and it should b e flexible to pave way for quick decisions when there is the need to take urgent decisions.
The organisation policies should be stated in terms broad enough to permit reasonab le flexibility in management.
This will also allow policies that have been in p lace a long time to be assessed and for necessary amendment to be made.
iv.
Cooperation for efficiency and effectiveness, there is need for all the members of the organisation to cooperate with one another.
This cooperation can be secured from organisation memb ers voluntarily or b y force.
If coop eration is lacking in any organisation such organisation will fold up in short time.
v. Division of Labour - the policy of the organization should p rovide for maximum homogeneity in the major d ivisions of work.
If there is no app ropriate division of labour, cooperation and coord ination becomes very difficult.
For realistic division of lab our, attention must be given to ind ividual competences and interests.
vi.
Evaluation - the policies of the organization must be evaluated at regular intervals to determine whether the objectives of the organization are being achieved or not.
If yes, there is need for improvement and if no, there is need to adjust.
An Organisation that does not evaluate its policies and programmes frequently may not b e able to meet the current challenges.
4.0.
Co nclusion 9  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE From what we have explained so far, management is a process of coord inating human and material resources towards the achievement of organisational goals while ad ministration is the ability to mobilize resources toward s the achievement of organisational goals.
The word s management and administration are sometimes used synonymously because they mean the same thing.
5.0.
Summary In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of management, the meaning of ad ministration, the meaning of educational administration, and the meaning of organisation.
We also classified organisation into formal, informal and social organisations, we also discussed the characteristics and p rincip les of organisation.
The principles discussed include: unity of ob jectives.
stability, flexibility, cooperation, division of labour and evaluation.
6.0.
Tut or marked assignment (i) Distinguish b etween management and educational administration (ii) Explain the characteristics of organisation (iii) Enumerate the princip les of organisation.
7.0.
References/Furt her Reading s Federal Repub lic of Nigeria (2004): National Policy of education, Lagos: NERDC Farham, D. & Horton, (1996).
Managing the new public services (second Edition).
Lagos Macmillan.
Federal Repub lic of Nigeria (2004): National Policy of Education, Lagos: NERDC Nwakwo J.I (1987).
School administration.
and human learning in school.
In E.E Ezewu ed s. Social psychological factors of human learning in school.
Onitsha; Lead Way Bks Ltd. Nwadiani, M and Sokefun O.A.
(1999).
Toward s greater efficiency in ed ucational ad ministration in the 21 st century.
In P.O.
Adesemowo eds.
Basics of Education, Lagos: Triumph books publishers Ogunsaju, S. (1998).
Leadership theory and the administrative process.
In S. Adesina and F.O.
Fagbamiye, eds.
Educational Ad ministr ation.
Ibadan; University press ltd .
Peretomode, U.F.
(1991).
Educational Ad ministration, App lication, Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives, Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Limited 10  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 2 THE DEVELOPMENT OF ADMIN ISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The development of Administration 3.1.1 Administration as an Art 3.1.2 Administration as a Science 3.2 Types of School Administrators 3.3 Functions of School Administrators 3.4 Qualities of a School Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction Administration is one area where, because of its basic and general ap plicability to every organisation, competence is claimed by all and most people therefore tend to rate it low.
This is one of the reasons why various organisations which tend ed not to recognise tshpee c ialty and professionalism of ad ministration do not perform efficiently and effectively.
Even though all human beings carry out administration in our daily lives, there is still the need to b e conversant with the principles, procedures and practices which make administration a profession.
11  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE It is therefore a must for all who intent to b ecome administrators in whatever form ocar p acity to have a comprehensive knowled ge ab out the histor y, development, principles, procedures and practices of administration which in modern times has become scientific.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) define administration (ii) explain why administration could be a science / or an art (iii) highlight the functions of school administrators (iv) mention the qualities of school administrators.
3.0 Ma in Content Administration is often described as a ubiquitous concept which has been an indispensable feature of human society for as long as one can rememb er.
It is present in ever y aspect of human endeavour.
Whether in business, hospital, religion, politics, education or even at home, no one can do without administration.
As a result of tahdi sm inistration is not only necessary, it is also compulsor y because of the need to control ever y organization.
Miewald (1978) opined that administration is the means b y which formal goals are achieved through cooperative effort.
To Adams (1913), it is the capacity to coord inate man y and often conflicting social energies in a single organisation so ad roitly that they shall operate as a unity.
3.1 The Develo pment of Administ ratio n Over the years, d ifferent organizations and different schools of thought have viewed ad ministration differently.
Some viewed it as a practical exercise req uiring no special study or effort.
Others feel that ad ministration as a d iscipline only exists in theory and in the mind s of people.
Others still regard administration as a technolog y which req uniorte os n ly sound theory b ut also sp ecialised p rincip les and techniques.
It is not feasible for us to pursue the arguments of the various camps here.
But the major camps shall b ee x amined .
The camps are those who view it as art and science.
3.1.1 Administ ra tion as a n Art.
Those who view administration as an art believe that administration like art (painting, drawing, sculpture, etc.)
b elongs to those who have the natural gifts, traits or abilities for it.
This trait point of view holds that only those who have the in-born qualities atrnadit s for the practice of the art of administering succeed as administrators.
Therefore, one becomes a good administrator not b y training or the mastery of an y special techniques of administration but by p ossessing the essential in-born traits of ad ministration.
As one p rominent university ad ministrator argue the successful ad ministrator has skills which have not been reduced to order and cod ified in textbooks.
Administration is an unqualified art.
Therefore, the only way to learn administration is to ad minister .
This implies that good administrators are not trained in any educational 12  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE institution, rather they are born administrators.
The problems of organisations, therefore, are how to id entify and select good administrators rather than how to train them.
However, recent developments and many studies on administration tend to show that successful ad ministrators today need more than inborn personality traits to manage mod ern complex organisations.
Obviously, those who have the in-born capabilities for ad ministration are b lessed, but they, in add ition, need appropriate training and techniques to prop erly utilize these natural traits in the modern complex organisation/society.
3.1.2.
Administ ra tion as a Science The view that administration is a science and not art emanated from the concep tion of ad ministration as a technology a matter of applying administrative principles and rules to the solution of management or organisational problems.
Exponents of this view - point, characterize the administrative process by such terms as human or social engineering, human management, resources optimization, or just management .
It was argued that as a scientist, the administrators must know and apply the rules the Dos and Don ts of ad ministering.
Scientist administrators must know what action leads to what result and what rule fits what action.
Those who viewed administration as a science believe that administrators are made through scientific selection and training not through in-born traits or hereditary factor.
Even the exponents of ad ministration as a science contributed more to the development of administrative practice.
It is clear that not all administrative issues and problems cbaen r e duced to the rule of the thumb.
Hence, it is currently being argued rather than talk of ad ministration as a science, it may be better to talk of the science of ad ministration.
3.2 Types of Schoo l Administ ra to rs In Niger ia, there are three main categories of educational ad ministrators; they are as mentioned and discuss below: (1) Local School/Primary Administrators: This group consists of head s of school and their assistants at the p rimar y, secondary, teacher training and technical schools.
They are appointed as the chief executive of their schools.
At the primary schools, they are known as the headmaster/mistress and assistant headmaster/mistress, while at the secondary school level, they are known as the p rincip als and the vice principals so also at the teacher s training and technical colleges.
Both the assistant head teacher/mistress and vice/deputy principals assist the school head in executing the enormous ad ministrative tasks.
(2) State and federal Ministry of Education Officials/Intermediary Level: This group comprises officials of state and federal ministr y of education.
They re external bodies working for the ministr y of education to ensure that schools comply with educational p olicy and curriculum set by the government.
They are intermediary between the gover nment and the school.
They are Local 13  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Insp ectorate of Education (LIE) and Education Officers who monitor activities of teachers at both the p rimar y and secondary schools, The LIE monitors activities at the primary schools while the education officers at state/fed eral ministries of ed ucation monitors activities at second ary schools, teachers training and technical colleges (3) Officials of Institutions of Higher Learning: This group comprises chief executives in institutions of higher learning for example, colleges of education, polytechnics, and universities.
They are known as Provost at the College of Ed ucation, Rectors at the Polytechnic, and Vice-Chancellors at the Universities.
These are chief executives of their various institutions and are appointed by the owner (usually the government except the private owned institutions) of the institutions.
They are also assisted b y their Deputies.
3.3 Funct io ns of School Administ rato rs Obemeata (1984) referred to a school head as an administrator who is responsible for running a school and also responsible for policy d ecisions, and determining the d irection and ob jectives of the school.
The function of a school head , according to Obemeata, ims o re than mere controlling the staff of the school, its finances and curriculum; it also includes the management of resources toward s the achievement of educational goals.
Fadip e (1990) however, highlighted the major functions of the school head as: interpretation of policy, execution of instructional programmes and the selection, induction and retention of personnel, and in Cranston (2 002), the duties of the sacdh mooinl i strators include: the demonstration of a variety of management and leadership ab ilities and, making comp lex d ecisions in collab oration with other staff in the school.
The function of the school administrators could be summarized as follows: (i) production and management of resources (human and materials) need ed to support organizations and its programe (ii) supervision of instructional activities in the school system (iii) obtaining and training personnel (iv) providing lead ership for curriculum (v) maintaining p eaceful co-existence between the school, the community and the external agencies (vi) influencing staff behaviour (vii) discerning and influencing the develop ment of goals and policies (viii) evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency or otherwise of the school (ix) initiating work activities (x) grouping the tasks into activities (xi) defining the task to b e done (xii) taking remedial action if the objectives are not being met (xiii) supplying incentives to stimulate p roductivity.
3.4.
Qualities of a School Administ rator 14  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE After discussing the functions of the school administrator, there is also the need to discuss some of the imperative q ualities which a school ad ministrator must possess in order to achieve an efficient school administration.
(i) H/Shee must be tactical: the school administrator need ed some tactics to deal with the subord inates under his/her direct control in the school e.g.
the teaching and the non-teaching staff, and the superior office at the ministry of education level whom the school head is responsib le to.
He must be tactical in dealing with the political office holders; he must not be confrontational in his approach at any time.
(ii) He/She must be capable of making decisions quickly: the school ad ministrators are confronted with many issues to decide on, some or many of which require urgent.
He d ecides on personnel, circulars, students and co-curricula matters on daily basis.
He must be versed in accurate facts and figures on issues relating to school enrolment, student- teacher ratio, drop-out rate, school facilities etc., and must also b e able to cop e with the daily tasks as the head of the school.
(iii) He/She must delegate responsibilities and authorities: the school head has so many functions that he cannot single-hand edly handle ever ything alone.
To avoid a vacuum, there is need to adequately involve every member of staff in the ad ministrative machinery of the school by delegating various responsibilities b acked b y authorities to avoid unnecessary prob lems and avoidab le delays.
As a matter of fact, democratization of school administration should be encouraged as this is an avenue for training future leaders/heads of schools.
(iv) He/She must be resourceful: the school head must at all times b e looking for b etter way(s) of doing a particular job.
He/She must be looking for new ways of working, tapping new ideas, suggestions and must be willing to assist others with his/her wealth of experience.
(v) He/She must have good human relations: there is need for school head to maintain peace and good relationship between the school and various groups in the school as well as b etween the school and the host community.
Other qualities exp ected of a school administrator are: high degree of enthusiasm, and ab ility to command resp ect and confidence.
4.0.
Co nclusion No organization b e it business or education (private or government owned) can do without administration.
The concep t administration has been viewed d ifferently y 15  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE different school of thought.
Some view it as an art while some view it as a science .
Those that viewed it as an art believes that for anyone to b e a good administrator, he must have the inb uilt qualities, trait, natural gift and or natural ab ilities for it, while those who viewed I as a science believes that good ad ministrator are mad e through selection and training, hey believes that ad ministrator are made through ed ucation and training not through in- born or any form of hereditary factor.
5.0.
Summary In this unit, we have learnt that administration could be art or science.
It is art wthhoesne w ho administer are those who have the in-born qualities to lead without necessarily going for lead ership course in any ed ucational institution and administration could b e a science when those who administer are those who are scientifically selected and trained in educational institution.
We also discussed various types of school administrators: local/p rimar y ad ministrators, state/federal/intermediary administrators, and officials of institution of higher learning.
So also we also considered the functions of school ad ministrators as well as the qualities of school administrators.
6.0 Tut or-marked assignment (i) Write short notes on three levels of school administration in Nigeria.
(ii) What are the qualities of a good administrator?
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Akinwumi, F & Jayeoba, A.O (2004).
Principles and Practice of Educational Management.
Ibadan: Bash-Moses Printing Co. Cranston, N.C (2002).
School-based management, leaders and leadership: change and challenges for principals.
International studies in educational Administration.
Vol.30(1)pp2-12 Fadip e, J.O (1990).
Utilizing the teaching manp ower in the secondary school system.
A necessary ad ministrative function for better productivity in Udoh, S.U and Akp a, G.O eds.
Management for Quality education in Nigeria.
Jos: Ehindero Nig.ltd.
Federal Repub lic of Nigeria (1998).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC Press Nwankwo, J.I (1991).
Eduational Administration: app lied concepts in School .
In Ezewu, E.E (ed s), Social Psychological Factors of Human Learning in Schools.
Onitsha: Lead way Books ltd. Obeamata, J (1984).
Secondary school headship in Nigeria context.
In S. Adesina, and S Ogunsaju.
(eds).
Secondary Education in Nigeria, Ile-Ife: University of Ife Press Ltd. 16  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ogunsaju, S. (1988).
Leadership theory and the administratives process, In S. Adesina, and F.O Fagbamiye, (eds) Educational Administration: Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Peretomode, V.F (1991).
Educational administration.
Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. UNIT 3 LEADERSHI P IN EDUCATION.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Leadership Styles 3.1.1 Autocratic Leadership 3.1.2 Bureaucratic Leadership 3.1.3 Charismatic Leadership 3.1.4 Democratic/Particip ative Leadership 3.1.5 Laissez -Faire Leadership 3.1.6 People Oriented /Relations Oriented Leadership 3.1.7 Task Oriented Leadership 3.1.8 Transactional Leadership 3.1.9 Transformational Leadership 3.1.10 Situational /Contingency Leadership 3.2 Positive and Negative Approaches 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction.
In every organization, be it education or industry, the prime mover is the leadership .
It is the duty of the lead er to see that he/she manages the organization while at the same time keep ing the subordinate/followership happy, satisfied and motivated.
In educational 17  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE institutions, there are various levels of leadership; the headmaster is a lead er at the primary school level, the principal is a leader at the second ary school level, while provosts, rectors and vice-chancellors are lead ers at the colleges of ed ucation, polytechnics and the universities.
So also at the local, states and federal government levels, we have local inspectors of education, commissioners of ed ucation and ministers of education as the leaders.
It is therefore imperative for educational administrators to equip themselves with leadership skills in preparation to assume positions of leadership to enable them fashion out their own styles or models of leadership.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to (i) Define lead ership and leadership styles.
(ii) Identify the various types of leadership styles in organisation.
(iii) Mention the best lead ership style that an institutional administrator could adop t and why?
3.0 Ma in Content Leadership is an imp ortant asp ect of management.
The essence of leadership is followership ; in other words there can b e no leadership without followership.
Leadership is a process of influencing p eople b y providing purpose, direction, and motivation while operating to accomplish the mission and imp roving the organization.
Army (1973) defines leadership as a means of getting p eople to do what you want them to do.
It is the means or method of achieving two end s: operating and improving.
In educational institutions, there must be a force to manage both the human and material resources toward s achieving educational goals.
A force is needed in schools to guid e the activities of teaching, non-teaching staff and students towards achievement of the institution s goals.
Leadership provides the needed force.
At the primary and secondary levels of education, the force is provided b y the head master/ headmistress and principal while it is p rovided b y p rovosts, rectors and vice- chancellors in the colleges of ed ucation, polytechnics and universities respectively.
3.1 Leadership styles Whether you are managing a team at work, cap taining your sports team or leading a major corporation, your lead ership style is crucial to your success.
Consciously or subconsciously, you will no doubt use some leadership styles.
Leadership styles are the manner and app roach of p roviding d irection, implementing plans, and motivating people.
There are a number of different styles to lead ership and management that are b ased odnif f erent assumptions and theories.
The style that individual leaders use will be based on a combination of their beliefs, values, and preferences, as well as the organisational culture and norms which will encourage some styles and discourage others.
Self Assessment Exercise 18  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Mention and explain the various leadership styles you are used to.
3.1.1 Auto cratic Leadership.
This is a lead ership style in which a leader exerts high levels of power over his/her employees.
People within the team or employees are given few opportunities for making suggestions, even if these suggestions would be of ad vantage to the organisations interest.
This style is used when leaders tell their employees what they want them to do and how they want it d one, without getting the advice of their followers.
Some people tend ttoh in k of this style as a vehicle for yelling, using demeaning language, and leading by threats and abusing their p ower.
Many p eople resent being treated like this, because this leadership style often lead s to high levels of absenteeism, and high staff turnover.
Also, the team s output does not benefit from the creativity and experience of all team members, so many of the benefits of teamwork are lost.
However, for some routine and skilled jobs, this style can b e adop ted and it remains effective where the advantages of control outweigh the disadvantages.
The lead er that ad opts this style d oes not consid er the interest or views of the employees but that of him/herself alone.
He treats his/her employees as tools/machines that are there to be used to affect his perceived goals.
He/She passes down orders and has no feelings for them.
3.1.2 Bureaucrat ic Leadership This typ e of leadership works by the book , ensuring that their staff follow procedures exactly the way it is wr itten down.
This is a very ap propriate style for work isnavfeotlyv i nrgis k s e.g.
working with machiner y with toxic substances or at heights or where lar ge sums of money are involved e. g. cash-handling.
In other situations the inflexib ility and high levels of control exerted can demoralise staff, and can d iminish the organisation s ability to react to changing exter nal circumstances.
3.1.3 Cha risma tic Leadership This leadership style is similar to a transformational style; the leader injects huge doses of enthusiasm into his or her employees and is very energetic in driving others forward.
Charismatic leaders believe more in themselves than in their employees.
This can create a risk that a p roject or even an entire institution, might collapse if the leader were to leave.
In the eye of their followers, success is tied up with the presence of the charismatic leader.
As such a charismatic leader carries a lot of responsib ilities, and needs long-term commitment from the followers.
3.1.4 Demo cra tic o r Participative Leadership This style of leadership invites one or more members of the team with him/her self to make decision(s) (d etermine what to do and how to do it) for the organization.
This style does not only increase emp loyees job satisfaction, by involving them in what is going on, 19  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE but it also helps to develop peop le s skills.
Employees feel in control of their own destiny, and so are motivated to work harder.
This style is normally used when the leader has part of the information, and the employee has other parts.
Note that a leader is not supposed to know everything; this is why the leader ekmnopwlolyeds g eable and skillful employees.
As participation takes time, this style can lead to things happ ening more slowly than using autocratic approach, but often the end result is better.
It can be most suitab le where team working is essential, and where q uality is more imp ortant than speed to market or productivity.
Using this style is of mutual benefit and allows the employees to become p art of the team and also allows the leader to take better decisions.
3.1.5 Laissez-Fa ire Leadership Laissez-faire is a French phrase non-inter ference in the affairs of others .
This is used to describe a leader who leaves his/her employees to get on with their work without his interference.
Laissez - faire leader allows the emp loyees to make decisions.
However, the leader is still resp onsible for decisions that are made.
This style can b e effective if tlheaed er monitors what is b eing achieved and communicates this b ack to his or her treeagmul a rly.
It can also b e effective when employees are ab le to analyse the situation adnedte r mine what needs to be done and how to get it done.
No leader can do ever ything, ale a der needs to set priorities and d elegate certain tasks.
Hence, it works for teams in which the individuals are very exp erienced and skilled self-starters.
However, it is not a style to use in ord er to b lame others when things go wrong.
Rather it is a style to b e used when you fully trust and have total confidence in the p eople working under you.
It can be referred to as situations where managers are not exerting sufficient control over the employees.
You should not be afraid using this style but it must b e used wisely.
Self Assessment Exercise Apart from the leadership styles you have read in this unit, mention other leadership styles that we have.
3.1.6 Peo ple-Oriented Lea dership or Relations- Oriented Leadership This style of leadership is the opposite of task- oriented lead ership; people-oriented leaders are totally focused, supporting, motivating and developing the employees or those in the lead ers team.
This leadership encourages p articipative d ecision making which leads to good team work and creative collaboration.
However, if it is taken to the extremes, it can lead to failure in achieving the organizational goal.
In p ractice, most leaders do not use this style alone.
Where it will be used, it is advisab le to cwoimthb tiansek - oitr i ented style.
20  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.7 Task- Orient ed Leadership A task-oriented leader focuses only on how to get the job done; this type of leader can b e quite autocratic.
He or she will actively define the work and the roles required by the employees, and will also put structures in place, p lan, organize and equally monitor twhoe rk .
Task-oriented leaders care less about the well-being of the employees; they are more concerned with how to get the job done.
This app roach can also suffer man y of the flaws of a leader that adop ts autocratic style of leadership.
He will also have prob lem of motivating staff as well as high rate of staff turn-over.
3.1.8 Transactional Leadership This style of leadership starts with the premise that the employees agree to obey their leader totally when they take up the appointment.
The transaction is that the organization pays the employees, in return for their effort and compliance.
As such, the leader has the right to punish employees if their work does not meet the p rsetadnedtearrmd.i n edIt is a process through which the tasks and human d imensions of oarreg arnecizoantcioilne d and integrated .
Nwankwo (1980 ) said transactional lead ership style is the leadership style that is most popular in Nigeria and it is resulting in high staff performance.
This lead er tries to match organizational needs with those of the employees of the organization and strives to attain them.
The employees can do little to improve their job satisfaction under transactional leadership.
The leader shows the emp loyees some measure of control of their income/reward by using incentives that encourage even higher standard s. Alternatively a transactional leader could practice management b y exception whereb y rather than reward better work, he or she would take corrective action if the required standards were not met.
3.1.9 Transfo rmatio nal Leadership A leadership who emp loys this style of leadership is a true leader who inspires the employees with a shared vision of the future.
Transformational leaders are highly visible, and spend a lot of time communicating with the emp loyees.
They do not necessarily lead from the front, as they tend to delegate resp onsibility amongst their teams.
In many organizations, both transactional and tr ansformational leaders are needed.
The transactional leaders ensure that routine work is done reliably while the transformational leaders look after employee s initiatives and add new value.
3.1.9 Situationa l Leadership or Contingency Lea dership A situational leader is a lead er that adop t the best leadership style or combination of styles to ever y situation he/she is dealing with, it also d epends on the type of forces involved between the followers, the leader, and the situation, the time available, the relationship s between employer and employees, the level of training of employees, the 21  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE type of tasks and laws that establish the organization.
A situational leader believes tthhaetr e is no single leadership style that suits all situations, the situation demands he typ e of style to adopt.
Self Assessment Exercise What are the factors that influence the choice of lead ership style adopted by any leader?
3.2 Positive and Negat ive Approa ches There is a d ifference in the ways leaders approach emp loyees.
Positive leaders use reward s, such as praise, commendation, financial rewards etc., to motivate employees, while, negative lead ers emp hasize p enalties.
The negative approach must b e used carefully due to its high cost on peop le s morale.
Negative leaders are domineering and superior with people.
They b elieve the only way to get things done is through penalties, such as threat, loss of job, days off without pay, reprimand of employees etc.
They believe their authority is increased by fr ightening ever yone into higher level of productivity.
Yet what always happ ens when this app roach is wrongly used is fall in employee s morale, which of course leads to lower or fall in productivity.
However, it should b e noted that most leaders do no strictly use one or another, but asorem ewhere on a continuum ranging from extremely p ositive to extremely negative.
People who continuously work out of the negative app roaches are bosses while those who primarily work out of the positive are considered real leaders.
4.0 Co nclusion Leadership has b een defined as a method of getting people to do what the leader wthaenmts to do.
Headmasters/head mistress, principals, provost, rectors vice-chancellors, commissioners, ministers are leaders of educational institutions at various levels.
There is no b est style of leadership; the situation will determine which style of leadership to adopt or combination of styles this is known as situational/contingency leadership style.
Though, we have many leadership styles which can b e adopt independ ently or combined to suit situation a hand.
Such styles includ e autocratic, bureaucratic, charismatic, democratic, laissez- faire, people oriented, task oriented, transactional, and transformational.
A good leader should adopt leadership style(s) that can result in high staff performance.
He/she should also b e able to match the need of the organisation with the need of the employees and work out how those needs could b e achieved .
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have treated the meaning of leadership as well as the meaning of leadership styles.
We also considered various styles that a lead er can ad opt.
In addition, we also treated the two approaches that a leader can adopt in approaching their employees.
The first one is the positive approach which is use to motivate employees such as reward s, praise, commendation, financial rewards etc., and the second one is the negative app roach which is use o punish the employees.
Leaders that use the positive 22  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE app roach encourages employees and are not domineering, while the leaders that adopt the negative approach are d omineering and bossy in nature, this typ e of leader believes tohnel y way to get thing done is through p enalties and various forms of threat 6.0 Tut or- Marked Assignment Mention and explain five leadership styles that an institutional ad ministrator could adopt.
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Akanni, J.A (1987).
Management: Concepts Techniq ues and Cases: Ibad an, Julab Publishers Limited Ezeocha, P. A.
(1990).
Educational Administration and Planning.
Nsukka: Op tional Computer Solution.
Mbiti, D.M.
(1974).
Foundations of School Ad ministration.
Nairobi: Oxford University Press 23  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 4 SCHOOL COMMUNITY RELAT IONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1.1 The concept of a School 3.1.2 The concept of a Community 3.2 Types of Community 3.3 School Community Relationship 3.4 The Roles of the School to the Community 3.5 The Roles of the Community to the School 3.6 Factors Influencing School-Community Relationship 3.7 The Roles of School Head in School-Community Relationship 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to discuss the meaning of a school separately and the concept of a community separately.
After this, we are going to discuss the roles, of the school to the community as well as the roles of the community to the school.
Finally, in this unit waree going to discuss the var ious factors that can encourage mutual relationship between the school and the community.
3.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) give brief definitions of school and community 24  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) list the two types of community (iii) highlight the roles of the school to the community (iv) highlight the roles of the community to the school (v) discuss the factors influencing the school community relationship (vi) explain ways of maintaining effective school-community relations.
3.0 Ma in Content Anywhere in the world, where there is no peace, there cannot be peace of mind, peop lcea n not settle, cannot organise themselves into meaningful groups, because they will b e thinking of safety at all times, hence there can not be develop ment.
Let us look at what is happ ening in Somalia, Liberia, Iran, Iraq , etc.
since war broke out in those countries, development ceased, b ecause war and development have no meeting point, they are two parallel lines.
Let us bring our mind back home to Nigeria; in some p arts of the country for some years now, there has been various form of crisis.
For instance, in the NDiegltear - abduction, kidnap ping, JTF attacks, and other forms of reprisal attacks has not allowed for any meaningful development in those areas as people in those areas will b eru n ning for safety of their lives and no reasonable investor will dream of investing in troub led areas.
For any school to function effectively, therefore, there is need for cordial relationship between the school and the host community.
The reason is not far fetched; the school dep ends on the community for its survival.
3.1.1 The co ncept o f a school School has b een defined in various ways.
It can be said that school is any organised educational institution where knowledge is transmitted from the teachers to the learners.
School can also be d efined as a social institution that transmits the culture of the society from one generation to another.
We can define it as an agent of socialization.
Ottaway & Smith (1980) defined school as a social unit formally established by members of the society for the purpose of developing the younger members of their society.
Olaniyi (2000) defined it as a formal agency of education estab lished by member of the mcoamcrmou- nity/society to mould the hab its interests, attitudes and feelings of child ren and transmit the societal norms, culture, value and tradition from one generation to another.
A school is a formally established institution by appropriate law and authorities where the knowledge, attitudes, and skills required for both p ersonal and social d evelopment are acquired .
School is a place where people learn about the past, present and project the future of a society at large.
3.1.2 The Concept o f a Co mmunit y Towns, cities, states and even the countr y comprise different communities.
Community however can be said to comprise groups of people living in a p articular place who share the same historical background, with common economic, cultural and social values.
25  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Mussazi (1982) defined community as a group of people living in the same place, with common value, histor y, b ound together by multiple economic, social, religious, and kingship-ties.
To Bray (1987), community is a group of people who share the same social, economic and cultural interests.
From all the above, community comprises peop le who live together in a community and interact with one another, share the same interest and ideology.
It can also be said that community is a group of people living together in one p lace having common religion, race and similarity of attitudes or interests.
3.2 Types of Co mmunity i. Rura l Communit y Rural communities are found in the rural areas or in thinly populated areas.
Rural community is a close unit which comprises members with strong ties and lives a subsistence life.
These groups of peop le are less influenced b y institutional or economic activities because these are less pronounced in rural area where rural communities are based.
ii.
Urba n Communit y Urban communities are found in the urb an areas or a d ensely populated area.
The community comprises number/group of people who have less in common with each others within the same community with weak lies.
They are highly influenced b y many institutions in their socio-political and economic activities because the community where they live (urb an community) may highly industrialize with presence and concentration of political and economic activities.
Self- Assessment exercise.
Distinguish b etween a school and a community 3.3 Schools - Co mmunit y Rela tionships School- community relationship is cord ial and mutual interactions that exist b etween the school and the community where the school is situated.
This relationship assists both the school and the community to achieve their set goals in a healthy atmosphere.
Bortner (1972) d efined school- community r elationship as planned activities and a way through which the school seek to learn about the community and interpret, when need be, the purpose, p rogramme, problems and needs of the school; and involve the community in the planning, evaluating and management of school policies and progress.
26  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE School - community relationship is a two way interaction that exists b etween the school and the community.
The school cannot exist in isolation or independent of the community because the community provides and prepares the input into the school system.
The inputs from the community include educational objectives and curriculum, students, school personnel, funds and facilities; some of the inputs are resid ents of the/in the community.
The inputs are processed to output in the school through teaching, assignments, exercises, research studies, guidance and counseling etc.
The output from the school which consists of cultured, d isciplined, and productive individuals cannot be consumed/retained by the school, but are sent back to the community to contribute their own contribution in various capacities based on the acquired knowled ge from the school to the development of the community.
Where the outputs from the school p erform b elow the standard set b y the community, the community investment on the school is not worthwhile and vice versa.
Both the school and the community are interdep endent and interrelated.
The community prep ares the input (i.e.
students) needed b y the school for survival, the output from tshceh o ol (i.e.
graduates) also comes back to the community and assists in various capacities.
For the school - community relationship to be peaceful, healthy, mutual, cord ial, worth while and productive; the school and the community must be willing taos s ist each other to achieve their respective set goals in conducive and loving atmosphere, where there is mutual trust, support and coop eration.
3.4 The Roles of the Schoo l to the Community The following are the roles of the school to the host community or the society at lar ge.
1.
Provision of Education.
The school assisted the community to train the child ren and young pup ils on how to write basic literacy/numeracy.
The curriculum used for tchhei ld ren by the school lay emphasis on the need and problems of the community and on how to assist the child ren contributes their quota to the development of the community.
2.
Preservation of Community Culture.
In the school also, the children are taught the community norms, values culture, tradition, beliefs.
Apart from teaching the child ren all these, school also ensure its transmission from one generation for another.
School also carries out research to improve on good culture of the community and to discourage the children from the bad or anti social character.
3.
Provision of Facilities for Community Use.
The school provides and makes availab le some school facilities for community use when needed b y the community.
Some of the facilities made available for the community are the school playing ground (for community rallies, socials, religious and other activities), school halls and classrooms (for receptions and entertainments as well as for adult and continuing education classes ), school vans/buses (for social outings).
However there must b e some rules governing the use of the school facilities b y the community to ensure proper use 27  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 4.
Provision of Means of Livelihood to Members of the Community.
The school provides a means of livelihood to members of the community b y employing them as teachers, administrative officers, day/night guards, drivers, cleaners, gard eners or any other available position q ualified for b y the member of the community.
The payment received for the service (s) rendered to the school are used as a means of livelihood and to cater for their own immed iate and extended family.
5.
Manpower Supply.
There are various categories of manpower needed by the community to serve in the various sectors of the economy, for example, Medical Doctors to provide medical service, Lawyers to p rovid e legal service, Bankers to provid e b anking service, Teachers/Lectures to teach in schools, Engineers to serve in the engineering units of the countr y, Computer Scientists to take car of the internet ser vice and other information technology ser vice of the country, etc.
There are so many other services need ed to sustain the countr y which are provided b y the school.
Without these manp ower supplies in q uality and quantity, there cannot be any meaningful growth and development in a countr y.
The school provid es these, after giving the required ttrhaaitn minagk e s them qualified and competent.
6.
Assist in Community Development Programme/Service.
Members of the school play active role in some project embarked on by the community.
The school students are engaged in various projects embarked the community.
Examp les of community development projects are road construction, road maintenance, they also rend er community service to the community where the schools are situated, and they serve as members of Road Safety Corps, Civil Defense Corps, Man-O-War, Red Cross Society etc.
3.5 The Roles of the Community to t he Schoo l The community in appreciation of the roles of the school to the community and for mutual co-existence performs the following functions to the school.
1.
Provision of Funds.
The community generates funds for the develop ment of the school through special levies.
Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) levies, donation by old students association, religious groups , non-government organization, p hilanthropist etc.
2.
Provision of Land.
The community makes availab le landed property (either freely or at a reduced price) to erect school structure of various categories and also fgoarr d ening and farming purposes.
3.
Maintenance of School Plant.
Various artisan groups within the community such as carp enters, bricklayers, mechanics, etc assist in installation, maintenance and rep air of school physical facilities at a reduced rate as at when needed and they are called upon.
4.
Provision of Facilities.
The community provides physical facilities which members of the school make use of.
Examples of the physical facilities; p rovided by the 28  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE community are public library, which assist the student to pursue academic excellence, community halls which are used by the school for teaching and learning and social activities, hospitals and clinics which are used as first aid in case of the need to refer to a specialist or other hospitals.
5.
Provision of Accommodation The community provides residential accommodation to both the staff and the stud ents of the school.
Most schools now have no befitting accommodation for their staff or even their students.
This makes the school and/or the staff concerned explores opportunity of getting an accommodation in the community where the school is situated or nearby communities.
6.
Provision of Scholarship.
The communities make provision for scholarship to brilliant or indigent b rilliant students or both of them depending on the fund available.
Some well meaning individ uals (who app reciate education and educated citizens) within the community, e.g.
Philanthrop ists Religious groups, etc.
also awards various scholarship schemes to assist students within the community in primary, secondar y or institution of higher learning.
The scholarship may cover school fees, books, others or all.
3.3.
Factors Influencing School Communit y Relatio nship It is necessar y for the school head to be familiar with the factors influencing the school- community relationship to facilitate cord ial relationship b etween the school and the community.
Some of the factors are discussed below.
i.
The Location of the School.
The location of a school within the community goes a long way in influencing the school - community relationship .
For example p arents are more likely to visit a school more frequently if it is located at the heart/centre of the community than if a school is located at the outskirt of the community.
A school that is also attractive, safe, accessible with opportunity for future expansion will enjoy patronage b y the community members.
However, if the location of the school is at tohuet s kirt of the town, the school head can use his initiative/p ower to be organizing meetings and activities which will be bringing members of the community into the school at regular intervals to see the school, know what the school has and school s needs.
ii.
Facilities Available.
The typ e of facilities available in the school will determine the level of cordial relationship the school receives from the community.
For example, a school that has a good hall for conferences/wedding receptions, classroom for adult education/extra mural stud ies, p layground for community rallies and meetings and make it available for community use at a sub sid ized /lower rate will enjoy more cordial relationship between the school and the community because, the community benefits from the use of these facilities and will want good relationship to continue to be able to continuing to enjoy the facilities, but where these facilities are not available for community use or availab le at expensive rate, the school community relationship cannot be/may not be as cord ial as when those facilities are availab le for community use at ncoos t or at subsidized rate.
29  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iii.
Communication.
Effective communication between the school and the community at all time will enable community members to assist the school and give them good advice.
It is compulsory that the school head should integrate memb ers of the community into the school system by giving them feed b ack on school activities through effective communication.
The school head must communicate effectively with the various governing/regulatory/voluntar y agencies Governing Board, PTA, and Old Student Association members in the community regularly.
In a situation where there is poor communication between the school and community, the result is unhealthy or poor school- community relationship .
iv.
Leadership Style.
The type of leadership style ad opted b y the school head will go a long way in enhancing positively or negatively the relationship between the school and the community.
For examp le, a school head that adopts d emocratic lead ership style will enjoy better cordial school-community relationship because he will be approachable and listen to community view at all times than the school head that adopted autocratic/laizzez-faire leadership style.
This is because, the school head that adopted democratic leadership style will involve people in his administration and consult with them and other members of the community if need be, before arriving at major decisions.
This strengthens mutual und erstanding between the school and the community.
However the school head that adopts autocratic lead ership style does not consult with peop le or community memb ers before arriving at decisions.
He d ecides single- handedly and enforce his opinion on people.
This situation creates a gap and distance between the school and the community and also create susp icious environment.
The school head that adop ted liazzez - faire is also the uncared typ e, who shows no concern for the work force and the community will not also enjoy the full support of the workers neither will he b e ab le to create/maintain cordial relationship between the school and the community.
It is only the school head that adopts democratic leadership style that enjoys the full support and maximum coop eration of the community.
v. Attitude of School Staff.
The attitude/behaviour of the school head and his staff toward the members of the community will either enhance their relationship or otherwise.
If the school head and the staff are accessib le to and approachable, friendly and fair idne a ling with the members of the community, there will be a cordial relationship , but itfh e y make themselves inaccessible and or unapproachable, unfriendly to the members of the community, the community will be hostile to them and confrontational because of the type of attitude and behaviour they put up against the community and this will not enhance good/cordial relationship between them.
However, for the school to enjoy cord ial relationship with the community there is the need for the school head and the staff to project good image of the school through their own good attitude and behaviour toward s the community members.
Self Assessment Exercise Wh y is it necessary for mutual relationships to exist b etween the school and the community?
30  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.7 The Role of School Head in Schoo l - Co mmunity Relationship.
To achieve the set goals for schools, healthy relationship is a must between the school and the community.
Therefore, the school head needs to ensure that there is love, understanding, trust, mutual trust between the school and the community.
To ensure this, the school head need to take the following measures: i.
He should establish a functional PTA.
The head should make the PTA a functional one rather than making it an income generating association alone.
The members be allowed to have a say/contr ibution in the running of the school.
For example, they can b e involved in the school p romotion exercise, maintenance of discip line in the school, school p lant and management.
If the school head can allow a functional PTA, it will facilitate healthy relationship between the school and the community, but when he/she refuses to make the PTA functional, there is the likelihood of having various crises between the school and the community.
ii.
He should be accessible.
The school head must make himself accessible to members of the community such a the PTA chairman or other executive, the parent, tchhei e fs, religious leaders and members of old student association and other visitors that may visit the school occasionally from the community.
The school head must be a good listener, nice, humble, and approachable, to enhance and sustain healthy relationship between the school and the community.
iii.
He should involve members of the community in the school activities.
Members of the community where the school is located must be involved in the school abcetciavuitsiee s , th e school is within the community, hence the need for the school head to involve the members of the community in the school activities.
For example, members of the community should b e allowed to p lay active role in the school s sporting activities and socials such as: end of the year get-to-gether, founder s day, christmas carol, valedictory service, and other social activities of the school.
This type of involvement will enhance cordial relationship between the school and the community.
iv.
He should make himself available.
The school head must make him/her self availab le to the members of community, the parents, PTA executives, old stud ents group, chiefs and religions leaders.
He should not be the typ e that administer in absence or have a lot of bureaucratic procedures before he can be seen by memb ers of the community.
A school head that makes himself available at all times will attend to the community needs timely and he/she will enjoy the support and healthy relationship from the community v. He should avoid realistic politics in the community: the school head and staff members should avoid taking p art in the political activities in the community to avoid b ad blood between the school and the community, the school head should ensure that he/she do not represent any political party within the school to achieve some political goals.
This will enable the school head to be neural on all issues at all time.
4.0 Co nclusion 31  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The school is a social unit formally established by members of the society to transmit the societal culture to younger generation.
The community is a group of people living together and sharing the same social, economic and cultural interests.
School community relationship is the typ e of relationship that exists between the school and the society.
There is need to ensure cord ial and healthy relationship b etween the school and the community because none of the two can exist in isolation and both will benefit more if there is cordial relationship between them.
When there is no cordial relationship between the school and the community, the goals of the school will not be achieved aesx p ected and the community will not also enjoy the benefit expected from the school.
For the parties to enjoy themselves the school head must ensure cordial relationship between the school and the community b y establishing a functional PTA, having good attitude toward s members of the community, b eing accessible and involving community members in school activities.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have discussed the meaning of a school, a community, the two typ es ocof m munities, the meaning and need for good school-community relationship.
We discussed the roles of the school to the community as well as the roles of the community to the school.
We also took a look at the factors influencing school- community relationship and the role of the school head in ensuring cord ial school- community relationship .
6.0 Tut or marked assignment i.
What are the responsibilities of a school to the host community?
ii.
Does the host community have any duty in the school?
iii.
The role of the school head cannot be over estimated in ensuring a peaceful co- existence between the school and the community.
Do you agree and why?
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s. Ajayi, I.
A (2007).
Issues in School Management.
Lagos: Bolabay p ublishers Bray.
M. (1987).
New resources for education community management and financing of Schools in less develop ed counties.
London: Commonwealth secretariat Mussazi, J.C.S (1982 ).
The Theory and Practice of Educational Ad ministration.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. Olaniyi, W.O.
(2000).
School community relations in the 21st century in J. O. Fadipe, & E. E. Oluchukwu (eds) Educational Planning and Administration in Nigeria in the 21st century Ibadan.
National Institute Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA).
32  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ottaway, A.K .C & Smith, W.O.L (1980).
Education and Society.
Lond on Routled ge and Keegan Paul Ltd UNIT 5 SUPERVIS ION OF INSTRUCT ION (1) 1.0 Introduction.
2,0 Objectives 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1 Evolution of Supervision in Nigeria 3.2 The meanings of Supervision and Inspection 3.3 Purpose of Supervision of Instruction 3.4 Techniques of Supervision 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0.
Introduction The primary objective of educational institutions set up all over the country is to train and teach the pupils the needed skills, societal norms and values in preparation for adulthood and membership of the lar ger society.
However, you would agree with me that there inse e d to sup ervise the type of instruction to be delivered in the classroom to make sthuaret th e right instruction is delivered to the right peop le at the right time.
Education is becoming more expensive day-in-d ay out.
Parents are spend ing so much on their wards; education and government is also spending so much on the recurrent and capital items in our educational institutions.
Hence the need to ensure that the financial provisions for the system by government, parents, and individuals are efficiently utilized and accounted for.
A venture like this which is of such magnitud e in terms of fminuasnt c eb e appropriately monitored and controlled to ensure that it achieve its stated objectives.
2.0 Objectives 33  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) define supervision (ii) define inspection (iii) distinguish b etween supervision and inspection (iv) define supervision of instruction (v) explain the purpose of inspection and (vi) explain the various techniq ues of inspection.
3.0 Ma in Contents The Nigerian government recognized the need to monitor not only the financial management of the school, but also the teaching of students.
Educationists at the Ministries of Education both at the federal and the state levels have set up quality control divisions in their respective ministries to ensure that q uality education is maintained.
It has been established that quality and standard could be maintained in the educational institutions through regular inspection and continuous supervision of instruction in the schools.
Supervision and inspection have been id entified as very germane to the day-to-day activities of educational institutions.
The sup ervisor assesses and record s the performance of teachers, their ability and consistency in carr ying out the classroom activities and keeping of high quality records.
The activities of supervisors include the following: inspecting, monitoring, rating, assisting, recommending etc.
All these activities if carried out b y p rofessional supervisors are aimed at imp roving instructional deliver y and quality of teaching in the educational institutions.
However, not all the appointed supervisors b y ministries of education (federal and state levels) are trained, this accounts for the reasons why the quality of work of supervisors is very low.
3.1 Evolution of Supervisio n in Nigeria.
The introduction of Western ed ucation in Nigeria could be traced b ack to 1842 when the missionaries established the first primary school in Badagr y.
At this time, the missionaries were responsible for supervising their own schools by the use of ad ministrative sup ervision approach p revalent at that time.
During this period, the Catechist was also used as teacher b y the missionaries while the layman in the church was used as sup ervisor or inspector of education.
However, in 1882 , government started to d emonstrate commitment to the stand ard of education by appointing Red Metcalf Sunter as the Her Majesty s Inspector of Schools of the West Africa.
In 1889, Henr y Carr, was appointed as the Local Inspector of Sfocrh o Lolasg o s colony.
This further showed the commitment of government to the imp rovement of the standard of education in Niger ia.
34  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE During the first quarter of the twentieth centur y, the inspectorate service got another boost with the appointment of a Director of Education and three (3) Zonal Insp ectors oscf h ools in order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of school inspection.
This development was influenced by the prevailing scientific management ap proach to supervision.
The regionalization of education by the McPherson constitution of 1954 gave birth to the establishment of Western Region Inspectorate Service.
This inspectorate was able to make considerable imp act on the educational standard s of the Western Region.
In 1973, the fed eral government through the federal ministry of education established the federal inspectorate division within the ministr y to supervise the quality of instructional delivery in schools.
Since 1975, when the government took over the provision of education in Nigeria, the same government is also responsible for the supervisory function.
The practice makes the government a judge on its own case.
The supervisors at this time being government agents were not taken serious because most of them were not p rofessionally trained.
Gradually, supervision of instruction became very weak and more ineffective and generally d egenerated to its present state.
3.2 The Mea ning o f Supervisio n and Inspect ion.
In the first instance, sup ervision is a concept that emanated from the American tradition while the concep t of inspection emanated from the British tradition.
Not only that, supervision was a hand of assistance given to a professional colleague in the process oinfs t ructional deliver y while inspection activities focused on school ad ministration and finding faults as well as what was wrongly done by the teachers in ord er to punish them.
Insp ection can be d efined as a process involving regular school visits to check that ever ything in the school is satisfactory and that the school rules and regulations are obeyed by the school head, teachers and students while supervision can b e said to be ap ro cess, facilitated b y a supervisor, through which the supervisor assists the school head, teachers and the students, counsel each other, p lan with each other and rub minds together on how to improve teaching and learning in the school.
Supervision can also be said to be an interaction between at least two people for the improvement of an activity.
School sup ervision is a process of bringing about improvement in instruction by working with people who are working with pup ils.
Supervision in school is a p rocess and coord ination of activities which is concerned with the teaching and imp rovement of the teaching in the school.
Supervision and inspection are two different concepts that have been used at various times in management of education industr y to mean the same thing.
But to some peop le they still means different things.
The school head, teachers, students and the parents view it from an angle at which each relates with the supervision.
To the school hsuepader, v ision may b e inquisition or fault find ing exercise; to a teacher it may mean challenge to his personality.
Mbiti (1974), d efined supervision as one of the basic requirements of administration that concer n itself with the tactics of efficiency and 35  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE effective management of human and material resources.
It is a way to advise, guid e, refresh, encourage, stimulate, improve and oversee teachers with the hope of seeking their cooperation in order that they may be successful in the task of teaching and classroom management.
According to Ghiselli (1971 ), sup ervision involves directing the work of others, organising and integrating activities in order to ensure that the goals othfe group are achieved.
However, Okoro (1994) d efines inspection as an instrument with which the government through the ministry of education maintains the necessary content with the schools, teachers, pupils and the community and so ensure that the system is working satisfactorily.
In this sense, insp ection is to be viewed as fulfilling a coordinating, controlling, and communicating role as guardian of educational stand ards.
It seems evid ent from both concepts that effective teaching and learning can be develop ed within the schools and that such develop ment is essentially derived from the control of the nexus of connections among staff, pupils, p arents and other stake holders within the school community with a view to developing a p ositive teaching and learning environment.
Self Assessment Exercise.
(i) Distinguish b etween supervision and inspection.
(ii) Trace the histor y of supervision of instruction in Niger ia.
From all the above, supervision d oes not mean inspection, because supervision is not fault find ing exercise or inq uisition but it means guidance, assistance, support, sharing of ideas b y all those involved .
It is a help provided by a p rofessional sup ervisors to ttheaec h ers and lear ners to realize their full p otentials in school.
In modern day, we talk more of instructional sup ervision or supervision of instruction in our educational institutions.
This concept: instructional supervision is focused on how to imp rove learning.
The objective of supervision of instruction is to improve the overall teaching p rocess and to ensure that effective educational services are rend ered b y the teachers to the students.
Sup ervision of instruction is carried out by those d esignated to do so.
They are known b y d ifferent names within and outside the school system; saorem ree f erred to as supervisors, some are called superintendents, principals, vice-p rincipals, head s of department, deans, provosts, rectors, vice-chancellors etc.
Supervision of instruction takes p lace in educational institution which is a social system with a numb er of interacting sub -systems.
These sub-systems are the teaching sub- system, the school management sub- system, the counseling and co-curriculum sub- systems etc.
It can also be said that supervision of instruction is a professional, continuous and cooperative exercise that covers all the aspects of the life of a school.
It covers all the sub-systems of the school and influences them.
The main purpose of influencing all the sub -systems in the school is to ensure improvement in teaching- learning situation and also to ensure quality teaching and learning in the school.
36  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ofoegbu (2004) defined instructional sup ervision as a process of ascertaining that teachers carry out the task of teaching to an exp ected level, according to the stipulated guidelines, which control the educational system.
It is a way of persuading teachers tdoe s ist from app lication of wrong teaching method s and procedures in instructional deliver y. Sup ervision of instructional is a concept that emphasises the improvement of instructional delivery method s. 3.4.
Purpo se of Supervisio n of Instructio n The p urpose of supervision of instruction is to ensure that the r ight instruction is passed to the students with the right method by the right p eople at the r ight time.
This winiflllu e nce the attainment of the major instructional and educational goals.
Other reasons for carrying out supervision of instruction in schools are as follows: (i) assess and estab lish the performance of the teachers in the school, (ii) provide sp ecific assistance to teachers with deficient teaching methods, (iii) discover teachers with special teaching skills and qualities in schools, (iv) ascertain and assess teachers classroom management skills, (v) provide level play ground for teachers growth and development, (vi) provide both knowledge and encouragement to young and inexperienced teachers, (vii) provide teachers with professional magazines, journals or references that would enlighten, motivate and encourage them to b e familiar with changes in the instructional d elivery methodologies, (viii) ensure the conformity of the dissenting teachers to the ap propriate instructional delivery method s through directional lead ership, (ix) organize induction programme to new teachers on various teaching methods available and make available other staff d evelop ment programme that should serve as incentives to improve incompetent teachers, and (x) Assess the overall climate of the instruction availab le in the school and identify some of its most urgent need s. Self Assessment Exercise.
(i) Define instructional supervision (ii) Wh y is instructional supervision a must in our educational institutions?
3.5.
Techniques of Supervisio n There are various techniques of supervision.
Before any strategy can b e applied b y tshuep e rvisor, the supervisor must resp ect the worth and dignity of the supervisee.
Mod ern supervision is cooperative and is focused on the aims and objectives of ed ucation, instructional materials, method s of teaching, staff and students and the entire school environment.
It involves all those who are involved and engaged in the task of sthoelv inpgro b lems in the school and imp roving instruction.
The following are the techniques of supervision: 37  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (i) Classroom Visitation and Observation Technique: this is a live systematic observation of a teacher at work.
The supervisor visits the classroom in an actual situation and ob serves how the teacher teaches, manages and controls the stud ents in the classroom.
The supervisor that adop ts this technique focuses on planning and prep aration of the lesson, presentation of the lesson (teachers voice, speech and habit clarity, app ropriateness of language,), teacher and students relationship, students particip ation in the lesson, app ropriateness of the instructional aids and methods, classroom management, teachers p ersonality and knowledge of the sub ject content.
This technique has been recognized as a good technique for supervision, because it provides the supervisor the opportunity to see the teacher in action.
(ii) Inter- School/Teacher Visitation Technique: This technique involves teacher(s) in a particular school visiting teacher(s) in another school and observing them while teaching.
Inter-school/teacher visitation can either be inter-class visitation or inter-school visitation .
It is inter-class visitation when teacher(s) in the same school visit another teacher teaching in another class within the same school, and it is inter-school visitation when teacher(s) in one school visit another teacher in another school teacher in the class.
Apart from the fact that this technique enhances interaction among teachers within and outside the school, it also assists the beginning teachers to learn class management.
It also help s both the experienced and in-exp erienced teachers to plan effectively and make judicious use of availab le resources.
Inter- school visitation involves pre-visitation planning to bring about the desired results.
(iii) Workshop Technique: The use of this technique involves organizing various workshops, seminars, conferences with intention of rubbing minds together on current and other issues that could lead to improvement in teaching and lear ning cond ition in the school.
This technique has recently become a ver y useful tool and method of supervision.
It affords teachers the opportunity to exchange ideas, foster good spirit and relationship among p rofessional colleagues and acquaint them with the new and special prob lems that they might be confronted with in the school.
A good workshop , seminar or conference is planned several weeks b efore commencement and it may run into several days or weeks depend ing on the objective(s).
A god degree of flexibility is necessary in the planning of a workshop.
38  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iv) Demonstration Technique: This techniq ue involves the p resentation of pre-arranged series of events in form of teaching by a master-teacher to a group of teacher s to see.
This technique is used to enhance ind ividual teachers growth and skill on the job.
The viewers should be given enough notice because of imp ortance of attendance and they should be ad equately involved in the exercise.
This technique should b e realistic and practicable.
Video tapes and guided practice can also be used to enhance the effectiveness of this technique (v) Micro-Teaching Technique: This technique is adop ted when a teacher is teaching a group less than the normal classroom population with time that is equally less than the normal 40 minutes for a period.
For examp le, if a teacher is to teach a group of 5-10 stud ents within 5-10 minutes, this method is best suited.
This method allows the supervisors and teachers to identify, define, d escribe, point-out, highlight, and re-try certain teaching skills without the risk of teaching the actual class and also with a period that is less than 40 minutes.
The method gives room for immediate feed back because the group involved is ver y small in size, and more so igti v es opportunity to student-teacher and sup ervisor the opportunity to watch and listen to his/her mistakes To effectively use micro-teaching technique, the following conditions must b e met: (a) there should be a pre-conference meeting between the would be supervisee and supervisor to agree on terms (what to b e taught and how it should b e taught), (b) there should b e audio and visual equipment e.g.
tape, video recorder, television, films etc., (c) there should be the actual teaching to be observed by the supervisor, and (d) there should be a post-conference meeting between the supervisor and supervisee, and the group to discuss on the strength and weaknesses of the sup ervisee.
(vi) Audio Visual Technique: This technique is becoming popular in recent times; it involves the use of sound recordings through video tape, computers, and media or film to p resent ideas to one or more listeners in such a way as to assist in the develop ment of skills.
Class activities are recorded and re-played too stimulate class discussion and imp rove teacher s behaviour hence improvement in teaching and lear ning activities.
(vii) Guided Practice Technique: Peretomode (1995) referred to this technique as the type that is sometimes associated with inter-visitation and observation.
The technique stresses actual doing with the needed support rather than mere talking independently.
It may ind icate the need for skill 39  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE development, and it may compliment a follow-up activity in which the supervisee develops the teaching plan to use in the class with d irect assistance and support from the supervisor.
4.0.
Conclusion The introduction of Western Education could b e traced back o 1842 when the missionaries established the 1st primary school in Badagr y.
At this time, the Catechist were used as teachers while layman in the church perform supervisory duties.
However, since 1882, government started to demonstrate commitment to education standard by appointing Inspector of Schools of the West Africa, and in 1 889, Inspector of Schools for Lagos colony was also appointed.
This showed that gover nment was committed to imp rovement of standard of education in Nigeria.
The inspectorate unit got another boos in the first quarter of the twentieth century when government appointed a Director of Education and three (3) Zonal Inspectors of schools; this was also to improve the effectiveness and efficiencies of school inspection.
There was also the establishment of Western Region Inspectorate Service in 1 954 to make considerable impact on the education standard of he Western Region, and in 1 973 the Federal Government established the Fed eral Inspectorate Division through the federal ministry of education o sup ervise the quality of instructional delivery in schools.
5.0 Summary.
In this unit, we have discussed the evolution of supervision in Nigeria, various meanings of supervision, insp ection, and sup ervision of instruction.
From our discussion in this unit, supervision and inspection are two d ifferent concepts.
Supervision from all the various meanings given was a hand of assistance given to a professional colleague in teaching exercise while inspection is a school administration focused on faults find ing in order to ensure maintenance of stand ards.
We also discussed the various techniques of supervision e.g.
classroom, inter-visitation, workshops, demonstration etc.
It should be noted that no single technique can b e applied in all circumstances, because teachers and teaching methods d iffer; so also do the students and the classroom environments.
6.0 Tut or Ma rked Assig nment .
(i) Distinguish b etween supervision of instruction and inspection.
(ii) Mention and discuss any five (5) techniques that a supervisor could adopt.
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Ajayi, I.
A & Ayodele, J.
B (2001).
Introduction to Education Planning, Administration and Supervision.
Lagos: YPPS Anuna, M. C (2004) Educational Supervision.
The Nigerian Experience.
Owerri: International university press.
40  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Fafunwa, A.
B (1974).
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Urwin.
Ofoegbe, F.I (2004).
Supervision and Inspection in the Nigerian Education System in Organisation and Administration of Education.
Perspectives and Practices.
Benin: Festa.
UNIT 6 SUPERVIS ION OF INSTRUCT ION CONTIN UED 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning of a Supervisor 3.2 Qualities of a good Sup ervisor 3.3 Types of Supervision 3.4 Challenges facing supervision in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we discussed the evolution of supervision in Nigeria which was traced back to 1842 when the missionaries established the first primary school in Badagr y (CMS primary school).
During this time, it was the missionar y that was responsible for supervising their schools.
In 1882, the government appointed Inspector of Schools of West Africa and in 1 889, local inspector of schools was appointed for Lagos colony.
Since that time, supervision has had expression in the Nigeria educational system.
We also d iscussed the meaning of supervision and inspection, the purpose of supervision of instruction and techniques of sup ervision.
In this unit we are going to discuss the various types of supervision and the problems of supervision in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) explain all the various forms of inspection (we have) (ii) identify the challenges facing sup ervision 41  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) proffer solutions to the challenges facing supervisors/instructional supervision in Nigeria 3.0 Ma in Contents Insp ection as d iscussed in the last unit is a way to review the q uality and quantity oedf u cational inp uts.
Such inp ut includes the quality and q uantity of teachers, the q uality of instruction and the quality of its evaluation procedure.
Educational inspection could be describ ed as a means b y which the educational system ensures that the ed ucation idte l ivers will serve the p urpose for which it is intended.
3.1 Mea ning of a Superviso r A supervisor can best be describ ed b y the nature of the work performed and the services rendered, rather than accord ing to any title.
Adams and Dickey (1953) opined that asu pervisor may be a school head in a small s ystem, the build ing principal in a large system, supervisor of a special field, such as physical ed ucation, art or music, the d irector of instruction in a country or city school system, the country or city school superintendent or a helping teacher.
Wiles and John (1975) posited that a supervisor is a person formally designated b y the organisation to interact with members of the teaching b ehaviour system in ord er to improve the quality of learning b y students or stud ents learning.
Ogunsaju (1978) d efined supervisors as officers performing supervisory duties.
They are mostly education officers working in the ministry of education and charged with the following resp onsibilities: (i) planning of school curricula, (ii) allocating funds and scholarships to students and need y student who demonstrated eligibility through comp etitive examination and Inter view ad ministered b y the ministr y, (iii) supervising teacher education and provision of textbooks and other instructional materials, and (iv) occasionally visiting schools to see how effectively their curriculum planning is working.
A supervisor could be said to be any professionally trained staff from the ministry of education and within the school system who can p roffer advisor y assistance to the teachers for the purpose of imp roving learning 3.2 Qualities of a Good Superviso r A supervisor in his own capacity is regarded a instructional leader.
He is expected tpoe r form certain functions and to fulfill the exp ectations, aspirations, needs, and demand of the society in which he/she operates.
For a supervisor to be successful, he/she needs to possess certain q ualities that will put him/her over those under his supervision: 42  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (i) He/She must be true to his own ideas (ii) He/She must be flexible (iii) He/she must be loyal (iv) He/She must command respect (v) He/She must be strong-willed (vi) He/She must be consistent (vii) He/She must be fair in dealings with other people (viii) He/She must be open-minded in making decisions (ix) He/She must respect others opinions (x) He/She must be teachab le (xi) He/She must be sincere, firm, and approachable (xii) He/She must be ready to help people solve their problem 3.3 Types/Forms of Inspect ion Below are the various forms of inspection that we have: (i) Full General Inspection: This form of inspection involves a comprehensive assessment of all aspects of life in a school.
The inspection will include the subjects taught, the qualification and adequacy of teachers as well as adequacy of various resources compared with the established standards.
For a full general insp ection to be successful, a lar ge team of inspectors must be put together and this type of inspection usually last up to four to five days d epending on the number of inspectors that make up the inspection team.
Prior to the inspection, the school head should b e contacted to p rovid e information on: the list of the subjects on the curriculum, staff subject analysis, a copy of the current class time table, individual teacher s time table showing the teacher s p eriod and class, staff list with their ranks and qualifications and a copy of school d aily routine.
The information supplied based on the request above will enable the inspectorate d ivision to choose the right inspectors to form the team.
The team should have a team leader who should not be lower in rank than the school head of the school to b e inspected and a reporting insp ector who would produce the final inspection report.
(ii) Routine Inspection: This type of inspection is carried out to determine the adequacy of school facilities.
It is a visit organized to familiarize the inspectors to the d ay-to-day activities/management of the school.
The inspectors at the end of the visit rep ort on the staff situation (whether under/over staff, or over/und er utilized) with regard to approved standard/quota, the numb er in post, vacancies by subjects (if available), ab sentees, enrolment and attendance, d rop-out, environmental sanitation, the school records.
43  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) Follow-Up Inspection: This is a type of insp ection carried out a year after the full general inspection had taken p lace.
This is a repeat visit to find out how the suggestions or recommendations made for the school during the full general insp ection have b een effected.
This type of inspection is regard ed as the on-the-spot assessment to see whether the action taken during the full insp ection is achieving the desired results.
(iv) Special Inspection: This is the typ e of inspection that is carried out on special or specific problem id entified by disciplinary or specific education committee.
Cases inspected b y inspectors on special investigation visits range from minor cases of students disobedience, p rincip al/teacher s ad ministrative mismanagement to ser ious cases like financial mismanagement/mis-appropriation, rape, stud ent riot, robb ery, arson, examination malpractice, immoral sex act and so on.
(v) Recognition Inspection: This is a special inspection carried out by inspectors to assess the number of subjects offered in a school as well as the number of human and material resources available in the school for purpose of accreditation by appropriate bodies or external examinations bodies like West African Examination Council (WAEC), National Examination Council (NECO).
The inspectors will assess the available lab oratories and other expected infrastructure, textbooks, the number of teaching and non-teaching staff b y grade, sex, qualification, and years of cognate experience.
All these will assist the school in the accreditation of courses in the school or recognition by the exter nal examination bodies Self Assessment exercise Highlight the various challenges facing sup ervision of instruction in Nigeria.
3.4 Cha llenges of Supervisio n o f Inst ruction in Nigeria.
It is p ertinent to also discuss the challenges facing supervision of instruction in Nigeria since supervision is a vital tool in enhancing the standard and maintaining quality in Nigerian schools.
A lot of problems hinder supervision of instruction, but we are going to discuss the most fundamental ones.
(i) The dearth of qualified and trained personnel: Most of the personnel used as supervisors of instruction in most states in Nigeria do not have the pre- requisites teachers qualification and exp erience.
(ii) Inadequate funds for supervision of instruction: Fund ing has been a major challenge facing not only supervision of instruction but also education in general.
The available 44  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE fund to the inspectorate unit in the ministr y of education is not sufficient to carry out the enormous task given to them.
It is becoming increasingly impossib le for inspectorate unit of the education ministries to service and repair vehicles need ed for supervision exercises and even to p ay duty tour allowance (DTA) of supervisors where need be.
(iii) Lack of relevant supervisory competencies: Nigerian supervisors of education are deficient in relevant supervisory skills because there is no pre-professional or pre-p ractice training for the supervisors.
School heads need to be trained in order to acquire the relevant skills for performing the sup ervisory functions.
(iv).
Styles of supervision adopted by supervisors: Some supervisors still ad opt autocratic, fault-finding styles of inspection.
This makes the school head and teachers become apprehensive.
This set of supervisors always assumes master y of the subjects and expect the teacher to be sub servient to hem.
They assume that supervisors have the knowledge and regard the teachers as inferior workers who should take instruction from them without questioning; this will always breed disdain and contempt instead of coop eration.
(v).
Low teachers morale: School sup ervisors, school heads and the supervisees do not receive correspond ing or much incentive to enab le them to be totally committed to their jobs.
The general belief by Nigerians is that teaching profession is of low esteem.
More than half of the teachers on the job are bidding their time to get alternative emp loyment and opt out of teaching because they are d issatisfied with the job.
It is difficult for such a teacher with the mind set that teaching is a stepp ing stone to be totally committed to their job and this could greatly have negative influence on their teaching, thereby making sup ervisor work more tedious.
(vi) Inadequate transport facilities: Sup ervisors of education have often complained of inab ility to cover most of their areas of operation.
This is compounded b y inaccessibility of some areas e. g. river ine, nomadic and rural areas where schools are located.
The problem of transportation cannot be sep arated from poor funding of the inspectorate unit in the ministry of education and the state of all Nigerian roads.
(vii) Pre-occupation of school head with administrative duties: School heads are sometimes occupied with ad ministrative duties to the extent that they have no time for academic leadership.
They 45  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE are more occupied with obtaining information from the ministry of education; attend parent teachers association meetings, maintaining community school relationship at the detriment of supervision of instruction which is one of their primar y d uties.
School heads prefer to travel most time b ecause of self-gain in traveling.
This situation makes them toe the grip of the situation in their schools.
(viii) Attitude of ministry of education officials: During the colonial and post colonial era, funding of schools was based on the submitted reports b y the supervisors of education ab out the development of the schools.
Fund ing schools in contemporary times d oes not depend on school p erformance in examinations.
Supervisor s rep ort is now worthless at the ministr y because the reports are not being taken seriously b y the ministry of education officials in the recent past as they were in the colonial p eriod.
(ix) Policy instability: This has to do with frequent change in educational policy without adequate knowledge of the supervisors which often leads to confusion or uncertainty.
The sup ervisors are not carried along when policies affecting education are to be changed/amended For example, change of school calendar, abolition and re-establishment of bodies like NPEC, abolition and re- introduction of private universities etc.
In addition to all the above discussed prob lems, there are so many other problems facing instructional supervision in schools.
They are almost inaccessible in areas that includ e: the location of the schools, inadeq uate data, over utilization of facilities, religious and political problems.
These in add ition serve as serious constraints to supervision in the Nigerian educational system.
4.0 Co nclusion The need for sup ervision is p ertinent to the growth and d evelopment of Nigerian education.
This is the main reason why Nigerian government should pay more attention to supervision.
The challenges of supervision on the morale of its agents should be seriously addressed.
The supervisors should b enefit from regular in-service training in form workshops, seminars, conferences, and other relevant short and long term courses that would expose the supervisors to increased effectiveness and efficiency in supervision exercise.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have exp lained the various forms of inspection we have, they are: fguelnl e ral, routine, special, ad visory, recognition and follow-up inspection.
We also discussed some of the problems facing supervision in Nigeria.
The following prob lems 46  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE are also discussed in the unit: the dearth of q ualified supervisors, inadequate funding, lack of relevant supervisor y competencies, styles adopted b y sup ervisors, pre-occupation of school head, attitude of ministr y of education officials, policy instab ility and enrolment, the location of the school, inadequate d ata, over - utilized facilities, religious and political p roblems.
6.0 Tut or marked assignment (i) List and explain five forms of inspection (ii) Identify any five challenges facing of sup ervisory function in Nigeria and suggest possib le solutions to them.
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s. Adam, J & Dickey, M (1953).
Basic Principles of Supervision.
New York: American Books Ajayi, I.
A & Ayodele, J.
B.
(2001).
Introduction to Educational Planning, Administration and Supervision.
Lagos: YPPS Anuna, M. C. (2004).
Educational Supervision.
The Nigerian Experience, .Owerri: International University Press.
Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1974).
History of education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Urwin.
Ofoegbu, F.I.
(2004).
Supervision and Inspection in the Niger ian Education System in Organisation and Administration of Education.
Perspectives and Practices.
Benin: Festa.
Ogunsaju, S (1978): Structural organisation and sup ervision of Nigerian primary and secondary schools.
Nigerian students international.
Vol.
No 2, pp.12-13 Wiles, K & John, T,L (1975): Sup ervision for Better Schools.
4th (ed), Engle-wood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice- hall Inc. 47  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE MODULE TWO EDUCATION LAWS AND SCHOOL PLANT UNIT 1 EDUCAT ION LAW AND CONTROL OF EDUCATION IN NIGE RIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition of Law 3.2 Law in Nigeria Traditional Education 3.3 Evolution of Education Law in Nigeria 3.4 Education Ord inance of 1887 3.5 Education Ord inance of 1908 3.6 Education Ord inance of 1916 and 1926 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction 48  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE For any organisation or institution (educational or otherwise) to be estab lished, managed and perform effectively, there must be guiding principles in form of rules and regulations guiding the activities of such an organisation or institution.
These rules and regulations may b e in form of taboos/customs/trad itions, dep ending on the p ractices of the community where the institution is situated.
It may also be in form of constitutional laws made b y relevant government agencies.
If there is no law, there will be no need tpor o secute offender(s).
The essence of promulgating laws for educational institutions is to guide the activities of the op erators in the system to ensure that, it all falls within tfhraem ework of the whole community.
Management of educational institution is a complex task for administrations b ecause the industry (education) is the lar gest employer of labour in Nigeria as well as in other p arts of the world and all other sectors depend on education ind ustry for survival.
As a result of these, it is imp erative to have some set rules and regulations guid ing the operations of the industry and the op erators.
2.0 Objectives.
At the end of the lesson, students should be ab le to: i.
Define law as a concept ii.
Distinguish b etween law and rule iii.
Distinguish b etween written and unwritten law iv.
Distinguish b etween statutor y and customary laws v. Trace the histor y of education low from 1882-1926 3.0 Ma in Content Law can either be written or unwritten.
It is written when those rules and regulations guiding the cond ucts and operations of a society are written down and peop le recognise that, it is binding on them and sanctions could be imposed by appropriate authority if such rules and regulations are violated.
But when the rules and regulation guiding the operations of a society are not written d own and the people also recognise that it is binding on them with appropriate sanding if violated, it is unwritten law.
Law could either be statutory or customar y. Statutory laws are the laws created by statute or acts of parliaments or the legislature arm of government.
Legislative arm of government is the one saddled with the responsibility of making laws.
Customary laws on the other hand are the laws, d erivab le from the customs and traditions of a society over a period of time but these customs and traditions must b e known and recognized b y the constitution of the land .
There is a difference between rules and laws.
Rules are regulations or ordinances which are statements of general norms.
Rules are made by the President, Governors, Ministers, Commissions, and Chief Executives of institutions/parastatals without passing through the legislative arm of government.
But in case of law, it must be passed through tlhege is lature arm of the government before it can become operative and recognized as the 49  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE law of the land.
No single executive/chief executive can enact a law; it must pass through legislative process.
Decree is another type of law; it is a law made b y the supreme military authority of a countr y d uring military administration.
Laws made by State Militar y Governors are referred to as ed icts.
3.1 Definit ion of law The term law has been defined d ifferently b y different authors.
Some perceive it as asy stem of rules which all citizens of that country must ob ey.
This means that the law of a country is sup erior to the citizens of the country whether written or unwritten as long as it is the law of the countr y. Elias (1 962) defined law as a rule laid down for the guid ance of an intelligent b eing by an intelligent b eing having p ower over him and Renter (1970) opines that law comp rises all rules and arrangements recognized by the law courts From the above, law can be defined as a rules written or unwritten recognized b y the cHoouwrtesv.
e r, law can also b e a discip line or course of stud y in higher institutions of learning, just as we have courses like: ed ucation, medicine, engineering, p harmacy etc.
it may also be a profession.
But in this unit, the term law is the one used for the proper regulation of a society b y ap propriate authority.
Law has two main branches, civil and criminal.
Civil laws are those app lied to settle civil cases such as: disputes b etween private individ uals, between ind ividual and businesses and between business, in this categor y we have law of torts, family law, land law, alanwd of contract.
Criminal laws on the other hand are those laws applied to settle criminal cases.
Cr iminal cases are wrongs committed against community, state or ind ividual property.
3.2 Law in Nigerian Traditional Education Traditional education in Niger ian is the education which each community handed over to the succeed ing generations; this is different from the western education or the formal education.
Nigeria comprises various communities with different cultures and ethnic groups.
Nigerian children who do not have the opportunity to have the western education or quranic education only enjoy the trad itional education.
Traditional education is not obtained from the four- walls of a classroom; it is obtainable from the parents/communities.
The main objective of either formal/western or traditional education is to assist the child to grow into a functional member of the family and society.
A child has the right teox p obsee d to basic education; basic education is ed ucation for living in conformity with the norms and values of the society.
For traditional education; parents, var ious members of the family (nuclear and extended) located within the same compound, household and his neighb our-hood are the child s teachers.
If a p erson is referred to as uneducated in a society, it is an insult on that person and the family b ecame it is assumed that the parents did not fulfill their obligation by not p roviding the basic education for the child at trhigeh t time.
Ever y child in the traditional education is also exp osed to some occup ational 50  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE trading in form apprenticeship to enable him to acquire an occup ation to maintain himself and his family at the appropriate time in the future.
In the traditional education, the environment/society reinforced the value of acceptance.
The principle of seniority within the trad itional society strengthens the principle of authority and responsibility in the society.
People in a society are not only familiar to coop erative efforts, they also have divergent views.
To clarify issues on divergent views, eld ers in the society were looked on to with unquestioning obedience by the younger ones.
As soon as a child is born, the p rocess of education started and continued iandtuol t hood until death.
A child derives knowledge from observation, customs, trad itional beliefs and religious tenets.
During the slave trade era, parents reserved the rights to sell into slavery, they can also administer corporal punishment without limit, and theft was seen as an offence that should b e visited with capital punishment.
Every child in tthraed i tional education must be corrected by the older children and members of the extended family and if the child refuses correction, corporal punishment can be applied At this time, d isob edience and other forms of indiscipline acts were rare among child ren because of the method /sways of administering punishment.
The whole community as well as the parents is teacher who can also punish errand child.
3.3.
Evolution of Education Laws in Nigeria.
The history of education laws in Nigeria could be traced to 1882 when the first educational ordinance was enacted.
The 1882 education ordinance was the first education official law made by the colonial masters in Nigeria.
The ordinance makes the following p rovisions: 1. establishment of a general board of education for Lagos colony made up of the gover nor as the chairman and members of the state executive council as members and other four nominees b y the government, 2. that the general education is empowered to hire and fire local education board s which were meant only to ad vise the general education board on the needs and areas where new schools are to be established, cond itions for granting certificate to teachers and set cond ition for schools to be qualified for government grant- in aid s, 3. that there shall b e one inspector of schools for West African colonies and three assistant inspectors to be b ased in; Lagos, Sierra Leone and Gold Coast, 4. that there shall b e both the government, missionary and community primary schools, and 5. that the school curriculum should include subjects like Reading, Writing, Arithmetic Domestic Science, English Language, History and Geography.
51  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.4 Educa tion Ordinance o f 1887 Up to 1886 , Lagos colony was administered b y the same colonial authority that governed the Gold Coast colony.
But from 1886, Lagos and Gold Coast colonies were separated; Lagos now became a separate colony and a protectorate.
This led to the attention given to the prob lems and prospects of educational development in Nigeria.
It was this event that led to enactment of the second education ordinance in 1887.
Fafunwa (1974) opined that, this was technically the first education ordinance to b e enacted for Nigeria; the 1882 education ordinance was for the British West African colonies in which Lagos was one.
The 1887 ordinance provided that: 1. a board of education be estab lished for Lagos colony comprising the Governor as the chairman, memb ers of house of legislature and other four Governor nominee, 2. the b oard established shall assist school with grants and scholarship awards to pupils, and 3. the board shall establish conditions for granting scholarship to pupils.
Among the cond itions set were that: a. schools must have a manager with power to hire and fire, teachers and also be accountable to schools on financial matters, b. teachers must be qualified and certified, c. schools academic p erformance in public examination must be good d. schools must b e open for inspection, e. school must be for all children irresp ective of their religion or ethnic background and no religious education must be given to students without the parent background, and f. school curriculum must includ e: Reading, Writing Arithmetic, English, Needlework, Histor y and Geography.
3.5 Educa tion Ordinance o f 1908 In Nigeria, the Northern protectorate was established in 1899 and in 1906 the colonies of Lagos and Southern Niger ia were merged.
But prior to this merger, in 1 908, the Department of Education was created for the new Southern protectorate of Nigeria.
This dep artment was responsib le for production of education codes to oversee the education need , expansion and management of education in the Southern protectorate.
The 1908 education ordnance focused on the Southern p rotectorate and also provid ed the following; i. that there shall b e a department of education in the colony, ii.
that there shall b e a director of education to head the dep artment of 52  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE education who would be responsible to the gover nor on education matters only, and iii.
that there shall also be superintendents of schools.
The establishment of a separate department for education for Southern protectorate was major development in the history of Niger ian education because prior to this time, education had b een administered from the Governor s office when need b e. No specific dep artment was designated to oversee the activities in the education d epartment then.
The establishment of the d epartment of ed ucation changed the scenario.
Training was organised for some officers who were given responsibility to p lan, co-ord inate, and control and supervise the educational development in the merged Lagos colony and Southern protectorate and the head gave account of the stewardship in the ministr y to the governor.
This resulted in greater efficiency and accountability in the management of education.
Self Assessment Exercise (i) Distinguish b etween written and unwritten laws.
(ii) There is no difference b etween civil law and criminal law.
Do you agree?
3.6 Educa tion Ordinance a nd Code o f 1916 and 1926 The amalgamation of the Southern and Northern protectorates came up in 1914 by Sir Frederick Lugard who was also appointed the Government - General for Nigerian territory by the British Government.
Lugard was aware of the gap in educational development between the Southern and Northern Niger ia and the imp ortance of education to d evelop ment of the people and the nation at large.
He devoted special attention to the formulation of education policy and its implementation.
After a few months of assump tion of office, Luggard proposed new guidelines for grant-in-aids to missionary schools, because the 1914 education ord inance was criticized b y the colonial master s office in Lond on and leaders of the various missionary group s in Niger ia.
Other provisions of the 1916 education ordnance were: i. grants - in aid to the mission for running the missionar y schools should be increased and inspection of schools should b e more frequent, ii.
Christian Religion should not be taught in schools located in the muslims communities in the Northern Nigeria, iii.
schools located in the rural areas should teach Agriculture and Local Crafts, and iv.
no interference among the various agencies involved in education and there should be cooperation among these agencies.
53  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The 1916 education ord inance resulted in the improvement of efficiency and effectiveness of school management and leadership, b etter teaching staff quality, and higher p upils academic performance.
But the ordinance was not without critics.
It was said that the ordinance focused mainly on missionary schools which were located mostly in the Southern Nigeria.
It also contained nothing to bridge the ed ucation gap between the Southern and Northern Nigeria.
In 1 922, the Phelps - Stokes Commission pub lished a report on education in Africa, this report spurred the British government to produce a memorandum on education in its territories in 1925.
However, in 1926, there was an ed ucation ordinance to respond to the Phelps - Stokes Commission s recommendations.
The ordinance addressed the issue of school management, staffing and supervision as observed by Phelps - Stokes commission.
It was sp ell-out in the ord inance that a person need ed to be a registered teacher before he could b e hired to teach in any school in the Southern Nigeria.
The ordinance also mandated voluntary agencies or communities to take approval from the director of education as well as the board of education before establishing new schools.
This measure was to check the establishment of sub-standard schools within the protectorate.
The ord inance also expantiated the functions and duties of supervisors and insp ectors of education.
The work of the supervisors and inspectors assumed a different dimension because their reports not only imp roved the academic standard and performance; it also assisted the Board/Director of Education in arriving at vital decisions on education.
The ordinance also put in place stringent cond itions for teachers to be employed; it also stipulated the minimum salaries that should be paid to any registered teachers in all tghoev e rnment or government assisted schools.
This 1926 ordinance therefore, became the first education ordinance that enhanced the status of teaching profession and mad e teaching attractive to the qualified teachers.
Self- Assessment Exercise Trace the histor y of Nigerian Education Law from 1882 to 1926.
4.0 Co nclusion Law can b e a discipline/or course of study in institutions of higher learning, and it caalsno be used for p rop er regulation of a society b y appropriate authority.
Civil laws aarpep lied to settle civil cases while cr iminal laws are applied to settle criminal cases in the society.
The histor y of education law could be traced back to 1882 when the first education ord inance was made for the entire British colonies to 1926 when education ordinance was made for the Southern and Northern protectorate after the amalgamation of Southern and Northern protectorate in Nigeria.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the historical development of education laws in Nigeria from 1882 when the first education official law was made b y the colonial master (i. e. 54  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE British).
The 1882 ordinance was meant for the entire British West African colonies, while the 1887 ordinance was the first one for Nigeria.
The ed ucation ordinance of 1908 was for the Lagos colonies and Southern p rotectorate after their merger in 1906.
This ordinance was focused on that new Southern p rotectorate which was a land mark in the histor y of education in Nigeria, because this ordinance stipulated and established a separate d epartment (department of education) to oversee education ministry.
However, the 1916 and 1926 ordinances were made for the Southern and Northern protectorates after the amalgamation of the d uo in 1914 by Sir Fredrick Lord Lugard who became the first Governor - General of the Southern and Norther n Nigeria.
The ed ucation ordinances made various provisions for education at one time or the other.
6.0 Tut or Ma rked Assignment Trace the historical development of education law in Nigeria from 1887-1926.
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Adesina.
S. (1993) Education Law and Politics in E.A.
Yoloye, (ed) Education and the Law in Niger ia; the Nigeria Academy of Education.
1993 Year Book on Education.
Ibadan, Claverianum Press Elias T.O (1962).
The Nature of African Customary Law, Manchester; University Press.
Fafunwa, A.B (1973).
History of Education in Nigeria, London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd Federal Repub lic of Nigeria (1979).
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Lagos: Federal ministry of Information.
Nwagwu, N.A (1993).
Historical Develop ment of Education Laws in Nigeria in E. A.Yoloye, (ed) Education and the Law in Nigeria; the Nigeria Academy of Education.
1993 Year Book on Education Ib adan, Claverianum Press Reuter, E.E (1970).
Schools and the Law.
Engle-wood Cliffs, New Jersey Oceana Publications Taiwo C.O (1993).
The Role of Law in Education in E. A.Yoloye, (ed) Education and the Law in Niger ia; the Nigeria Academy of Education.
1993 Year Book on Education.
Ibadan, Claverianum Press 55  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 2 ORGANISATION OF THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Structure of the federal ministry of education 3.1.1 Organogram of the fed eral ministr y of education 3.2 Functions of the federal ministry of education 3.3 The state ministr ies of education 3.3.1 Organogram of the state ministr y of education 3.4 Functions of the state ministry of education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to d iscuss the organisational structure of the ministries of education in Nigeria (federal and state).
We will also d iscuss the functions of federal and state ministries of education.
The various dep artments that make up the federal ministry of education and other agencies under it will also be looked into.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Distinguish d eliver federal ministry and state ministry of ed ucation (ii) Draw organogram of federal ministry of education (iii) Explain the functions of the fed eral ministr y of education (iv) Draw the organisational structure of state ministry of education (v) Explain the functions of the state ministr y of education 3.0 Ma in Content Education in Nigeria is on the concurrent list of the Nigerian constitution.
Apart from the concurrent list, there are also the exclusive and residual lists.
All items on the elixsct l uasriev e e xclusively und er the total control of the fed eral government, for examp le: the Nigerian Police Force, the Nigerian Army: he Nigerian Custom Services etc the Nigerian Prison Ser vice.
While residual list is made up of those items that are und er the total control of the state government, the state governments are solely responsible for the provision, controlling and fund ing of items on the residual list at their various states, because the law has given the state government the statutor y right to do so.
56  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE However, education is one of the items on the concurrent list.
This means it is to b ejo i ntly provided by both the fed eral and state governments.
In the p rocess, if there is any clash, the position of the federal government takes precedent.
Federal government owns, controlled, financed and operates federal secondar y schools and institutions of higher learning i.e.
Fed eral Secondary Schools, Federal Colleges of Education, Federal Colleges of Agriculture, Fed eral Polytechnics, and Federal Universities etc.
So also the state government owns, controlled, financed and operate the state owned secondary schools, state owned colleges of education, state owned polytechnics, state owned colleges of agriculture and state universities.
These institutions (second ary and institutions of higher learning at state levels) are owned, managed, financed and controlled b y the state government.
However the Primary Basic Education is provided b y the local government through the primary school.
3.1 The Structure of the Federa l Minist ry o f Education: Federal ministry of ed ucation is the organ of federal gover nment that is responsible for the ad ministration, financing and controlling of the federal government-owned education institutions both at the secondar y and higher institutional levels.
There are vertical and horizontal flows of authority and responsibility in them ministr y of education.
This will be seen in the hierarchical structure.
The ministr y is head ed by a minister of education who is nominated for appointment by the p resident sub ject to the approval of the National Assembly in a civilian government or approval of the supreme militar y council in a militar y gover nment.
At the ministr y of education there are seasoned educational administrators and civil servants who work directly or indirectly with the minister in various cap acities.
The ministry comprises eight different departments and several agencies.
The departments are: i.
Personnel ii.
Finance iii.
Planning Research and Statistics iv.
Primary and Secondary v. Post Secondary and Higher education vi Technolog y and Science vii.
Insp ectorate viii.
Education Support Service Some of the agencies under the supervision of the ministry of education are: i.
The National Council of Education (NCE) ii.
The Join Consultative Committee on Education (JCCE) iii.
The Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) iv The National Teachers Institution (NTI) v Joins Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB) vi The National Universities Commission (NUC) vii.
The National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) viii The National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) 57  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.1 Orga nisa tional Structure/Cha rt/Orga nogram o f the Federa l Ministry of Educa tion.
Figure 1 b elow is the hierarchical structure/or organisation chart of the federal ministry of education in Nigeria Figure 1 .
Minister of Education (ME) Permanent Secretar y (PS) Director Directo r Director Director Administration Schools Higher Inspectorate & & (PDoIli)c y Education Education (DAP) Support (DHE) (DSES) It can b e observed from figure 1 that authority flows downward from the ME = PS =D A P, DSESS, DHE & D1.
However, horizontal relationship exists b etween DAP = SESS = DHE = D1, b ecause these personnel operate at the same level and are headed by officers of the same cadre i.e.
d irector.
3.2 Funct io ns of the Federa l Minist ry of Educa tion The functions of the federal ministry of education are discussed below: 1.
Formula tion o f Na tional Policy on Educat ion The federal government through the federal ministr y of education lays down broad general ed ucation policies covering the various aspects of education in the country.
These policies are handed over to various states ministries of education through the state government to imp lement.
The federal ministr y of education draws a bench mar k for some educational programmes at certain levels e. g. the minimum O level qualification(s) 58  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE to be possessed b y candidates before being admitted into the colleges of ed ucation, polytechnics and universities.
ii) Funding o f Educatio nal Institutions/Agencies The federal ministr y of ed ucation solely finances all the educational institutions owned by the federal government (i.e.
the federal unity schools popularly called federal government colleges, the federal colleges of education, federal polytechnics and federal universities).
The fed eral ministry of ed ucation finances federal colleges of education through the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE), also the ministry finances the federal polytechnics through the National Board for Technical Ed ucation (NBTE) and finances the federal universities through the National Universities Commission (NUC).
The federal ministry of education also fund s some special agencies and institutions under it such as Nigerian Education Research and Development Council (NERDC).
The National Teachers Institute (NTI) the National Council on Education (NCE) etc.
iii) Pro vision o f Statistical Data Another major role of the fed eral ministry of ed ucation is the collection, collation and publication of students enrolment statistical data.
This assist the government to make necessary budgetary allocation to schools, have first hand information about the total numb er of students in the each school and all over the countr y.
Educational information is disseminated throughout the country through newsletter, statistical digest, pamphlets, journals and periodicals.
All educational p lans are b ased on the statistics p rovided by the federal ministr y of ed ucation.
iv) Quality Co ntro l The federal ministr y of education formulates general guidelines and bench mark aimed at ensuring educational standard s both at the state and federal levels.
The guideline and benchmark set are complied with b y both the states and fed eral government-owned institutions throughout the countr y. v) Develo pment o f Syllabuses/Curricula r The federal ministry of education in conjunction with other relevant agencies/b odies develops uniform curricula and syllabuses for use by all educational institutions in Nigerian.
The s yllabuses/curricula d eveloped are handed to state for imp lementation in the state owned schools.
vi) Pro vision o f Consulta ncy Services In addition to all the ab ove functions, the federal ministr y of education also padr ovvisidoer sy sand consultancy services to schools at the state levels and other interested organisations requiring educational information or advice.
59  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Self- Assessment Exercise Apart from all the functions of feral ministr y of education d iscussed above think of more functions of federal ministry of education 3.3 The Sta te Ministries of Education As at now, Nigeria is made up of 36 states and the Fed eral Capital Territory (AFbCuTja).
All the states have their respective state ministr ies of education.
This means that there are 36 states ministry of education in Nigeria, apart from the federal ministr y of education.
The state ministries of education are the organs of state government responsible for the administration, financing and controlling of the state government owned educational institutions both at the secondary school and higher institutional levels.
The state ministry of education is headed by a commissioner for education who is nominated b y the Executive Governor subject to the ratification of the legislative arm of government at the state level ( in Nigeria, it is called the House of Assembly).
Apart from the commissioner for education, there are also seasoned educational administrations (Permanent Secretaries, Directors), and civil servants that work in his ministry of education who manage the affairs of various divisions, directorates, units and sections of the ministr y.
There are some statutory management agencies under the state ministry of education e.g.
Secondary School s Management Board (SSMB), the State Education Commission (SEC), and the Teaching Service Commission (TSC).
3.3.1 Structure/Orgnogram of State Minist ry of Education Figure 2 below is the organogram of the state ministry of education in Niger ia.
Tmhaeyr e b e differences in the nomenclature dep ending on states, but a typ ical organogram of the state ministr y of education looks like this 60  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Fig.
2 Commissioner for Education State Education Board Director Director Director Director (Policy and (Inspectorat (School (Higher Planning) e and Management Education) stand ards) ) From the above, as we have in the federal ministry of ed ucation, authority flows downward while resp onsib ility flow up ward .
There are also line authority r elationships at the state ministr y of education as we have at the federal level.
Self Assessment exercise What are the differences between the organogram of the federal ministry of education and state ministry of Education?
3.4 Funct io ns of the Stat e Ministry of Educat io n in Nigeria.
i.
Implement atio n of Educational Po licies The state governments through the state ministries of education implement national educational policies formulated by the fed eral government through federal ministry of education.
State ministries formulate educational policies, b ased on the broad national policies on education set by the fed eral government through federal ministry of education.
(ii) Funding o f Educatio nal Institutions/Agencies The state ministr y of education is the sole financier of all the educational institutions owned by the state.
The ministr y is responsible for recurrent and cap ital expenses on monthly, quarterly or yearly basis.
Capital exp enses are money exp ended on site 61  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE acquisition, construction of school buildings, procurement of equipment and machinery.
The state ministr y of education also finances the statutor y education agencies und er the ministry.
Some of the agencies are: Teaching Service Commission, State Education Commission, Secondar y Management Board or Post Primar y Schools Management Board .
iii) Coo rdinat ion of Educa tiona l Activities The state ministries of education also coordinate educational activities within the states because of their leadership positions.
They also ensure that different p arts of the sscyhstoeoml and the people within it work harmoniously.
The state ministr y of education streamlines the structure of the state educational system to avoid multip le control, direction and management.
In some states, we have post primar y school management board or the secondar y education management board at zonal levels to monitor educational activities within the zone and report bock to the parent bod y i.e.
the state ministry of education iv) Pro vision o f Statistical Data This is another vital role of the state ministry of ed ucation.
The ministr y collects, collates and make available data on admission, enrolment, drop-out and other relevant data that will assist the state government in making adequate prep aration on p lanning for smooth operation of educational system at the state level.
Availability of correct data will enable the government to make adequate plan and vice versa v) Regulations o f Admissio n into Schools The States ministries of education provide regulation that guide the ad mission of student s into the state owned schools as well as student transfers and withdrawals vi) Quality Co ntro l It is reasonable to argue that one of the most important functions of the state ministr y of education is the maintenance of educational stand ards.
The ministry insp ects and supervise both the administrative and instruction components of the school and ensures that it meets the set standard vii) Formula tion o f Educa tional Policies Based on the b road educational provision and practices within the context of the policies from the federal ministry of education, the state ministry of education formulates state education policies which are included in the state education laws and cover ever y aspect of educational p rovisions and practices at the state level.
62  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE viii) Recruit ment and Payment of Tea chers/Ot her Staff The statutory agencies in the state ministry of education e.g.
Post-primary Ed ucation Board , Teaching Service Commission as the case may be, are responsible for the recruitment of teachers into the state owned educational institution.
The board also sees to the payment of teachers, and other staff salar ies and allowances as at when due.
4.0 Conclusion From this unit, you have leant that education is a service provided b y both federal astnadte governments in Niger ia.
Fed eral government provides education through the federal government owned educational institutions e. g. federal gover nment colleges, federal technical colleges, and federal colleges of education, federal polytechnics and federal universities.
These institutions are financed and controlled b y the federal government through federal ministry of education which is headed b y a minister ap pointed b y tphree s id ent based on the approval of the national Assembly in a democratic government.
State governments also provide education through the state owned educational institutions.
All the state owned educational institutions are controlled and financed by the state government through the state ministr y of education which is headed by a commissioner for education who is appointed by the executive Gover nor of the state based on the approval of the State House of Assembly 5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the concurrent and resid ual list and that the concurrent list contains items to be jointly provided by both the federal and state governments e.g.
education, the residual list contain items solely reserved for the federal government to provide e.g.
Nigeria Police Force etc.
we also discussed the functions of federal and state ministries of education and structure of both the federal and state ministries of ed ucation.
It was pointed out that the fed eral ministry of education is headed by a minister of education while the state ministry of ed ucation is headed by a commissioner for education 6.0 Tut or Ma rked Assig nment 1.
Draw the organogram of the ministry of education of your state 2.
Explain in full, the various functions performed the state ministry of education of your state 7.0 Reference Ajayi, T. & Oni J.O (1992).
A Functional App roach to School Organisation and Management, ljeb u-ode: Triumph Books.
Bedeian, A.G. & Zamnuto, F. R. (1991 ).
Organization Theor y and Design, New York: American Books.
63  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ezeocha, P. A (1990).
Educational Administration and Planning, Nsukka: Op tima Computer Solution.
64  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 3 FUNCT IONS OF STATE PRIMARY EDUCA TION BOARD AND EDUCAT ION COMMISSION S IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reasons for the establishment of state primary Education Board 3.2 National Universities Commission (NUC) 3.2.1 Function of the National Universities Commission (NUC) 3.3 National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) 3.3.1 Reasons for Establishment of NCCE 3.4 National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) 3.4.1 Reasons for the Estab lishment of NBTE 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, our discussion was on the federal and states ministries of education and we are able to see that education is p rovided b y both the federal and state governments.
At the federal gover nment level, education is under the federal ministry of education which is head ed by a minister who is appointed by the p resident subject to the approval of the National Assemb ly.
So also at the state level, education is under the ministr y oedf u cation, but this ministry at the state level is headed b y a commissioner appointed by the executive governor subject to the approval of the state House of Assembly.
In the unit, we are going to discuss the estab lishment and the functions of state pedriumcaartiyo n board (SPEB) as well as the various commissions that we have in the ministry of education at federal level.
2.0.
Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) explain the reasons wh y SPEB is needed (ii) explain the imp ortant of NUC.
(iii) distinguish b etween NUC, NCCE and NBTE (iv) trace the historical d evelopment of NUC in Niger ia.
(v) mention the reasons for the establishment of NBTE.
65  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.0 Ma in Content The state primary education board (SPEB) was established for each state of the freedpeurba ll ic of Nigeria by the fed eral government by d ecree 96 of 1993.
It was established to oversee the activities and management of primary school education in their respective states.
There are thirty-seven (37) state Primar y Education Board offices in Nigeria, it comprises one (1) in the thirty-six (36) states and one (1) at the FCT.
3.1 Funct io ns of Sta te Prima ry Educat ion Boa rd (SPEB) The following are some of the functions for the establishment of SPEB in Nigeria (i) Ma nagement o f Primary Schoo ls Level The statutory role of SPEB is to manage the p rimar y schools in the state.
This is dthornoeu g h co-ordination and supervision of the primary schools and its activities.
Needed assistance is rendered by SPEB to primar y schools in needed areas discovered during the supervisory visit to assist the schools and teachers to achieve the school s objectives.
(ii) Appointment of Staff SPEB is responsible for the appointment, p romotion and discipline of teaching and non- teaching staff on grade levels 0 7 and above.
The board is also responsible for transfer of teachers within the state and inter-state transfer.
(iii) Disbursement of Fund SPEB disburses fund p rovided to it from both the federal and state government to p ateya c hers and other supporting staff salaries and allowances.
SPEB also embarks on capital projects in the primary schools (build ing of classroom building, ad ministrative blocks, librar y etc) (iv) Supervisio n o f Inst itutions SPEB carries out supervisory d uty either on routine basis, advisory b asis, full-time basis special b asis or follow-up basis, with the intention to improve the instruction, and maintain high standards of instruction in p rimary schools and to ensure that primary schools are run in accordance with the laid down regulations.
Self Assessment Exercise What are the other functions p erformed b y SPEB apart from the ones discussed above?
66  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.2 Na tiona l Universities Co mmission (NUC) As fallout of Sir Eric Ashby Commission report on higher education in 1962 , NUC was established in that same year.
However b etween 1962 and now the university system has undergone three developmental phases.
The first p hase was between 1 962 -1968 when NUC was a part of the Fed eral Cabinet.
It was an administrative d epartment at this time and it was headed by Head of Department (HOD) to advice the p rime minister on university matters.
At this time, the membership was comprised of twelve (12) non-academic members.
Around this time, there were three regional universities (Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, and University of Ife, now Ob afemi Awolowo University), and two federal universities (University of Lagos and University of Ibadan) in Nigeria.
The second phase was between 1968 -1974.
During this period NUC still remained an ad visor y b ody, but the memb ership was expand ed to seventeen (17 ) comprising t(w12e)l vneo n -academic and five (5) academic members.
During this time, University of Benin was established; this increased the total numb er of university in Nigeria to six.
The third phase was from 1974 to date.
This phase could be regarded as statutory p hase because, it was during this period that NUC was given statutory powers, on the 25th April 1974.
Since then, NUC as been emp owered to employ staff, discuss and reward satnadff , w as given d efinite roles to play.
NUC increased its staff strength and created professional d epartments and committees and since then NUC had been one of the statutory agencies of the Federal Ministry of Education.
3.2.1 Funct io ns of Na tiona l Universit ies Commission Below are some of the functions of the NUC: (i) Co-coord inating the entire activities in all Niger ia universities, (ii) harmonizing and co-ordinating the development of Nigeria universities to meet the national goals, (iii) ad vising the government on the financial needs of the universities, (iv) distrib ution of fund to then Universities when such is made available by the government, (v) setting the minimum, b enchmar k for Nigerian universities, (vi) ensuring compliance of the Univer sities to the minimum bench mark set, (vii) collecting, collating, analysing and storing d ata collected from Nigerian Universities for use in ad vising the government on the need to exp and the existing universities or establish new ones, (viii) setting standards to be followed in establishing universities in Nigeria, (ix) issue operating license to Nigerian universities.
(x) accrediting courses in Nigerian universities, (xi) particip ating in universities annual estimate hearings to determine the financial need of the universities, and 67  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (xii) keep ing of accurate and up-to-date financial records for all local and foreign transactions.
3.3 Na tiona l Commissio n fo r Co lleg es of Education (NCCE) Increase in school enrolment occasioned b y the Federal Government Universal Primary Education Scheme introduced in 1974, brought about scarcity of q ualified teachers.
This situation forced the federal gover nment to b e directly involved in teachers training programme for the first time by p roviding buildings (classroom and administrative), equipment, teachers salaries, bursary awards to students-teachers in the department of education in Nigerian Universities, Colleges of Education and Teacher Training Colleges.
The product of teacher training colleges need ed higher education, for them to be qualified to teach in second ary schools, this led to increase in demand for higher education in education d iscipline.
As a result of this, between 1979 -1983, more Colleges of Education was established all around the country which created prob lems and necessitated a national bod y to serve as checkmate and to coordinate activities at the Colleges of Education in the country.
This led to the establishment of National Commission for Colleges of Ed ucation as one of the agencies und er the Federal Ministry of Education in 1989 by Act No.3 of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
3.3.1.1 Funct io ns of Nat iona l Co mmission for Colleges of Educat ion(NCCE) The following are among the functions of the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE): (i) to coord inate the activities of all Colleges of Education and other institution of higher learning offer ing teachers education other than universities, (ii) to advise the fed eral gover nment through the Minister of Education on all the asp ects of teacher education outside the Universities and Polytechnics, (iii) to make recommendations to the government on matters affecting teachers education, (iv) to manage the financial affairs of the colleges of education, (v) to develop scheme of National Certification for the various products of Colleges of Education, (vi) to collect, analyse and publish information relating to teacher s education, (vii) to set bench mark for Colleges of Education, (viii) to accredit courses in Nigeria Colleges of Education, and (ix) receive grants from the federal gover nment and allocate them to colleges of education according to the laid down formula.
Self- Assessment Exercise Distinguish between the National Univer sities Commission (NUC) and National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) and their functions.
68  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.4 Na tiona l Board for Technical Education (NBTE) The National Board for Technical Ed ucation was firstly established b y Decree No.
7 of 1977 but it was later reconstituted by way of amend ment Decree No.8 of 1993.
It wesatas b lished to develop and manage technical and technological education in Nigeria.
This b oard was one of the agencies of the Federal Ministry of Education to oversee institutions offering technical and technology related courses in Niger ia.
National Universities Commission (NUC) was put in a place to monitor teaching and lear ning activities in Nigerian Universities, National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) monitors teaching and learning in the Colleges of Education.
National Board for Technical Ed ucation (NBTE) was however established to monitor teaching and lear ning in Polytechnics and Technical institutions in Nigeria.
3.4.1 Funct io ns of Na tiona l Board for Technical Educa tion (NBTE) NBTE was established to perform some statutory roles, among which we are to: (i) coord inate all aspects of technical and vocational education outside the universities in Nigeria, (ii) make recommend ations on the national policy necessary for the training of craftsman and skilled manpower in technical and vocational courses, (iii) ad vise the federal government on issues relating to all aspects of technical and vocational education outside the University, (iv) set minimum bench mark for Niger ian Polytechnics, (v) make recommendation based on the available data on the need to establish new polytechnics or expand facilities in the existing polytechnics, (vi) review the terms and conditions of service of personnel in polytechnics and make recommendation to the federal Government, (vii) assess the financial need s of polytechnics and technical institutions and ad vise the gover nment appropriately, and (viii) act as channeling agents b y channeling all external aids to polytechnics.
4.0 Co nclusion The State Primar y Education Board (SPEB) was established by decree 96 of 1993 of the Federal Republic of Nigeria to oversee the activities of primary schools in Nigeria.
SPEB has 37 offices in the country, one office each in a state and one at the fCeadpeirtaall Territor y (FCT) Abuja.
There are also other commissions established b y the federal ministry of education to serve var ious functions, such commissions apart from SPEB are NUC, NCCE, and NBTE.
These commissions perform various regulatory functions in their various capacities.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the reasons b ehind the establishment of State Primary Education Boards and the number of SPEB in Nigeria; we equally discussed other commissions/board s und er the federal ministr y of education.
Commissions discussed are 69  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE National Universities Commission (NUC), NCCE, and NBTE and we are able to see the various roles played b y these commissions/board s to ensure that there is improvement in educational system at large.
6.0 Tut or-Ma rked Assig nment (i) Justify the need for the establishment of the National Universities Commission (NUC) in Nigeria.
(ii) Primary School in Niger ia can survive without State Primar y Education Board.
Do you agree?
7.0 References/Furt her Reading Ezeocha, P. A.
(1990): Educational Administration and Planning.
Nsukka: Optional Computer Solution.
Ogunu, M. (2000 ): Introduction to Educational Management.
Benin City: Mbogun Publishers Olagboye A.A (2004): Introduction to Education Management.
Ibad an: Daily Graphics 70  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 4 PLANNING OF SCHOOL PLANT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Objectives 3.1 Planning of school plant 3.2 Princip les of school p lant p lanning 3.3 Stages involved in the provision of school plant 3.4 Type of sp aces on school site 3.5 Problems of school plant maintenance 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we have d iscussed the meaning of school plant.
We learnt that it is mad e up of all physical facilities which include buildings, equipments, furniture, and vehicles etc.
We also looked at the meaning of school mapping as a process of identifying aenstdim ating educational institutions requirements and identify the communities and locations for new schools In this unit however, we shall b e looking at the meaning of p lanning of school plant, the principles of p lanning school p lant and the guidelines to be followed in arriving at logical effective school plant facilities.
We shall also b e looking at the various types of sepxapceecst e d at the school site, the p roblems of school plants maintenance and the solutions to the various problems associated with school plants.
2.0 Objectives.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define school plant planning.
(ii) List the principles of school plant planning.
(iv) Mention the typ es of sp aces expected to be provided for at the school site.
3.0 Ma in content 3.1 Pla nning o f Schoo l Plant School p lant is the process of identifying, selecting and acquiring a suitable site for the school to be located, erecting appropriate physical structures that will assist in achieving the educational goals/ob jectives.
The planning process involves citing, construction, and 71  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE provision of recreation sp aces for the achievement of educational goals/objectives.
It is a comprehensive process in which a suitable site is chosen and adequate buildings are designed with the aim of satisfying the educational needs of the stud ents.
Essentially, school build ings are designed to meet the educational p rogramme requirements and satisfy the stud ents and teachers p hysical and emotional need s. The quality of instruction given to the stud ents b y the teacher d epends on the type of school build ing and the learning environment.
This is the reason wh y it is emphasized that tshceh o ol building should be adequately considered , p lanned effectively and executed thoroughly to allow for effective teaching and learning.
3.2 Stag es Involved in t he Provision of School Plant.
The p rovision of adequate and app ropriate school plant is one of the most important responsibilities of school of school administrators.
To ensure that the school plant is relevant, adequate and efficient, the following six (6) stages should b e ob served: i Stage of adequate survey of needs ii Stage of wise educational planning.
iii Stage of choice of site.
iv Stage of architectural planning.
v Stage of prudent financial planning.
vi Stage of efficient p lant construction.
The stages can be in form of a model (see fig.
1 ).
Each of these stages has its pchecauralicatre r istics and requires specialists from the ministry of education, school architects, educational consultants, accountants, and the engineers.
The model shows the interrelationship of the stages involved in the procurement of school buildings and after the last stage i.e.
building construction, it goes back to the survey to find out if tnheeerde fios r new project or expansion of the existing one.
Figure 1 Survey needs Educational Planning Choice of site Building Financial Planning Architectural Construction Planning Adapted from Adeboyeje (1994) 3.3 Type of Spa ces on School Sit e There are five (5) major spaces necessary on the school site to enable it carr y on tehfefe c tive activities of teaching and learning.
72  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE i. Instructional Spaces: These are spaces set aside for students to receive instruction; they include classrooms, auditorium, gymnasium, lib rary, lab orator y workshops, arts room, music room, multipurpose rooms and all other rooms set aside for students to receive learning instruction.
ii Administrative Spaces: These are sp aces set aside for administrative offices of the school administrators, other staff memb ers office (academic and non-academic), school counselor s office, and health centres.
iii Circulation Spaces: These are spaces meant to occup y corridors, lobby, staircases, and other spaces where students can recreate.
iv Spaces for Convenience: These are spaces designed for toilets, bathrooms, cafeteria, kitchen, dormitories, custodian sheds and stores.
v Accessories: These are spaces meant for car p arks, relaxation and footb all/tennis field, volleyball court and tennis lawn.
3.4 Cha llenges of Schoo l Plant Maintenance Several challenges are militating against prop er maintenance of school plant.
These account for the reasons why the school facilities are not what it used to be.
Among tchhea l lenges, we have: i.
Financial Constraints This prob lem is ver y common is the p rimar y and secondar y schools.
The head at these levels of education are starved b y the controlling and regulator y bod y with fund to maintain school plant.
Most of them are not even given imprests.
This makes it very cumb ersome to procure or maintain the essential equipment and structure needed b y the schools.
ii Misuse of School Physical Facilities Some members of the school make use of p hysical facilities in the school ver y carelessly, because of the impression they have that it is government property.
This is often common with the way both the students and staff make use of the toilets, lecture rooms, libraries, furniture, fittings, and other school facilities.
iii Mismanagement of Maintenance Funds and Materials School administrators in Nigeria mostly d o not spend the allocation for maintenance appropriately.
Money allocated for maintenance is either used for personal purposes or on things other than maintenance.
Left over materials most times are not cared for; they are aband oned after use.
73  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iv Lack of Dedication on the Part of Custodians The custodians are those in charge of the maintenance of the physical facilities in the school.
The attitude of the custodians to work is very poor.
Some of them are absent from work without reasons.
They lack maintenance culture.
Incessant p ower failure and bureaucratic procedure involved in getting order are other excuses given b y the custodians for failing to take proper care of the school plant.
3.6 Solutions to the Challeng es o f School Plant Maintenance With the present economic situation, the school administrators are not sure of the amount of money to be received from the gover nment as imp rest or for maintenance.
The following strategies could be adopted to deal with the challenges of school plant maintenance.
i Community Participation: The need to seek the support of the community where the school is located in solving school plant maintenance p roblem should not b e overlooked.
This is because the community needs must have been considered and given priority at the initial plant p lanning for the school.
Members of the community especially members of Parents Teachers Association (PTA) of the school should be actively involved in solving the p roblems of school plant maintenance.
The professionals/artisans among them e.g.
carp enters, bricklayers, plumbers, etc should be co-opted as at when need ed in the various committees for professional advice or repairs.
ii Creation of Awareness: The gover nment at local, state and federal levels, educational ad ministrators, curriculum planner s should embark on enlightement campaign through the media on the need to p rop erly use and maintain the school plants.
iii Setting up of Special Committees: These committees should be set up by the school ad ministrators at the beginning of the term.
The committees will be in charge of maintaining and carr ying out any form of rep air on the existing physical structures in the school.
iv Regular School Insp ection/Supervision: Regular school inspection by the school head or ministry of education will assist in d etecting the problems on any of the school plant which if necessar y action are taken to remedy them early will prevent total breakd own of the school plant.
v Provision of Adequate Funds: Government/Supervisory agencies should make available to the institutional ad ministrators adequate funds to maintain school plant in schools.
If the government does not make availab le ad equate fund the existing school plant can not be ad equately maintained or utilized.
Most of the p hysical facilities in our schools are 74  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE lying id le and have broken down because of inadequate funds to maintain them.
4.0 Co nclusion The provision of adequate and app rop riate school plant is one of the most important responsibilities of the school head.
School buildings are d esigned to meet the educational programme requirements and to satisfy both the physical and emotional needs of both the teachers and learners.
For this reason, and many more, school building should be ad equately considered and planned effectively to allow for effective teaching and learning.
There are five major spaces (instructional, administrative, circulation, convenience and accessories spaces) that must b e p rovided on the school site to enable it carry on effective teaching and learning.
However, there are also some challenges militating against school plant maintenance.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have consid ered what the school planning is all ab out.
It is a comprehensive process in which a suitable location in chosen and adequate buildings is designed with the intension of satisfying the educational needs of a community.
So also we examined the basic p rincip les to be followed before a good school p lant planning can be done as highlighted b y UNESCO (1982).
The basic guidelines in the process of arriving at logical school plant facilities were also mentioned.
We also discussed the various stages involved in the provision of school plants as well as the var ious spaces that need ed to be provided for on the school site.
Various problems facing school plant maintenance such as financial constraints, mismanagement, misuse of school plant facilities etc are discussed as well as the solutions to the identified p rob lems.
6.0 Tut or-Ma rked Assig nment What are the factors militating against p roper maintenance of school plant in Nigeria?
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Adeboyeje, R.A (1994).
Management of School Physical Facilities Ibadan: Fountain publishers.
Adeboyeje R.A (1999).
A p ractical approach to effective utilization and maintenance of p hysical facilities in second ary schools in educational planning & ad ministration in Nigeria in the 21st Century.
Ibadan.
Daily graphics Nig.
Ltd. Adeniyi, I.
A and Oguntimehin Y.
A (2005).
School p lant and mapping in issues in school organization.
Lagos; African cultural institute.
UNESCO (1982).
Accommodating and space for secondary General Schools: Modules I, III & IV Paris;S UNESCO 75  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 5 SCHOOL PLANT AND MAINT ENANCE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of school plant 3.2 Management/Maintenance of school p lant 3.3 Types of school plant maintenance.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0.
Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to look at the concept of school plant, and how to maintain the school facilities.
Adequate and appropriate school p lants are ind ispensable in educational process.
Proper maintenance of school p lant in the schools will not only b oost the morale of teachers and students.
It will also ensure that the objectives of the school system aarceh i eved.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) Define school plant.
(ii) Explain/state the meaning of school plant management.
(iii) Give reasons why school p lant must be maintained.
(iv) Briefly describ e the various types of school plant maintenance 3.0 Ma in Contents Education is an industr y that also makes use of human, material and financial resources like the production industry.
The school p lant is the physical facilities available in the school; this can be likened to the cap ital in production ind ustry.
There is no gthaaint s asycihnogo l plants are necessary ingredients toward s achievement of effective teaching- learning activities.
As a result of this, there is need to ensure availability of school plant and it should be maximally utilized and maintained b y school administrators and tshtaefifr.
Adaralegbe (1983) observed that, inspectors reports over the years have indicated that there is abundant evidence of a catalogue of inadequacies in the p rovision and jud icious use of school buildings and instructional materials.
The p roportion of increase in students population in Nigeria schools at all levels year-in year-out is much higher than the p roportion of increase in the p rovision of school plant.
76  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Government has not considered the need to expand or put in place new school plant in the some proportion to student population growth.
This has led to over-utilization of the existing school p lant because of the pressure on them.
3.1 Mea ning of School Plant The term school plant embraces all ph ysical structures and infrastructural facilities in the school premises such as the classroom buildings, hostels, halls, offices, libraries, lab oratories, instructional materials room, workshops, and equipment used for educational use towards achievement of ed ucational goals.
Olagboye (1998) refers to school plant as school p hysical facilities which includ e buildings, eq uipment, machinery, vehicles, books, electrical infrastructure and water supply.
Durosaro (1998) opines that school p lant embraces both permanent and semi-p ermanent structures on the school premises as well as means of transport, teaching equipment and even the cleaner s tools.
To Fadipe (1998), school plants are the non- consumable materials in the school for tphreo m otion of teaching of teaching- lear ning activities.
Adeboyeje (2000) d efines school plant as the ph ysical facilities within the school which are b asic materials that must bave a ilab le and considered to be able to achieve the objectives of the school.
The availability of these facilities (in q uantity and quality) determines the quality of instruction and stud ents performance in the school s inter nally and exter nally conducted examinations.
To Olutola (2000 ), school plant embraces both p ermanent and semi- permanent structures as well as items such as machines, laboratory eq uipment, the chalkboard and the teachers tools.
Self Assessment Exercise From all the definitions provided above, think of an appropriate definition of your own for the term school plant .
From all the d efinitions above, school plant covers all facilities required to facilitate teaching and learning.
School plant can also be said to include; buildings (classrooms, hostels, lib raries, laboratories, assembly halls, administrative blocks, staff quarters where availab le), equipment (laboratory and workshop equipment , sporting eq uipment, instructional teaching materials, typ ewriters or and computers, printers), machinery (duplicating and secretarial machines, workshop s machines and tools), furniture (classroom and office furniture, hostels and staff quarters furniture), vehicles (official vehicles for school head and principal officers of the school, school bus, water tankers), books (text-books, stationeries, librar y books), electrical infrastructure (overhead electr ical cond uctor lines, meters generating sets, air conditioners, fans and other electr ical fittings) and water supply infrastructure (public water extension to the school, bore holes, deep well, water tanks, either used for teaching and learning or to support those activities.
77  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.2 Ma nagement/Maintenance of School Plant School plants or school physical facilities are essential aspect of educational ad ministration.
Effective and efficient teaching and learning may not be achieved if schools are wrongly located , or if the classrooms are not well constructed or if the equipment availab le are over-utilized, under-utilized or are not well maintained.
Management of school plant is a process of planning to meet the need of the school itner m s of physical facilities, maintaining and keeping such facilities in good cond ition at all times so that the facilities can be used as at when needed for teaching and lear nAidnegb.
o yeje (1994) posited that efficient management of school p lant is a must to make the school a pleasant, safe and comfortab le p lace for the activities of the community.
One of the important duties of institutional ad ministrator is the maintenance of the school p lant.
Maintenance of school p lant is an important aspect of school administration.
It is the activities emb arked upon by the school administrators to ensure that school plant remain in the same state, the activities include repairs, servicing, painting, greasing etc.
Maintenance can also be those activities put in place to keep and restore the original cond ition of an item.
When activities such as repairs, ser vicing, p ainting, etc., are put ipnl a ce to keep or restore the original condition of an item, the item is being mMaaiinnttaeinnaendc.
e of school plant therefore imp lies the process of or any other activities that involve repairs, servicing, painting, etc and which is b een carried out on any of the components of school plant in an attempt to keep or restore it b ack to the original cond ition and more importantly to ensure that the school plants are in good shap e. The aim of maintenance of school plant is to ensure that it remains in the b est condition for educational instruction at all times.
Miller (1965) observed that construction of new block of classroom and other buildings and alteration to the existing b uildings are not the whole housing effort; it also involves the continuing operation and maintenance of the school plant.
It is therefore necessary for school administrators to have the knowledge of operating and maintaining school plants.
School plant maintenance requires maximum coop eration and hard work from the officials of ministry of ed ucation, the school ad ministrator, the school staff (acad emic and non-academic), the stud ents and the community where the school is located.
3.3 Types of Schoo l Pla nt Ma intenance Maintenance services of school plant may take any of the following forms: (i) Preventive and Predictive Maintenance: this form of maintenance is aimed at preventing the occurrence of total b reakdowns of school plants availab le for use.
It is also aimed at preventing situations which can p ut parts of the school plant out of use.
Examp les of services und er preventive maintenance are timely and regular servicing of vehicles, generating sets, duplicating machines, cutting of trees, periodic repair and painting of classroom building and other school buildings.
78  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) Corrective and Emergency Maintenance: this typ e of repair is a spontaneous repair carried out at the appropriate time.
For example, the timely rectification of electrical faults in the school buildings will prevent the possibility of any fire outb reak.
Other activities that could be grouped under this are: replacing leaking p ipes, replacing bad plugs, or cleaning of the plugs on time.
(iii) Breakdown Maintenance: this type of maintenance is otherwise known as emergency maintenance; it is that maintenance that aimed at rectifies breakdowns in any component of the school p lant.
It involves preparation for a possible but unp redictable breakdown of school plant by procuring in ad vance sp are parts that will be need ed in case of breakdown.
Breakdown maintenance is the maintenance carried out after the b reakdowns of the school plant which will require heavy monetar y outlay.
Ineffective/inefficient p reventive maintenance lead s to total b reakdown and invariab ly breakd own maintenance.
(iv) Running Maintenance: this type of maintenance is otherwise known as regular maintenance which is carried out when the school p lant is still in use.
For example the rep air carried out on the school generating set in the day while the lesson is going on and before it will be needed at night, the rep air is completed, and the repair/servicing done on the school van d uring the school lesson period and before the students are ready to be taken back to their various homes/bus stop , the repair is over.
This type of maintenance is referred to as running maintenance.
(v) Shutdown Maintenance: This typ e of maintenance is carr ied out only when the operations of the school have b een closed or postponed or susp ended for a given p eriod of time to carry out the maintenance work.
This type of maintenance is carried out when a major work/repair is to b e done in a classroom.
For example, if a windstorm damages a classroom block or if a building collapse in the school, the school may be shut for a specific period of time to carry out major repair on the d ilapidated build ing occasioned b y storm.
4.0 Co nclusion The achievement of the overall goals and ob jectives of education revolves around the ability of the learners to utilize the var ious opportunities offered b y the school and its environment.
It is not just imperative that the school should have a functional school plant, it is equally ver y imp ortant that each school plant be well maintained to improve students academic performance.
79  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 5.0 Summary In this unit, we are able to see that school p lant embraces all infrastructural facilities in the school premises.
It could also be send to mean both permanent and semi-p ermanent structures on the school premises which also include machines, vehicles, and instructional materials.
Various ways of maintaining school plant was discussed as well as the various typ es of school plant maintenance 6.0 Tut or-Ma rked Assig nment (i) Give a brief definition of school plant.
(ii) Briefly discuss fire (5) typ es of school plant maintenance.
7.0 References Adeboyeje R.A. (2000).
A practical approach to effective utilization and maintenance of physical facilities in second ary schools b y J.O Fadip e & E.E Oluchukwu (eds) educational planning & ad ministration in Nigeria in the 2 1st century.
Ondo.
National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Durosaro, D.O.
(1998).
School plant management practice in Nigeria.
Trend s, Issues and problems.
In A.A Olagb oye and J. O Fadipe (eds) management of Nigerian ed ucational p roject monitoring and school p lant maintenance.
Ondo National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Fadip e J. O.
(1998) .
Modern strategies of school plant maintenance in A.A. Olagboye & J.O.
Fadipe, J.O (eds).
management of Nigerian educational project monitoring and school p lant maintenance.
Ond o: National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Olagboye, A.A (1998).
Promoting school plant management culture in the Niger ian school system.
In A.A. Otagboye & J.O.
Fadipe (ad s) management of Nigerian education p roject monitoring and school p lant maintenance.
Ondo.
(NIEPA) Publications.
Oluchukwu, E.E (2000).
School mapping and planning for efficiency in the school system.
In J. O Fadipe and P.K Ojed ele, eds.
management of Nigerian ed ucation, personnel administration and quality in ed ucation.
Ond o: National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Olutola, A.D. (2000).
Education facilities and students performance in West African School Certificate Examination.
International Journal of Educational Management.
Vol 11:1 80  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Owolabi J.
(1990) Introduction to school mapping.
Mimeograph, Department of Educational Management, University of Ib adan 81  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE MODULE THREE SCHOOL RECORDS AND ADMINISSTRATION UNIT 1 SCHOOL RECORDS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning of School Records 3.2 Meaning of Record Keeping 3.3 Reasons for Keeping School Records 3.4 Classification of School Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction Record keeping is vital for the proper functioning of any s ystem, be it private or pTuhbel iscc.h o ol system is not an exemp tion.
Effective teaching and learning can b e achieved if p rop er school records are kept and these record s are effectively utilized.
Information is a perishable commod ity; hence human b eings have to rely on written document to store ideas and impressions.
One of the major challenges in our school system today is record keep ing.
I nformation has to b e documented for future use and reference purpose, hence the need to keep school records.
Records are indispensable to a p rogressive society, whether for government, in schools or any other activities.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) explain the meaning of a school record (ii) explain reasons why records are kept b y school administrators (iii) distinguish b etween statutory and non-statutory records in a school (iv) mention the various school s records.
3.0 Ma in Content 82  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The comp lexity of administration of ed ucational institutions brought ab out b y the explosion in students p opulation at all levels of our education (i.e.
p rimar y school, secondary school and institutions of higher learning) and the need to keep accurate and up-to-d ate information about the school and the stud ents makes it unavoidab le for school ad ministrators to be exposed to ways and means of making their job less stressful.
One way to do this is to know what a school record is, how it can be kep t safely and hcaonw b eit r e trieved easily.
3.1 Mea ning of School Records School records could be explained to be a document through which information is transmitted within the school system and between the school and other stake hold ers itnh e education sector.
Such document may be in form of letters, reports, pictures, minutes, maps, forms, films, microfiche and soft cop y.
School record s could be many and varied.
They are to b e kept by the generality of schools staff memb ers, head teachers (head masters/headmistress at the primary school level and principals at the secondary school levels) bursars, heads of d epartments, coordinators etc.
Mbiti (1 974) defined school records as the records that comprises all b ooks, files and other documents containing information relating to what goes on in the school, who is in the school as well as what types of property the school owns.
Eleanor (1984) d escribes school records as a document through which information is transmitted.
However in the opinion of Akinyemi & Sanni (1999), school records document accurate information about the histor y, activities, students list, staff list, past and present events or happenings, among others of a school.
Self Assessment Exercise From the knowledge you have just acq uired on what a school record is.
Give a pdreeficnisitei o n of your own of what a school record is.
3.2 Mea ning of Record Keeping A record is the detailed and meticulous account of any phenomenon.
It can be set down permanently in writing on a flat plate, film strip , computer flash/hard d isk or any ofothrmer that is permanent.
A record serves as a memorial or authentic evidence of a fact or event.
A record if well preserved lasts from one generation to another.
Records are collected and stored by different people for differ ent reasons.
Record keeping is the ahratb, i t or p ractice of keeping information or fact in such a way or manner that it can bre etr i eved when need ed.
The gate man in some schools have visitor s book, which could include time-in and time-out book.
The store keep er has an inventory of items in and out of store i.e.
records showing who collects what?
What is left and what need to be rep laced?
83  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Keeping of school records should b e seen as an indispensable aspect of effective school management and a way to p reserve the trad ition of the school, culture and image.
This is because; school record s are where all the necessary information about the teachers, pupils and all activities b eing d one in the school are kept.
Therefore, record keeping should not be seen as an undue imposition by the Ministry of Education or any other external agencies.
If we b elieve in the frailty of man, we must also acknowledge the fact thhuamt a n memory needs to be supplemented with accurate records.
The school like any other organisation has its own records, which are kept for its efficient management.
The class teacher has his own records, the sub ject teacher has his/hers, the head s of departments have theirs, the vice principal academic and administration have theirs etc.
The practice nowadays is to store school records in soft cop y or computer memor y for easy retrieval and accuracy.
This method of keeping records in soft copy or in computer memor y is not common in our second ary schools b ecause most of the schools are located in the rural areas where they are yet to adopt the computer culture due to lack of fund s and facilities.
As a result of these, our emphasis will be more on tmhaen ual storage of school records.
The use of documents in school management has increased as a result of increasing in students enrolment.
Parents are all concerned with education industry nowadays and tend to be more serious with a school whether pub lic or private, that has its bpurospineerslys documented.
Akinwumi & Jaiyeoba (2004) d efine record keeping as the processes and systems which an institution or individ ual staff memb er puts in p lace fcoorm piling information.
3.3 Reasons for Keeping Schoo l Reco rds (1) Record keeping in a school helps the head teacher to give all necessary information about the school, staff and pupils to any inspector from the Ministr y of Education or any other regulator y body, (2) Record keeping plays a ver y crucial role in the life of the students because after leaving the school to further his or her studies, the institution of higher learning may request for any information about his/her previous school.
(3) It enables the p arents to know the performance of their children.
The parents may ask the school ad ministrator about the record which shows the performance of their children, (4) Apart from students academic performance, it also helps the parents to get adequate information about the child ren, how regular and punctual they are in the school and the general behaviours, (5) Record keeping help s the government through ministr y of education to get ad equate information about the school, and 84  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (6) Without relevant records, the develop ment of scheme of work, lesson notes, and curriculum cannot be easy as records of p ast years will be help ful in these processes.
There may also b e problems and confusion when compiling students results.
Self Assessment Exercise Apart from the above reasons for keeping school records, pause and think of more reasons for keeping school records.
Other reasons why school records are kept are; (7) to ensure strict compliance with the requirement of education law, (8) for planning and bud getar y purposes, (9) to save school from unnecessary emb arrassment (and legal tussle,) (10) to provide useful information not only for members of the school community b ut also for members of the public, employers of labour, researchers and gover nment, (11) to aid ad ministrative decision making and efficiency in the school, and (12) to enab le the teacher know something about his pupil and through this, be in a better position to assist him/her academically, morally, socially and in add ition to be ab le to pred ict his behaviour and p rovide needed information to whoever may need it.
From all the above, it could b e concluded that no comprehensive record, no efficient management as records are life wires of any school management.
Every teacher or head teacher should therefore cultivate a good record keep ing culture, because if the records are kept for a long time, it makes the school head /new school heads to have knowledge about what has happ ened in the school in the p ast/b efore his arrival as the school haneadd a, ls o enables him/her to make prediction.
3.5 Classificat ion of School Records There are countless numbers of records a school must keep sub ject to the level of affluence, tradition and status of the school.
School records are conventionally classified into two broad categories.
A. Statutory Records B. Non-Statutory Record s A. Sta tuto ry Records 85  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE These are documents stipulated b y the Education Law of the state.
They are mreacnodrdasto wryh i ch must be kept b y each school.
The following statutor y records must be kept and maintained b y each school and made availab le for insp ection whenever they are demanded.
i.
A certificate of registration, letter of approval or other such document such as law, d ecree, ed ict, and gazette published giving legal authority for the establishment of the school, ii.
The log book, iii.
Admission progress and withdrawal register iv.
Class attendance register v. Class dairies vi.
Corporal punishment book vii.
School time-tab le viii.
National curriculum ix.
Examination syllabus and individual sub ject teaching syllabus x.
Scheme of work xi.
The education law xii.
The National Policy on Education xiii.
Staff time book xiv.
Students testimonial and transfer certificate book xv.
Stores and Inventory records includ ing all school plant and equipment xvi.
School prospectus xvii.
Site plan, showing evid ence of survey, registration and extent of the school card xviii.
School budget xix.
School audit file/b ook xx.
Staff records xxi.
Continuous assessment b ook/file xxii.
Individ ual students file xxiii.
Visitors book xxiv.
Board of governor s records xxv.
P.T.A.
record s xxvi.
School annual report file xxvii.
List of approved textbooks xxviii.
Teachers class/attendance registers xxix.
Teachers lesson notes xxx.
Staff minute book xxxi.
Staff movement book xxxii.
Students honour roll including school projects xxxiii.
School inspection file B.
No n-Statutory Records 86  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE They are equally important records but not mandatory.
They are kept to assist the school head and or officers delegated b y him in the d ay- to-day management of the school s affairs.
The list of such supportive records are in-exhaustive but salient ones include: i.
Records of physical develop ment ii.
Schools management board/committee records iii.
Staff registers showing the current staff list including p ersonal details of each staff especially the registration number, qualification with d ates, subject specialization, and d ate of employment, deployment and current salary.
iv.
Staff and students clubs and societies v. School sports vi.
Mark book for each class vii.
Record of work book viii.
Staff instruction book/internal circular file ix.
Inventory of school lib rary books x.
Daily roster xi.
Fees register xii.
Account record s including the cash b ook, bank reconciliation/statement, staff ad vances, auditor s reports, impress book and record of vouchers.
Self Assessment Exercise Distinguish b etween Statutor y Records and non-statutor y Record s. 4.0 Co nclusion In conclusion, school administrations are to understand reasons why the need for safe record keep ing is a must.
They also need to und erstand the differences between statutory and non-statutory records and what they are meant for.
Good understand ing of statutory and non-statutory records by the school head will enable the school head to know the imp lication of keeping record safely 5.0 Summary In this unit, we have been able to see that record keeping is an essential instrument feoffre c tive school management, and that school records are documents through which information is transmitted.
We also looked at the reasons for keep ing school records and types of records.
6.0 Tut or-Ma rked Assig nment (i) Do you agree that record keeping is a must in educational institution?
Support your position.
(ii) Distinguish b etween statutory and non-statutory records.
Give at least 10 examples of each.
87  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 7.0 References Akinwumi, F. & Jaiyeoba, A.O.
(2004).
Principles and Practice of Educational Management.
Ib adan; Bash-Moses Printing & Publishing Co. Akinyemi, S.T.
& Sanni, R.I. (1999).
Confidentiality and school records.
In Bolarin T.A.
and Akinpelu B.
(eds).
Effective teaching practice (A slide for students teachers).
Lagos: Ziklay Educational Publishers.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981).
Educational Administration; Theory and Method .Lagos: Izharsons Printer s Lahove Karachi.
Eleanor, A.T. (1984).
Administrative Office Management.
The Electronic Office.
New York; John Wileay and Sons.
Mbiti, D.M.
(1974).
Foundations of School Ad ministration.
Nairobi; Oxford University Press.
88  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 2 SCHOOL RECORDS CONTINUED 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Types of Records Kept in School 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/further Readings.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we started discussion on school records.
We defined a record as a detailed account of any phenomenon and stated /learnt that record keeping is an art and a habit that a good school head should cultivate.
We also discussed the importance of keep ing school records.
Effective and efficient record keep ing is imp ortant for successful school management.
School record s were also categorized into statutory and non- statutory records.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: i. list some vital records in the school ii.
explain the use of the vital records listed iii.
highlight the usefulness of admission register only .
3.0 Ma in cont ent.
3.1 Types of Records Kept in Schoo l 89  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The area of school record keeping is one in which bureaucracy is exemp lified.
Education laws specify that schools school keep some documents.
Apart from the requirement, school records are a source of information on a variety of sources and interests.
It is npoots s ib le to discuss in details the procedure and value of all he statutory and non- statutory records in schools, efforts would be focused on the vital record s kept in the school.
i.
The Log Book:-The book is a document containing the comprehensive information about an institution, its establishment and equipment.
It is a historical record of events that have significant effect on schools activities.
It is similar to Black Box in an aircraft which record s all activities, discussions, and problems in the aircraft during a flight.
In case of an accident/air crash, the black-box is the main source of tapping information.
It is also similar to personal diar ies, motor vehicle log books where details of movements and repairs are written.
Events happ ening within the immediate environment of the school, capable of influencing the school life, should be adequately recorded in the school log book.
The type of events that are recorded in the log b ook includ e: change of staff, date of vacation and resumption, mid- term date examination dates, visits by important people, special occasions and functions, workshop s, sandwich, seminar course attended b y teachers, reports of inspectors when they visited the school and so on.
ii.
The Admission Register: - this is a book that shows thre particulars of the registration of pupils enrolled in a particular school.
The book indicates a complete list of all pupils admitted each year with the following details: age, date of enrolment, class into which admitted, previous school, progression in the school, year of withdrawal/leaving indicating reason (s) and the certificate number.
Other information in the admission register are: registration numbers, names in full with surname written first, sex, date of b irth, address of the parents or guardians.
Since we have to respect the cultural and religious sensitivities of the students in our schools, their state of origin and religion affiliation should also be entered in the ad mission register.
The admission register serves as the historical d ocument or reference with detailed records of ever y child who was admitted into the school right form the year it was found ed.
It is also a reference book for tracing the entr y, progress and exit of an y student admitted into the school.
From the ad mission register, reliable d ata which may b e needed for the planning and management of the educational system at the local, state and federal levels.
iii Attendance Register: this is a book in which the p resence or absence of pupils in a school is recorded on a daily basis.
It is mar ked twice a d a(my o rning and after noon) to show pupils attendance in school.
There is a column in the register which shows whether the child comes to the school 90  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE or ab sent from the school.
Attendance register enables the school authority to keep track of the pupils more so, that whatever happ ens to pupils d uring school hours is the major responsibility of the school.
The register enab les the teacher to observe the behavioural traits of the pupils e.g.
punctuality, lateness, absence/truancy.
Data needed b y researchers, educational planners and officials of the ministry of education can be obtained from the register and it serves as a valid evidence to save the school from a lot of embarrassment in case of a legal tussle.
iv.. Staff Record: this is a record that shows the current staff list as well as their personal d etails, the teacher s registration number, qualifications, subject sp ecialization, d ate of employment/deployment and the current salary scale.
v. Record of Work (Diary):- this is a record that shows the teacher s plan of work in each sub ject area and the actual work covered weekly, and this is recorded at the end of each week.
The school head is exp ected to check and be certain that all entries are correctly made.
It help s the new teacher(s) to know the top ics taught and from where to take over.
vi.
Staff Meeting Minute Book: - this is a record of every formal meeting of the staff under the chairmanship of the school head.
In this book, the discussion and d ecisions of the staff are always written and it is kep t with the secretary appointed b y the members of staff.
vii.
Education Law: - it is a document which contains the education law obtained from the ministry of ed ucation.
It contains the objectives and policies of government on education and educational p rocedures.
This document spells out regulations guiding the management of the schools and education in general.
viii.
School time-table: - this is a comprehensive outline of the school schedules for the week.
Subjects for each d ay of the week are stipulated in the time-table and period for each sub ject also appears, so also the time for break.
This is usually in the school head teacher s office so that the head teacher or any other supervisor can at a glance know what subject is being/to be taught in an y class and which teacher is to teach/teaching it at that time.
Self Assessment Exercise Mention other records that school keeps.
Other books are as follows: 91  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE ix Continuous Assessment Cumulative Record:- this is a record of students performance in var ious continuous assessment tests carried out during the course, each year or session.
These scores are computed cumulatively.
x Terminal Record Card:- this is a record where all the assessments of the students are recorded either weekly or fortnightly, or quarterly according to (what the head of the school wants) the school s policy.
xi Visitor s Book: - this is a book that contains information about important visitors to the school.
An important visitor is presented with the book during his visit to the school to enter usually the d ate, and purpose of his visit, some comments on his visit or impression about the school and suggestion if an y for imp rovement.
Apart from important visitor s/personalities from the society, ministry of education officials who come to the school for important assignments like inspection of the school could also fill the visitor s book.
xii.
Teachers Lesson Note: - this is the most imp ortant record kept b y the teacher.
It is sometimes called teachers companion .
Every teacher is expected to prep are notes for the entire lesson he/she has to teach in all the classes.
This may be on a daily or weekly basis.
It is the d uty of the head teacher or his delegates to ensure that such notes are well prep ared and in line with the app roved scheme of work.
If there is any record which must be properly prep ared and kept ver y well, it is the lesson note because it is an indicator of a possible successful class lesson.
Familiarity with textbooks and many years of teaching exp erience cannot be a justifiable reason for not writing a lesson note.
A lesson note is the only convincing evid ence that the teacher has given adequate thought and consid eration to what he/she is teaching.
It is therefore; imperative that ever y teacher must have his/her lesson notes and make it available for inspection b y the school head /delegates and other appropriate authorities as may be demanded.
xiii.
Stock Book: - this is a book containing a record of materials and other equipment supplied or bought b y the school.
The school stock includes materials such as: dup licating p aper, ink, pad, pencils, pens, typing sheets, which are constantly being used in the school.
xiv Time- Book: - this is a b ook where teachers attendance is shown, including the arrival and dep arture time.
It is kept to monitor the time of arrival and dep arture of each teacher.
The book should be filled b y all members of staff twice daily.
The head teacher or appointees should rule-off at an agreed time so that anybod y signing b elow the ruled-line is late for that day.
The name of teacher who is absent could also be written down when the school closes.
92  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE xv.
Teachers Movement Book: - this is a book where teachers movements ever y day are recorded to enable the school management to monitor the movement of teachers d uring each working d ay.
The book is usually placed in the principal s office; it should b e filled b y any teacher who has obtained p ermission to go out.
4.0 Co nclusion School record keeping is a compulsory process.
Schools are required to keep records on all child ren, staff to monitor their academic growth and development skills and abilities, progress made in the school, class management and performance amongst other things.
Good record keeping will lead to efficient and effective school management with effective teaching and learning process.
5.0 Summary.
In this unit, we have discussed record keep ing in schools and we have id entified the vital records in school and have also discussed them.
Among those records d iscussed are: the log-book, admission register, staff record, record of work, staff meeting minute book, etc.
6.0 Tut or Ma rked Assig nment Mention and discuss ten (10) vital record s that must be kept in the school and why?
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Akinwumi, F. & Jaiyeoba, A.O.
(2004).
Principles and Practice of Educational Management.
Ib adan; Bash-Moses Printing & Publishing Co. Akinyemi, S.T.
& Sanni, R.I. (1999): Confidentiality and school records.
In T.A.
Bolarin and B. Akinpelu (eds).
Effective Teaching Practice (A slide for students teachers).
Lagos: Ziklay Educational Publishers.
Eleanor, A.T. (1984).
Administrative Office Management: The Electronic Office.
New York; John Wileay and Sons.
Mbiti, D.M.
(1974): Foundations of School Administration.
Nairobi: Oxford University Press.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981).
Educational Administration; Theory and Method .
Lagos: Izharsons Printer s Lahove Karachi.
93  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 3 THE SCHOOL TIME - TABLE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Meaning of the school time-table 3.2 Types of school time-table 3.3.
Importance of school time-table 3.4 Guideline for constructing the school time-table 3.5 School time- table and school effectiveness 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusions 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 Introduction It is very necessary for a school to have a time- table; this will enable the school to plan in order to ensure ord erliness and decorum among the teachers and stud ents.
There must be time for ever y subject in the school.
Teachers lesson are guided by the school time- table.
In this unit, we are going to define the school time-table, the importance of school time- table, the guid elines to b e followed in constructing school time-tab le and steps to b e followed by the school head in order to ensure effective utilization of time through a well planned time-table.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) define school time- table (ii) mention the imp ortance of school time tab le 94  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) mention the types of time table (iv) highlight the guidelines to be followed in constructing a school time-table 3.0 Ma in Content Time is a precious resource in the school; it must be managed well along with other resources to achieve the school goals.
A good school head must b e able to p lan the school time table and ensure compliance to it.
There are instances where some school head complain of non-working time-tab le: This is because the school head or those in charge are not well guided b y basic principle of time-tab le.
3.1 Mea ning of School Time- Table School time- table is one of the imp ortant records which a school is required to kreegeupl.a t eIst the teaching and lear ning activities in the school.
A school time- table can b ed e fined as a schedule prepared b y the school management indicating the subjects to b e taught per day and p er week, the time allocated for each subject as well as the number of periods per subject, p er day and p er week in a particular school.
Ob i (2001) defines school time-tab le as a p lan of action in which the sub jects of the school curriculum adriest r ib uted over the teaching p eriod s of the school day of the weeks that make up ttherem s and academic sessions.
A school time-table can also b e d efined as a schedule of classroom teaching by subjects per period, per d ay, d esigned by a committee or group of people usually time-table committee appointed by the school authority to guid e and to regulate the teaching activities in the school.
A normal school time- table is usually divided into eight (8) periods p er day and for five days (i.e.
Mond ay Fr iday) in a week with each period last for 40 minutes.
There is always an allowance for short and long breaks.
The short break lasts for about 10 minutes and usually it is b etween 10.00 am -10.10 am while the long blarsetask f o r about 30 minutes and it is usually b etween 11.30am- 12.00pm.
The short break is meant for the pup ils to stretch their muscle and urinate while the long break is for tphuep i ls to take their refreshment that was b rought from home or bought at the school canteen.
However, in some schools, there is only one break p eriod and it is tagged long break but it will be for forty minutes between 11.20am-12noon.
3.2 Types of time-ta ble There are three main typ es of time table (i) General Time-Table: this comprises the whole school time-table, the various classes and various levels drawn for the school by a designated staff or committee under the supervision of the school head .
It is usually d rawn and d isp layed in the office of tshceh o ol head and/the assistant.
General time-tab le is a comprehensive time-table that consists of all the time-tab les of the different classes of the school.
95  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) Class Time-Table: this type of time-table is meant for a particular class, it is extracted from the general time tab le and it is usually drawn/d isp layed on the wall, besides the class chalkboard or in a conspicuous p lace in a p articular class.
(iii) Individual Time-Table: this is a time- table prepared by ind ividual stud ent to guide his or her personal reading and learning per d ay, per week.
It is usually p repared by very few students.
3.4 Importance of Schoo l Time-Table The following are the reasons wh y timetable is a must in a school organization: i. it assists the teachers to know what subject, what time and which class to teach, ii.
it assists the students to know which b ooks and other learning materials to take along to school daily, iii.
it assists the students to know when a particular lesson will be taught and who will teach it, iv.
it eliminates possible clashes in the teaching schedules, thereb y p reventing unhealth y rivalr y among the teachers in the school, v. it ensures maximum utilization of time resources available for subject teaching and learning, vi it assists in the implementation of curriculum through well planned teaching and learning activities, vii it makers it possible to bring together the school subjects and other resources human (teachers), physical facilities (classrooms) and other supporting facilities to achieve the goals of the school, and viii.
it remind s the students of the assignment which could have been ord inarily b e forgotten and when to sub mit the assignment.
3.4 Guidelines for Construction of a School Time-Table The school head must be guid ed b y some guidelines in constructing a school time-tab le, so also the officer/group of people/committee who is/are in charge of the school time.
If the time-table is to serve the intended purposes, the following guidelines must b e followed: i. Allocation of Periods: p eriods should be allocated to subjects based on their imp ortance.
For example English Language and Mathematics are allocated the highest numeric p eriods in the week when compared with other subjects because 96  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE these are the basic necessary subjects and pre- requisites for any institution of higher learning admission req uirement.
The two subjects feature on the time-table almost ever yday.
In add ition subject(s) that needed practical sessions are allocated double p eriods on the time table ( i.e.
80 minutes) to allow for effective practical exercise with the lesson.
For example subjects like Fine-Art, Agricultural Science.
Home Economics, Technical Drawing ii.
Scheduling of the Subjects: the nature of the subject will d etermine when it will feature on the time-tab le.
Sub jects that need full concentration and that involve calculation such as Mathematic and Principles of Accounts should feature in the mornings on the time-table, so also subjects with practical that must be done on the field/in the farm such as Physical & Health Education and Agricultural Science are better in the mornings than afternoon when the weather becomes hot.
However, subjects that require less calculation and mental concentration such as some humanities subjects (Economics, Commerce Social Studies, Literature in English, Chr istian/Islamic Religion Studies, etc.
can b e taught in the afternoons.
iii.
Lengths of the Period: the age of the students and the nature of the subject should be consid ered to in determining whether a subject will b e for a period odro u ble period p er d ay and the number of times such a subject will ap pear in aw e ek.
However the standard time for a p eriod at the primar y school level is 35minutes while it is 40 minutes at the secondar y school level.
Doub le period at the primary school is 70 minutes while it is 80 minutes at the secondary school level.
Self Assessment Exercise i.
What is a school time-table?
ii.
Identify the three types of time-table you know iii.
Apart from the above- listed guidelines in the construction of a school time- table which other guidelines do we have to follow?
Other guidelines are: iv.
Arrangement of the Subjects: the nature of the subjects should b e taken into consideration when drawing the time- table.
Subjects that require practical sessions such as Woodwork, Typewriting, Home Economics, and Fine Art should not be fixed close to some subjects that require physical activities such as Physical & Health Education and Agriculture practical.
v. Break Period: there is government regulation guid ing the break period.
This is the stand ard practice and should not be d eviated from by any school or the time- table committee.
It is mandatory to observe a b reak session of ab out 20-30 minutes before the commencement of afternoon session.
This should be noted when drawing the school time- table.
97  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE vi.
Available Space: the available space in form of classroom, laboratories, lib rary etc.
should be consid ered by the time-table committee at the construction stage.
The sp ace determines the number of students that a class can contain.
When there are enough and adequate spaces in the classroom, lab oratory, lib rary, etc the task of the time-tab le committee becomes easier and effective/working time-table could be constructed in such a situation than in a school that is having the challenge of space.
In such a school there will be over crowded classrooms which will have negative effect on teaching and learning of the subject.
vii.
Availability of Teaching Staff: the numb er of the teaching staff in a school must be consid ered when constructing a school time-table.
This will be used to determine the school stud ent-teacher ratio (STR) as well as the teachers workload.
If the number of teachers required to teach a subject is adequate, this could facilitate efficiency because the teachers will not be overload ed with extra class without any form of incentive as we have in a school where the number otefa c hers needed to teach a subject is insufficient.
To ensure effective time-table, there must be adequate number of teaching staff for each subject on the time- table.
viii Availability of Supporting Facilities: availability of supporting facilities should be taken into consid eration when prep aring the school time tab le.
Supporting facilities such as non-teaching personnel, electricity, water, generator, etc.
These supporting facilities are very important in assisting in the maintenance and security of the school and especially in the teaching and learning of sub jects that requires laborator y practical.
In a situation where these supporting facilities are not available or inadequate, it may be difficult if not impossible to teach these practical subjects effectively as it may appear on the time table.
ix.
Number of Available Subjects in the School: the total numb ers of sub jects on offer by the school will d etermine how they are allocated in the time-tab le and their frequencies.
A compulsory subject for example at the school and class levels must be id entified and be given priority if the teachers that are to teach them are available.
This will also d etermine their frequency and time.
3.5 Time-Ta ble and Schoo l Effectiveness The aims and ob jectives of preparing a time-table for school is to ensure that all the activities scheduled on the time tab le are carried out as expected and effective teaching and lear ning take p lace.
When this is achieved in a school, ever y sbtoatfhf teaching and non-teaching are said to be effective.
For a school head to achieve this, he/she must take the following step s: He/She must: i. ensure compliance with government directives and polices in regard to the school time-table ii.
ensure that every teacher conducts his lesion as scheduled on the time-tab le, 98  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iii.
supervise instructional activities of the teachers to ensure that they adop t the right teaching method, iv.
ensure that every teacher makes the optimum use of the school resources, v. ensure amicable resolution of clashes in the time-table between teacher s, vi put in p lace time-table monitoring committee that will ensure strict adherence to the school time-table, vii.
make the school environment conducive for teaching and learning, and viii.
maintain discip line among staff and students.
4.0 Conclusion An effective school head must b e able to plan a working and acceptable time-tab le for the school.
For subjects to be taught at the right time there must be a time-tab le which ipsr e p ared b y the school head/appointed committee/group.
Time table is a schedule of classroom teaching by subjects, p er period, per d ay, d esigned by the time-table committee to guide teaching activities in the school.
To ensure that all teaching activities come up as at when scheduled, there is need to have a time-table and when the aims and objectives of p reparing the school time table are achieved , the school is said to b e effective and if otherwise.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of time-tab le and have highlighted and discussed the various types of time-tab le: general time-table, classroom time-table and individual time-tab le.
We also discussed the importance of school time-table in a school organisation, and the guid elines that must be followed to come up with acceptable and effective school time tab le.
Finally, in this unit, we discussed time table and school effectiveness as well as the various steps that could b e taken to by the school head teon s ure that the objectives of preparing the school time-table is achieved.
6.0 Tut or marked assignment i.
Explain the concept of school time-table and state the reasons for preparing a time-table for school ii.
Mention and explain the various guid elines for construction of an effective school time-table.
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Ajayi I.A (2007 ).
Issues in School Management.
Lagos: Bolabay pub lishers.
99  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Idoghor, I.S (2001).
Lecture and Counsels to Students and Practitioner.
Effurum: Freebo Printing co. Obi, E (2001): Practicum in School Organization.
Enugu: Computer-edge Publishers UNIT 4 SCHOOL BUDGET 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Meaning of a Budget 3.2 Meaning of School Budget 3.3 Purpose of a School Bud get 3.4 Method s of Preparing a School Bud get 3.5 Importance of School Budget 3.6 Challenges of School Budget in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to look at the meaning of a budget as well as the meaning of a school bud get; we will also exp lain the purpose of school budget.
The various methods of prep aring school budget will also be examined in this unit.
We will equally examine the importance of preparing a school bud get and look at the various challenges facing the proper p reparation and implementation of a school budget in Nigeria 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Distinguish b etween bud get and school budget (ii) List the purpose of a school budget (iii) Explain the various methods that could be adopted in the preparation of a school bud get 100  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iv) Highlight the challenges facing the school heads in the p reparing a workable school budget.
3.0 Ma in Content The three major financial functions in education bud geting, accounting and auditing are separate, discrete operations, b ut they are nonetheless closely interrelated.
They are required activities in p roviding reliable fiscal information, guidance and accountability in the use of allocated fund.
Budgeting is a process and plan for determining how money is to be raised and spent, as well as document the budget d eveloped and approved during the bud geting process.
Money is organised and spent accord ing to an accounting system, using a general led ger that standard izes each spending category and accounts for its use.
Auditing however, is a formal or official inspection of organisations books of account.
3.1 Mea ning of a Budg et Every reasonab le individ ual and organisation all over the world plans for the p resent and future.
Part of the plan is to forecast how much an individual/organisation would realize over a p eriod of time as well as how much to be expend ed.
Forecast of income troe a libs eed and expend ed is known as budget.
Bud get is an itemized summary of estimated or intended expenditure for a given period along with proposals for financing them.
Abu d get is a two-way p roposal i.e.
p roposal on income and proposal on expenditure.
This is wh y budgeting is given special attention in everyday life, because no organisation can perform without income generation and expend iture.
At least, every organisation must source/generate the salar ies of its work force.
Budget can also be said to be an analytical financial statement of income and expenditure for a sp ecific period of time.
It can also be said that it is a systematic plan for tehxep e nd iture of a usually fixed resource, such as money or time during a given pFerorimod .
t h is p oint of view time can also be regarded as one of the resources that must bbeu d geted for just like we budgeted for money.
Bud get could be deficit, surplus or balanced.
It could be d eficit when the proposed expenditure is more than the proposed income, but when the p roposed income is more than the proposed expenditure, the bud get is surplus.
However, when the proposed income equals the proposed exp enditure, it is referred to as balanced budget Self Assessment Exercise Now that we have knowledge of what a budget is, can you think of what a school bud get is?
3.2 Mea ning of School Budget Hartman (1 999), d efined school budget as a working tool for the successful operation of state and local schools and a significant opportunity to plan the mission, improve their 101  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE operations, and achieve their educational ob jectives.
To Clabaugh (1988), school budget is a financial b lueprint for the operation of the school for the fiscal year.
Musaazi (1982), in his own view perceived school budget as a financial plan through which educational objectives are being implemented and translated into reality.
Edem (1987) posited that school budget is a statement which describ es how various educational objectives outlined for the year or another stated period are to be achieved.
To Adesina (1981 ), sbcuhdogoelt i s an outline of the plan for financing the school programme for a given period In a more technical term, school bud get is a statement of the total educational programmes for a given unit, as well as an estimate of resources to carry out the programme and the revenues needed to cover those expenditures.
The various d efinitions show that school budget is concerned with procedures of funding a school system to accomplish its pre-determined objectives over a period of time.
It is an estimated financial standard meant to guide the activities of a school administrator toward the attainment of the aims and objectives of the school system in the financial year.
School budget like b udgets of the local governments, state governments and the federal government usually cover a period of one year.
The budget reveals the expected income and intended expenditure for a school.
School bud get is usually prep ared by the shcehaodo l th ough the d uty may b e delegated to the bursar of the school.
Preparation of a school bud get is neither a one-man affair nor one- department affair.
All the d epartments of the school must b e involved in the preparation of the school bud gTehte.
s c hool head has to collect information on various activities and the financial needs of each unit from the units head and heads of departments so as to incorporate it into tdhrea ft of the school budget.
In a large school, a bud get committee may be appointed bthye head of the school to review the var ious departmental demands and make sure tthhaety are in line with the school ob jectives.
Involvement of a committee/staff in bud get prep aration ensures better budgeting and will also serve as encouragement to the staff as well as cooperation of the staff when the b udget is to b implemented.
A school hsheoadu ld not monopolize the preparation of a school bud get in order for the budget to incorporate the needs of the various d epartments of the school.
Budget could be vertical or horizontal.
A budget that includes the various income aenxdp e nd iture estimates by line item, function, and ob ject in a given fiscal year is known as a vertical budget, but when the bud get includes current estimates for a given fiscal ycoeamrp ared to p rior audited income and expenditures, and a projection of costs, it is horizontal budget.
3.3.
Purpo se of a Schoo l Budg et The following are some of the reasons why there is the need to prep are a school budget: (i) to forecast the activities, ser vices and programmes, which the appropriate school governing body/council has approved for a given period, (ii) to reveal the anticipated revenue for a given period and the source 102  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) to show the details of the intended expenditures for the school for a given period, (iv) to control the official financial activities of the school head b e it at the primary, secondary and tertiary institution levels.
(v) to reduce to the bearest minimum the level of wastages or reckless spending of approved fund s for various educational facilities in the school, and (vi) to reveal other contributions and pressures on the budget that are expected during the given period.
3.4 Met ho ds of Preparing a Schoo l Budget There are various method s of preparing school budget, some of which are discussed below: (i) Line Item Budg eting/Tradit ional Metho d This is a method whereby specific items of revenue and exp enditure are listed on line-by-line basis.
In this type of b udgeting, proposed revenue and exp enditure are done in tabular forms showing the detailed items for the budgeted year and one or two p revious years.
This method allows each unit to continue with the imp lementation of existing projects because it is backward -looking in preparation and it is b ased on certain increase or d ecrease in the amounts granted for the preceding year (s).
This method makes the prep aration and auditing of budgeting easy and guard s against misappropriation of funds.
However, it is length y to prep are, it is not good for planning or management, and does not relate to specific projects, because the functions of the expenditures are not explained.
For example, teachers salar ies are a budget line-item, but it will not explain which teachers, at which schools, teaching which type of students.
(ii) Zero -Based Budgeting (ZBB) Met hod This method of budgeting was popular in the 1950 s and 1960s.
However, unlike the line-item budgeting, it does not take cognisance of the previous year(s) budget.
It began with the assump tion that the school system starts out every year on a clean slate .
It puts each programme under review every year and its cost is computed from the scratch as if the programme never existed.
With this assumption, ever y unit has to justify its expenditures annually b y relating all costs to system goals and ob jectives to p revent arbitrar y spend ing.
This method enab les school head to allocate resources to programmes based on importance.
Nevertheless, the method is very exp ensive to implement and could make some 103  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE school administrators exaggerate the benefits of pet projects in order to have them funded.
(iii) Performance Budget ing Method This method of budgeting emphasises the performance of the work to be done.
There are ways of measuring the achievement of each programme.
It is possible to ascertain performance b ased on each unit of work.
For examp le, when bud get is to be for the construction of a b lock of classroom, performance budgeting method would not only show the total amount of money to b e spent on the whole block, but it would also show the amount to be spent on foundation, setting of blocks, roofing, plastering, wiring, plumbing, painting etc.
This budgeting method is very informative and makes it eas y to control school spending, b ut it requires elaborate accounting, data processing and a lot of pap er work.
Inflationar y rate could also b e a treat to this method.
(iv) Pro gramme Budg eting Method When this method is used to prep are school budget, all the p rogrammes to be executed are provid ed for, but it will be prepared accord ing to the functions, programmes and activities of each unit/department in the school.
This means that the school budget will be classified according to the var ious unit/dep artment in the school.
For example, in school, we have units/departments like Business and Vocational, Science and Technolog y, Language Arts, Humanities, Bursary, Expend iture and Control, General Ad ministration etc.
Programme budgeting method will reveal how funds are distributed for various programmes in the units/d epartments in the school.
This method reduces the goals and objectives of the school system into specific operations and the method to accomplish them is determined.
However, the typ e of management information system required may take several years to be developed, thereb y, delaying the take-off.
(v) Pro gramme-Planning-Budg eting System s (PPBS) This is a new method of preparing school bud get; it requires the school head to spell out or identify the goals and objectives of a school in measurable terms, lay out alternatives to achieve the stated goals, attrib ute cost to each alter native, analyse the costs imp lication, then select and the b est method for achieving the goals, and then b uild the budget around the selected option, and finally feed data back to ad just the cost to results.
This method was first used by the U.S Defense Department during the Vietnam War; it seeks greater efficiency by attaching spending to p articular programmes.
The method enables schools to eliminate costly programmes that can waste resources, it also help s the school administrator to identify and d efine the goals and ob jectives of the school, on the basis of which app ropriate p rogrammes are designed to achieve such goals and ob jectives.
However, while this method sound s ideal, it is too complex for developing 104  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE countries such as Nigeria where there is inadequate data to p lan with and shortage of skilled manp ower Self Assessment Exercise Mention and explain the various method s of preparing a school budget.
Which one would you as a school head prefer?
3.5 Importance of Schoo l Budg et The role of school budget in administration of a school cannot b e overestimated.
Some of the importances of the school budget are listed below: (i) School budget is an instrument of planning and control in the school system because it specifies the financial procedures through which the goals and objectives of the school system can be achieved.
(ii) School budget also serves as an instrument of control because it is an established standard against which performance of the school system is evaluated.
(iii) School budget makes it easier to ascertain the extent to which the school has achieved its aims and objectives through implementation of various programmes budgeted for in a year.
(iv) School bud get also reveals p ossible inab ility of the school to imp lement/achieve some of the p rogrammes budgeted for as this will enab le appropriate action to be taken to ensure its imp lementation/achievement in the future.
(v) School bud get encourages teamwork among the staff as they work together to achieve common goals and objectives.
(vi) School budget also enhances the coord ination of the activities of the school by giving financial direction to the various activities being carried out b y the school for the purpose of achieving the aims and objectives of the school system.
3.6 Cha llenges of Schoo l Budg et in Nigeria There are various challenges facing the prep aration and implementation of school budget.
Some of them are identified and exp lained below: (i) Lack of Accurate Statistical Data.
In order to make a working bud get by the school, there must b e available accurate data of past projects and bud gets.
In some schools, these records are not prop erly kept while they are not even availab le in some schools.
This makes it difficult for school head s to make accurate financial projection for the school programmes, and with this problem prep aration and implementation of budget in a school is difficult.
105  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) Political Instability.
The unstable political environment and policies, as well as lack of continuity in all government p olicies in Nigeria give room to poor economy.
This lead to reduction in allocation of funds to the public schools which have adverse effect on the p reparation and implementation of the school bud get (iii) Inflation .
This is a situation whereb y too much money buys fewer goods; inflation is a persistent fall in the purchasing p ower of citizens of a country.
This situation makes the prep aration and imp lementation of school budget so difficult in Nigeria where the accurate rate of inflation cannot be ascertained.
As a result of this, some budgeted p rojects may not be implemented due to rising cost of materials.
This makes the preparation of school budget faulty and makes the implementation ver y difficult.
(iv) Dependence on Government Grants.
The largest p art of revenue for public school s in Nigeria comes from the government, while ver y insignificant financial resources come from other sources and inter nally generated revenue.
Government gives both recurrent and capital exp enditures to public schools.
Whenever, there is a delay in the allocation, the implementation of the bud get becomes so difficult to the extent that schools at times are ground ed, and in Nigeria nowad ays, government allocation is unpredictab le, esp ecially with the trend of economic situation in the world, where prices of oil which is the major source of revenue for Nigeria is fluctuating.
This and other problems had reduced school budget to a mere p aper work and no more a working budget.
(v) Insincere School Heads.
Most of the school heads in Niger ia are not sincere, and are greedy, most of the times; they misappropriate the allocated funds and also commit other forms of indiscipline such as embezzlement in their schools.
This will jeopardize the attainment of objectives of the school system as contained in the school budget.
(vi) Lack of Orientation for School Heads.
Most of the school heads are not given induction training on assumption of headship position.
They only use their residual knowledge gained when assisting their school head to p repare their budget when they eventually b ecome the school head.
To those who do not assist before assuming headship position, this is a serious threat.
Most school head s give this function to their bursars or other delegated staffs; this practice does not give room for realistic bud geting.
4.0 Conclusion Budget has b een defined as an analytical financial statement of income and exp enditure for a sp ecific period of time.
It can also be said that it is a systematic plan for tehxep e nd iture of a usually fixed resource, such as money or time during a given pHeorwioedv.
e r , a school budget is a statement of the total educational p rogrammes for a given 106  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE unit, as well as an estimate of resources to carr y out the programme and the rneeveedn eude s t o cover those exp enditures.
Budgets are used to forecast and reveal the anticip ated revenue for a given period and the source, to control the official financial activities of the school head among others.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have d iscussed the meaning of budget as well as the meaning of sbcuhdogoelt , and we can see that b udget may be for either the whole country, or an organisation, but the school bud get is a b udget meant for a school.
However, whether a budget or a school budget, it is specifically for a p eriod of one year.
We also looked atht e purpose for preparing a school bud get as well as the var ious methods that could bad eo p ted for prep aring a bud get.
We also examined the var ious challenges facing the prep aration and implementation of budget.
6.0 Tut or-Ma rked Assig nment (i) Define a school budget.
(ii) Explain the various challenges facing school administrators in the prep aration of a school bud get and suggest possible solutions.
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Adesina, S. (1981).
Some Aspects of School Management, Ibadan and Abeokuta: Educational Industries Ltd. Clab augh, R. E. (1988).
The preparation and administration of the budget, in S. Adesina, and E.O.
Fagbamiye, (ed s) Educational Administration.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd .
Ed em, D. A.
(1987): Introduction to educational administration.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books ltd. Hartman, W. T. (1999).
School district budgeting.
Reston; V. A.
Association of School Business Officials International Musaazi, J. C. (1982): The theory and practice of educational administration.
London: Macmillan Publishers ltd. 107  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 5 DISCIPLINE AND SCHOOL ADMIISTRAT ION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning of discipline 3.2 Meaning of indiscip line 3.3 Purpose of school discip line 3.4 Causes of indiscipline in school 3.5 How to control indiscip line in schools 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Discipline in Nig erian schools has long been an issue that is of main concern not only ttoh e government at all levels but also to educational practitioners (private and public).
The parents are also not left out when the issue of discipline in school is brought up for discussion.
To a very large extent, good schools are usually known for their high level of discip line among their students.
The frequent occurrence of stud ents unrest in Nigerian Universities, Polytechnics and Colleges of Education is a reflection of the level to which discip line has degenerated .
It should be noted that year-in year-out, people change with time.
Students are influenced b y their peers and immediate environment.
The type of influence in students life is manifested in their relationship with schools and environment.
Discip line during the p re-colonial era, is not the same with the same during the colonial era and even nthoet same at the immediate post-colonial era and now.
2.0 Objectives 108  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE At the end of this unit, students should b e able to: (i) define discip line.
(ii) mention some acts of ind iscipline among the secondar y school students.
(iii) discuss the various causes of indiscipline in Nigerian schools.
(iv) suggest what school head can do to ensure discipline in schools.
3.0 Ma in Contents Oniyama and Oniyama (2002), posited that a prob lematic child is the one who cannot ad just to the socially acceptable norms of behaviour and consequently d isrupts his/her own personal academic progress, the learning efforts of his/her classmates and interpersonal relations.
Thus p rob lematic children denote children with unacceptable behaviour.
They are found in man y schools at various levels influencing other students negatively and constituting a major source of worry to all educators.
The citizens of the country are governed by the laws of the land.
These laws also aafllf e catg encies, whether government, inter-ministerial, parastatals or education for the purpose of promoting peace, justice and equity.
It is evident that the purpose of law is to ensure ord erliness in the society.
So also the school system needs a conducive teaching and learning environment that is peaceful at all times for a functional and p roductive school work.
3.1 Mea ning of Discipline The word discip line is derived from the Latin word discipulus which means to learn.
It means group of people are bound b y rules and regulations toward s attainment of a common goals.
The term discipline is construed in different forms such as; d iscipline as punishment, discipline as control, as training, and as learning.
Umukoro (1997) posited that discipline is training or learning by an individual to attain self-control, self-will, self- direction to act in a proper or right manner at the right time and place without b ediencge iv ed or forced to do so.
Idoghor (2001 ) opines that discipline imp lies procedure and rules, which lead a child to manage his/her b ehavioural patterns b y self in order to be ab le to act in a socially acceptable manner.
Olagboye (2004) has also posited that discipline may be considered as the readiness and ab ility of students and teachers to resp ect the constituted authority, observe and obey school rules and regulations, and to maintain a high standard of behaviour necessary for the smooth running of the teaching - lear ning process.
Discipline as conceived by various authors suggests, it is an internal state of the mind where in an ind ividual thinks and acts in the proper manner anytime, anywhere, without an ybod y urging him/her to do so.
This is against the discip line that comes forcefully by an exter nal factor so that the individual carries out the intended behaviour.
The first form of discipline is the positive type of discip line, while the second form of discipline resulted from external control or force is the negative type of discipline.
The willingness of the stud ents to obey school laws and regulations is ab sent in the second form.
Therefore that typ e of discipline is not desirable.
The b est form of d iscipline ad vocated 109  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE for the school is self control that leads to good b ehaviour without any external force.
It is this type of discip line that can foster stability in the schools thereby paving the way fqoura l itative education.
3.2 Mea ning of Indiscipline Indiscip line is the direct opposite of discipline i.e.
lack of discipline.
Dittimiya (1995) defines indiscipline as any act that does not confirm to the societal value and norms.
Otu (1995) also defines it as unruly acts and behaviours, acts of lawlessness and disob edience to school rules and regulations.
From the above, it can be inferred that indiscip line refers to b ehaviours which are capab le of imped ing the achievement of the goals set for institutions.
In other words, indiscipline is a violation of school rules and regulations.
Indiscipline is capable of obstructing the smooth and orderly functioning of the school system.
It can be summarized that indiscipline is any form of mis-behaviour which the student can display in the following ways; general disobedient to constituted authority, d estruction of school property, poor attitude to learning, abuse of seniority, immoral behaviour, d rug abuse, stealing, lateness, truancy, dirtiness, quarrelsome, use of abusive language, rudeness etc as the forms of indiscipline are inexhaustible.
Ind iscipline can also be said to be the unwillingness of students and or teaches to resp ect the constituted authority, observe, and obey school rules and regulations, and to maintain high standard of behaviour conducive to teaching learning process and essential to the smooth ruling of the school to achieve the ed ucational objective with ease.
It can also be said that an act of indiscipline is when the students and or teachers refused to obey the rules or a code of behaviour set aside by a constituted authority within the ed ucational system/school.
Self- Assessment Test (i) Distinguish b etween d iscipline and ind iscipline (ii) Highlight 15 types of ind iscipline common to secondary school students 3.3 The Purpo se of Schoo l Discipline 1.
To facilitate and enhance the attainment of the goals of the school, 2. to create a conducive teaching and learning environment, 3. to produce cultured citizens who will have resp ect for themselves and others in the society, 4. to help individuals to do the right thing all the time without any compulsion, 5. to produce loyal and respectful citizens, 6. to help student to develop and have respect for the constituted authority, and 110  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 7. to facilitate the creation of a disciplined society where peop le of various interests learn free and apply the norms and values of that society.
3.4 Ca uses of Indiscipline in Schoo ls There are many factors responsible for indiscipline acts among the students in the schools.
The b ehaviour of the students usually reflects the society in which they are brought up.
Since they are products of the society, they mostly exhibit and share in ivtas lu es and b elief.
The causes of indiscip line in the schools are therefore traceable to the parents at home, the headmaster/headmistress or principal, the teachers in the school the peer group, the gover nment and the general public.
1.
The Parent s Many parents have abandoned the responsibility of taking care of their children.
Some parents have little or no time for the child ren who are left in the care of house hheelnpcse; m any of these children pick up the behaviour of the house help s which they exhibit in schools.
Man y p arents are not disciplined too in terms of moral b ehaviour.
Sthoemme eomf b ezzle money in their var ious p laces of work; tell various lies in their places owfo r k. Ever ybody knows it is easier to cop y bad behaviours than good ones.
As the children watch their parents b ad behaviour, they p ractise them and with time they become p erfect at putting up such b ad behaviours.
(ii) The School Staff The attitud e of teachers to work, teachers appearance (i.e.
dressing) and illicit relationship with stud ents, failure to prepare for class work/lesson, teachers involvement in examination malpractices, cultism, illegal school fees collection/other fees, poor learning environment and the like breed indiscip line among the students.
(iii) The School Head The inab ility of the school head master/mistress or principal to provid e or influence ohra v e a say in the provision of adequate facilities, employment of qualified staff, encouragement to teachers, and ad mission of students with p oor acad emic standard into schools may degenerate into various acts of indiscipline on the part of the students whenever there is need to show their disagreement with some of the policies of the school head .
(iv) The Peer Group Once a child is of school-going age, he/she sp ends more time with p eers outside the family where the child is exposed to various pressures from the p eers and with this, there is the possibility that the child may be more influenced by the peer s character where he/she spends most of the time than home where less of the child s active time is spent, because the peers are in the same age bracket with him.
The pressure from the peers as 111  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE well as students characteristics plays a strong role in shaping children s behaviour.
Some peers have formed gangs who recruit members from among child ren who have experienced adjustment p rob lems at school and at home.
Gangs/p eers often create problems for schools by using drugs, encouraging violence among their memb ers and by particip ating in illegal acts.
(v) The Go vernment Frequent change of government s educational policies, poor funding, lack of sustainable plans, d istorted value system, corruption, embezzlement, favoritism, nepotism, records alteration and all negative actions by government agencies, office holders, and mass media, breed indiscip line among the students and in the society as a whole.
The pthoalti c ya f fects the principle and p ractice of education in Niger ia seem to lack consistency.
Different administrations always come out with d ifferent p olicies instead of consolidating the existing ones.
This inconsistency does not only affect teachers morale and it also affects students interest and wastes their time.
Frequent strikes as a result of inconsistent police waste human and mater ial resources which can also lead to students protests and demonstration.
Self Assessment Exercise Wh y is it that indiscipline is on the increase among Nigerian adolescents?
3.5 Ho w to Cont rol Indiscipline in the Schoo ls Indiscip line is an act that can better be prevented than corrected .
The following pre- cautions are necessar y to prevent occurrence or re-occurrence of ind iscipline acts among the students in schools.
i.
Basic Managerial Skill The school head should acquire b asic managerial skill through training, and seminars to improve the technical skills of the school head as well as to improve the knowled ge of school head administrative techniques, and procedures in order to foster and enhance discipline in school.
ii.
Appointment of Dedicated Trained Teachers Dedicated professional trained teachers are those with professional competence who can bring the desired level of professionalism into teaching by ensuring that students comply with the laid down rules and regulations and ensure that culprits are brought to book.
iii.
School Head Should Leading by Example - Indiscipline can be reduced in schools when the school heads and other staff members are disciplined and those who are not disciplined among them should be read y to lose the right of forcing others to be d isciplined.
112  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iv.
Prioritize Student Welfare The school management must give high priority to the welfare of the students b y p roviding health centres, sports facilities, conducive learning environment, water, regular electricity and meet with the students on regular basis to know their needs, and let them know wh y some of their demand s may not b e met if any.
v. Establishment of Guidance and Counseling Service This service will promote discipline in schools because the service will assist the maladjusted students in the areas in emotional, social and personal ad justments.
This will reduce frequent ind iscip line acts among the students.
vi Teaching of Moral and Religious Studies In schools where we have moral and religion ed ucation, more emp hasis should b e laid on it and where there is none, it should be introduced.
This will instill the fear of God in the stud ents, d raw them more closer to God, and make them more obed ient than before vii.
Establishment of Parent Teachers Association This is a forum where the school head can brief the parents and guardians of stud ents on various acts of ind iscipline found among the stud ent and issues related to discip linar y matters could also b e discussed.
This forum will allow parents and the school staff to join teach together to enforce discip line on the students.
4.0 Co nclusion To achieve self control, there is need to behave according to the laid down rules and regulations in school setting.
Ever yone in a given society needs to take p art in the act odfis c ip line and discip line should not be seen as a negative force and fire fighting activities.
It should be a habit in the home, classroom and even in the society.
Parents should bd iesc ip lined and be good models to their child ren, the society should equally b e discip lined ; bribery and corruption at various levels should b e checked so that child rweinl l not imitate this bad habit from our generation, since the students are the product othfe society and leaders of tomorrow.
If Nigeria is to progress and advance into a developed nation, then our present youths must be disciplined.
The home should lay the foundation, the school builds on it and this is transferred into the society where they will eventually function as discip lined adults.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have d iscussed the act of discip line and indiscipline.
Discipline has been viewed as training by an individ ual to attain self-will and to act in the right manner at the right time and place, without b eing forced to do so, while ind iscipline is the opposite of discip line.
Examples of acts of indiscipline found among the children in schools are 113  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE mentioned ; the causes and what can be done to prevent ind iscipline among the students have also mentioned and discussed.
6.0 Tut or Ma rked Assig nment (TMA) Identify various reasons wh y the act of indiscip line is more pronounced in Nigerian educational institution than the act of discipline.
7.0 References/Furt her Reading s Dittimaya, I.A (1995).
Discipline in schools in V.F.
Peretomode ed s. Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research Pub lishers Ltd .
Idoghor, I.S (2001).
Lecture and Counsels to Students and Practitioner.
Effurum: Freebo Printing co. Oniyame, H.O and Oniyama, E.A (2002).
Introduction to Sociology of Education.
A Social Psychology Analysis.
Warn: COEWA Publishers.
Otu, D.O (1998).
Handbook for Headmasters of Primary Schools.
Samaru, Zaria; S. Asoukome and Co. Umukoro, J.O (1997): Parents Sup reme Duty and the Society: A Book of Inspiration and Guidance of developing child ren.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers.
114
