  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Course Code EDU 248 Course Title Early Childhood Education Methods Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) I.C.
Maduabum College of Education (Technical) Umunze - Anambra State Course Writers Dr. (Mrs.) I.C.
Maduabum College of Education (Technical) Umunze - Anambra State Course Editor Dr. Osuji, U.S.A School of Education National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Co-ordinator Dr. Osuji, U.S.A School of Education National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-110-3 All Rights Reserved Printed by…………….
For National Open University of Nigeria iii  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Table of Content Page Module 1 1 Unit 1 Child Centered Method ………………… 1-5 Unit 2 Questioning Method …………………… 6-11 Unit 3 Group Method ………………………….
12-18 Unit 4 Story Telling Method ………………….. 19-23 Unit 5 Project Method ………………………… 24-28 Module 2 29 Unit 1 Discussion Method……………………… 29-35 Unit 2 Play Method…………………………….. 36-43 Unit 3 Demonstration Method………………….
44-49 Unit 4 Montessori Method………………………50-55 Unit 5 Activity Method………………………… 56-62 Module 3 63 Unit 1 Role Playing Method…………………….63-72 Unit 2 Phonic Method………………………….. 73-78 Unit 3 Selection of Teaching Method………….. 79-85 Unit 4 Teaching and Learning Environment…… 86-92 iv  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods MODULE 1 Unit 1 Child Centered Method Unit 2 Questioning Method Unit 3 Group Method Unit 4 Story Telling Method Unit 5 Project Method UNIT 1 CHILD CENTERED METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Terminology 3.2 Early Childhood Education 3.3 Child Centered Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teaching methods are the features of education that have change most during the present century.
Schools, teachers and curricula have altered somehow, it is true, but methods or perhaps, as we should say the choice of methods have multiplied enormously.
Just as research in science and industry has produced better and quicker methods of doing things, so in education, research has pointed out more efficient techniques for teaching.
Several methods exist which the pre-school teacher can employ to facilitate children’s learning.
Faced by this variety, it is necessary for you to know their advantages, limitations and ways of utilizing them.
In this unit, you will look at child –centered method.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit – you should be able to do the following: 1. explain and discuss teaching methods and their limitations.
2. define teaching methods.
1  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3. define early childhood education.
4. carry out some activities on teaching methods.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Terminology Teaching methods are techniques or strategies the teacher employs while teaching his pupils.
3.2 Early Childhood Education At birth, the child is a helpless individual, who depends on others for survival.
Consequently, the child has a number of developmental needs.
Following some pioneer works of some leading philosophers on early childhood education, many countries have made adequate provision for children to obtain these needs to a reasonable extent through pre-primary education.
The pre-school has been found to be crucial for satisfactory adult development.
It is very useful to the development of the child’s physical, emotional, social and intellectual well – being.
It is the years for laying the foundation for the overall development of the child.
It is believed that early childhood education facilitates the learning that occurs in the later stage of a child’s life.
What then is early childhood education?.
Early childhood education is the education given in an educational institution to children prior to their entering the primary school.
It includes, the crèche, the nursery and the kindergarten’’.
Pre – school is the first formal education given to the children in an educational institution to children aged three to five years plus.
(National policy on Education (Federal Republic of Nigeria (FRN), 2004 P.11)).
3.3 Child – Centered Method Child – Centered method is a method of teaching where the children are more active than the teacher.
In a classroom where child – centered approach is used, the teacher should know each child as an individual with all his talents and difficulties.
Plenty of good visual aids in current use should be displayed.
The classroom should be bright and colourful with pupil’s best work carefully displayed.
Interesting learning areas should be mapped out in the classroom.
For example, nature corner, book corner, displays, discovery table and creativity corner.
The atmosphere should be relaxed and happy.
The teacher should plan the 2  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods lessons with the pupil’s needs in view.
There should be more pupils’ activity than teacher’s activity.
Having looked at the overview of the child centeredness, let us now look at the aims of child – centered teaching.
The aims of child- centered teaching are that the child is happy at school, and interested in his work.
The child’s life develops from day to day with a feeling of achievement.
The child considers himself a person of worth.
He feels he is understood and appreciated.
He gets plenty of opportunity for creative work and self – expression.
A sense of responsibility is fostered in him.
The child should be taught to live and co – operate with others and work in a group when necessary.
The child should be taught to appreciate beauty in values, art, music, literature, nature and character.
The child learns to use his leisure time profitably.
The child learns to be helpful and generous.
Limitations of this method are few.
They include: 1.
It is time – consuming 2.
Secondly, an impatient teacher cannot manage a class.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 (a) What are the merits/ demerits of child – centered method?
Self Assessment Exercise 2 (b) Define the following terms (a) Child – Centered method.
(b) Teacher Centered method.
(c) Teaching Method.
(d) Early Childhood Education.
4.0 CONCLUSION You will agree with me in this unit that children have different learning methods of which child centered method is one of them.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that child - centered method is an approach a teacher employs to teach a pre- school child.
This method also makes the child to be an active participant.
The child plays all the roles during instruction.
3  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods You also learnt that teaching methods are strategies the teacher uses as he teaches his pupils.
While early childhood education is the type of education given in an educational institution to pupils prior to their entering the primary.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (1) Define teaching methods (2) Explain Early Childhood Education (3) Write short notes on: Child-Centeredness You can pick the answers from the summary above.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Farrant, J.S.
(1964): Principles and Practice of Education; London: Longman Group Ltd. Esomonu, N.P (2005) Pre- primary and Primary Education: Fundamental and Operational Methods; Awka: Marpat Education Research and Publishers.
National Policy on Education Section 2 p11.
(Federal Republic of Nigeria).
(2004).
Yaba: NERDC Press.
Sister Mary Jacinta etal (1981): Primary Methods HandBook; London: Hodder and Stoughton Ltd.
ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 (a) The merits of Child-Centered method.
(1) The child learns to use his leisure time well.
(2) He learns to be generous and helpful.
(3) He learns to appreciate beauty in values, arts, music, nature and character.
(4) He learns to live and co-operate with others and work in a group when necessary.
(5) It makes the child to be happy at school.
(6) The child’s life develops from day – to – day with a feeling of achievement.
(7) The child sees himself as a person of worth.
(8) The child is actively involved in his learning.
4  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods (b) Demerits of Child –Centered Method 1.
It consumes time 2.
An impatient teacher cannot manage a classroom.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 A.
Child – Centered Method is a method where the child is actively involved.
He is the sole actor.
B.
Teacher – Centered Method is a method where the teacher acts as the facilitator.
He alone is actively involved.
He talks and chalks.
C. Teaching methods are techniques or strategies the teacher employs while teaching his pupils.
D. Early childhood education is education given to children in an educational institution between the age of 3 to 5 plus.
5  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 2 QUESTIONING METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Questioning 3.2 Types of Questions 3.3 Higher Order Cognitive Questions 3.4 Guides to Good Questions 3.5 Advantages 3.6 Disadvantages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the main characteristics of a good teacher is the successful use of the techniques of questioning.
Very often, the involvement and activity of the pupils through out the lesson depend largely on the teacher’s skill in formulating good questions to challenge them and stimulate thought.
Let us consider why we ask questions during instruction.
Questions should be used in many different ways in teaching and learning.
Questions should: (a) help pupils develop their ability to think and solve problems.
(b) be a means of learning new information and making already learned information more meaningful.
(c) allow the pupils to actively participate in the lesson.
(d) encourage pupils to ask their own question.
(e) help the teacher to discover how successfully he has taught.
Questions can be thought of as serving two major objectives.
They help the teacher to discover how well the pupils have learned and therefore, how well he has taught.
In this unit you will learn how to use questions as a teaching method.
6  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit; you should be able to: 1. develop questions to assess the different levels of learning; 2. analyze the type of questions found in pre – primary school textbooks; 3. explain why pupils should be able to do more than memorize facts.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Questioning You have briefly learnt about questioning at the introduction.
Now let us go into details on questioning.
Questioning is versatile and can be used at every stage of the lesson to serve different purposes.
Questions are statements for which a reply is expected.
Questions constitute an important tool of teaching in the hands of a skillful teacher.
(Olaitan/Agusiobo.1981).
There is some truism in the assertion that “to question well is to teach well”.
As Mayer (1978) maintains that with appropriate types of questions, pre–school children can be encouraged to do more complex thinking.
Pre- school teachers should ask questions that will encourage thinking and inquiry.
You learnt about questioning method in details.
You should now examine the types of questions teachers can use during instruction.
3.2 Types of Questions Questions can be categorized into two ways or types; the lower order cognitive questions and the higher order cognitive questions.
Lower order cognitive questions involve, recall, comprehension, and applications whereas the higher order cognitive questions border on analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
The former type may be referred to as “factual – questions” while the latter is called “thought – questions”.
(Maduabum, 1992).
Some examples of the questions are illustrated below.
Lower order Questions: are, i) Recall: Name the objects in your class.
ii) Comprehension: State (a) the similarities (b) the differences between a father and a mother.
7  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods iii) Application: what do you think will happen if we do not eat food and drink water?
3.3 Higher Order Cognitive Questions The higher order cognitive questions include: i.
Analysis: What are the things you can see in your father’s parlour?
ii.
Synthesis: Suggest ways you can purify water for drinking.
iii.
Evaluation: why do we consider insects as animals?
In addition to thinking about the types of questions, we remember, there are some guides to good questions.
Let us look at these guides.
3.4 Guides to Good Questions 1.
A good question should have a purpose.
2.
It should be free from ambiguity.
3.
The question must be relevant to the lesson on hand.
This emphasizes the need to prepare key questions in advance.
4.
Avoid poor questions since they do not evoke any worthwhile learning experiences.
5.
The vocabulary as well as the construction of the question used will be such that the pupils can understand.
6.
Questions should be varied in types to include both the lower order and the higher order cognitive questions.
The reason for including the latter is to sufficiently challenge the pre–school children.
7.
Questions should be repeated since it promotes attention.
8.
Usually the distribution of questions should be as wide as possible.
9.
Good question will not be confined to memory.
10.
It must take into account the pupil’s background experience.
(Sister Mary Jacinta et all (1981).
11.
Allow time for a response.
12.
Do not penalize pupils with wrong answers.
13.
Reward good answers with verbal or non – verbal response.
For example, “Good”, “Fine,” “Allright,” 14.
Do not use questions beginning with “Do you understand”?
“Who can tell me (or us)” or Does anyone know …..?!
Use the following guidelines in answering pupils questions: 1.
Treat pupils’ questions with respect.
2.
Show pleasure when pupils ask intelligent questions and motivate them to ask questions.
8  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.
If you do not know the answer to a pupil’s question, say so, and tell him you will find out.
Keep your promise.
4.
If the answer is simple and obvious, get it quickly from the other pupils.
5.
Sometimes use series of linked questions to get the answer from another pupil.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 a.
Define Questions?
b.
Why do we ask Question?
Self Assessment Exercise 2 2.
State levels of questions you know.
You’ve looked at Activity A.
Let us look at various advantages and limitations of these methods.
3.5 Advantages 1.
Questioning helps pupils to develop self confidence.
Questions draws facts from pupils, by so doing, the pupils become self- assertive.
2.
Questioning increases classroom interaction Good and well distributed questions increase teacher – pupil interaction in the classroom.
3.
It helps to stimulate and sustain pupil’s interest in classroom.
When good questioning skills are used in classroom teaching, pupil’s interest are stimulated as they make effort to answer the questions.
3.6 Disadvantages 1.
Questioning method is time – consuming.
The teacher gives a lot of time for each question to be answered.
2.
If the questions are not properly distributed in the class, some pupils especially the introverts may not be involved in answering the question.
3.
Poorly –framed questions may create noise or confusion in the class.
When such questions are being treated, it may lead the pupils away from what the teacher intends to teach using the question.
4.
If the teacher calls the name of any pupil before asking question, other pupils in the class will relax, since the question is meant for the pupil whose name has already been mentioned.
This will 9  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods defeat some of the purposes for which questions are used.
(Maduabum, (1989).
4.0 CONCLUSION You have seen that questioning method is so versatile and can be used at anything.
At the presentation of the lesson, at the introduction and at the closure of the lesson.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that questioning as a method of instruction in the pre – school is used to elicit and draw facts from the pupils and leads them to better understanding of the lesson.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Self Assessment Exercise 3 (a) Develop questions to assess the different levels of learning.
(b) Critically identify the type of questions found in pre –primary school text books.
(c) Explain in a nutshell why pupils should be able to do more than memorize facts.
(d) Write short notes on he merits and demerits of questioning methods.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Agusiobo, N.O.
& Olaitan, O.S, (1981).
Principles of Practice Teaching.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Mayer, V.M.
(1978).
Biology Teachers’ Handbook.
Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS).
New York: H John Wiley & Sons.
Maduabum, M.A.
(1992).
Teaching Biology Effectively.
Owerri: Whyte and Whyte Publishers.
Maduabum, M.A.
(1989).
Teaching Integrated Science Effectively.
Onitsha: Space Matrix Publishers Ltd.
Sister Mary Jacinta & Sister Mary Regina (1981) London: Hodder and Stoughton.
10  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 (a) Questions are statements of facts that need immediate response.
(b) We ask questions for obvious reasons.
1.
It helps pupils to develop their ability to think and solve problems.
2.
It makes pupils to participate actively in a lesson.
3.
It encourages pupils to ask their own questions.
4.
It helps the pupils to evaluate the teacher and themselves.
5.
It is a way of gaining new information and making already learned information more meaningful.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 2.
Questions are divided into two types (a) Lower Order cognitive questions (b) Higher Order cognitive questions (a) Lower order cognitive questions are at recall, comprehension and application levels (b) While the Higher order cognitive questions are at analysis, synthesis and evaluation levels.
11  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 3 GROUP METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of Grouping 3.2 Kinds of Grouping 3.2.1 Non-Ability Grouping 3.2.2 Natural Grouping 3.2.3 Interest Grouping 3.2.4 Sex Grouping 3.2.5 Need Grouping 3.2.6 Random Grouping 3.2.7 Gang or Peer Grouping 3.3 When to Use Group Methods 3.3.1 How to Use Group Method 3.4 Advantages of Group Method 3.4.1 Disadvantages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Group method is a method in which the class is divided into small groups for a particular learning activity.
It is a modification of class teaching.
You can use it to simplify the problem of teaching big classes with wide range of abilities.
When the class is divided into small groups, you can attend to each group in turn while you give individual help to pupils in difficulty.
In grouping the class, different criteria or measures could be used.
For instance, age, sitting arrangement or serial numbers in the register.
However, the aim for grouping determines the criterion to be used.
For example, in reading activity, pupils can be grouped using intellectual ability so that higher achievers will form a group, lower achievers another group and mediocres yet another group.
For physical and health education, age or gender or height could be used as a criterion depending on the type of game to be played.
(Esomonu, (2005) During pre-reading and pre-number sorting and matching exercises and memory exercises, the teacher moves around the groups observing, 12  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods encouraging and suggesting.
He keeps careful records of the pupil’s progress.
No formal teaching will be going on.
The teacher is busy watching the development of the children.
This in education, is called problem-solving activity.
Sometimes a teacher may form a group with a special lesson to help them.
Other pupils will be engaged in working at some useful activity on their own.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: a) Define grouping b) Identify kinds of grouping c) Discuss the advantages/ disadvantages of grouping.
d) Explain when and how to use group teaching in a pre-school.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 The Concept of Grouping Grouping is a flexible kind of classroom arrangement, for adjusting the curriculum to the needs and abilities of class members.
It is a means to an end.
It helps pupils to learn more effectively than they would if the class were always taught as a unit with every one being taught the same thing at the same time.
3.2 Kinds of Grouping There are many kinds of grouping.
Good teachers group pupils in different ways for different activities in pre-primary classes.
These are: (a) Ability grouping (b) Non-ability grouping (c) Natural grouping (d) Interest grouping (e) Sex grouping (f) grouping according to need.
(Sister Mary Jacinta et al (1981) Ability grouping means putting pupils who seem to be advanced (in expressing them selves, carrying on a conversation or answering question) in one group (A) and the pupils who are least advanced in the D group and the average pupils in B and C groups with all the pupils in any one group being of much the same standard.
Teachers never call the pupils A, B, C, D but choose or allow the children to choose their own names, birds, animals, colours.
Pupils are always taught in ability groups for mathematics and reading.
13  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.2.1 Non-Ability Grouping Each group is made up of pupils of varying levels of intelligence.
This type of grouping is used for many subjects like writing, oral language, fine arts and rhymes and songs.
3.2.2 Natural Grouping Each child in this group is free to sit wherever he likes in the classroom.
May be beside their friends or in a favourite place.
It is used during moral instruction and story-telling.
3.2.3 Interest Grouping Pupils who are interested in a certain activity may be grouped together just as that activity is in progress.
Their common interest should lead to a sharing of ideas and good social interaction while they are working.
For example, at fine arts lesson, pupils interested in modeling might model, while others might choose painting, others construction and so on.
3.2.4 Sex Grouping This type of grouping is used in a pre-school mainly in physical Education.
Males are separated from females for obvious reasons.
3.2.5 Need Grouping Sometimes a teacher may discover in his class a group with a common difficulty (like forming a letter incorrectly in penmanship or pronouncing sounds incorrect in oral language) They are put in a special group.
The remainder of the class are given suitable work to do while the teacher deals with the group with the special need.
3.2.6 Random Grouping Children are chosen in a haphazard way to form groups –no criteria are used.
3.2.7 Gang or Peer Grouping It starts at about the age of 11 (Maduewesi, 1990) 14  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Self Assessment Exercise 1 (a) Define Grouping (b) list 4 kinds of grouping (c) Explain 2 kinds of grouping (d) Differentiate between Ability Grouping and Non-ability grouping (e) Identify their similarities.
3.3 When to Use Group Method 1.
You can use this method when there is the need to examine in greater detail, various aspects of a larger issue.
For example, on oral language expression, four or more groups may be set up to partake.
2.
You can also use this method when you want to take a serious stand on matters that require in-depth study, resolution or decision making.
For example, in pre-school, you can use it to study songs/rhymes.
3.3.1 How to Use Group Method 1.
Divide the class into small groups of five, depending on the class size.
Group them based on ability.
2.
Each group should have a guide.
3.
You should ensure that no pupils are inhibited.
(Castle, 1978) 3.4 Advantages of Group Method 1.
Pupils are given opportunity to learn on their own.
2.
It helps pupils to perform various functions and roles.
3.
It increases pupil’s participation in learning.
This is because pupils are sub-divided into groups.
4.
It increases interpersonal relationship among the pupils.
When pupils work together, they understand themselves better.
5.
It may encourage healthy competitions since grouping enhances inter-group and intra- group competitions.
3.4.1 Disadvantages 1.
It makes a lot of demands on the teacher.
This is because when pupils are grouped, the teacher acts more as a superior.
2.
It may lead to development of complex behaviours.
When pupils are grouped, the high achievers or fast group may feel superior to other groups.
3.
It may lead to discrimination and unhealthy competitions.
When pupils are grouped; there may be tendency of groups trying to out- compete one another.
15  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Self Assessment Exercise 2 Discuss the advantages of Group method.
List the disadvantages of Group method.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit treated grouping as a whole.
The concept of grouping was defined.
Kinds of grouping were identified and discussed.
Their advantages and limitations were pinpointed.
5.0 SUMMARY Since teachers reason for being in the classroom is primarily because some pupils are there waiting to learn, it has become necessary for one to find different methods of teaching that will cater for children of different ages, maturity levels, interest, abilities, social and economic backgrounds.
That pupils themselves should decide what and how they want to learn, no particular method of teaching is recognized by every one as the right or best method just as no particular method of teaching is recognized as wrong or worst.
The way the teacher uses them will go a long way to determine the effectiveness of any method.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define Grouping 2.
What are the kinds of grouping a good teacher should use in a pre-school?
3.
Identify 5 types of group methods and discuss any 2.
4.
What are the advantages of group method?
5.
What are the disadvantages of group method?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Castle, E.B (1978) Principles of Education for Teachers in Africa; Nairobi: Oxford University Press.
Esomonu N.P (2005) Pre-Primary and Primary Education: fundamentals and Operational methods; Awka: MarPat Educational Research and publishers.
Maduewesi E.J (1990).
General Methodology for Primary School; Onitsha: Africana Feb. Maduabum M.A (1989).
Teaching Integrated Science Effectively; Onitsha: Spaces Matrix Publications Ltd. 16  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Maduabum M.A (1992 Teaching Biology Effectively; Owerri: Whyte/Whyte Publishers.
Sister Mary Jacinta et al (1981) Primary Methods Handbook; London: Hodder/Stoughton.
ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 2 A) Grouping is a flexible kind of classroom, arrangement, for adjusting the curriculum to the needs and abilities of class members.
B) 4 kinds of groupings are:- need grouping sex grouping, random grouping, interest grouping.
C) Sex grouping and random grouping.
Sex grouping is the type of grouping used in a pre-school mainly in physical education.
Males are separated from females for one reason or the other.
Random grouping is the type of grouping where children are chosen in a haphazard way to form groups-no criteria are used.
D) The differences between Ability Grouping and Non-ability grouping are: In ability grouping, pupils who are more advanced in conversation, answering questions or expressing themselves are grouped together in alphabetical order; ABCDE groups etc.
while non-ability grouping is made up of pupils of varying levels of intelligence.
It is used for many subjects like rhymes/songs, fine arts, Oral language and writing.
The former type of grouping i.e, ability grouping is used for teaching reading and mathematics.
E) Their similarities are: (a) Both are used in teaching pre-school Children.
(b) Both are used in teaching many subjects.
Each question carries equal marks.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Advantages of Group Method (1) Pupils are given opportunity to learn on their own.
(2) It helps pupils to perform various functions and roles.
17  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods (3) It increases pupils participation in learning.
This is because pupils are sub-divided into groups.
(4) It increases interpersonal relationship among the pupils.
When pupils work together, they understand themselves.
(5) It encourages healthy competitions since grouping enhances inter-group and intra-group competitions.
Disadvantages of Group Method (1) It makes a lot of demands on the teacher.
This is because when pupils are grouped, the teacher acts more as a supervisor.
(2) It may lead to development of complex behaviours.
When pupils are grouped, the high achievers may feel superior to other groups.
(3) It may lead to discrimination and unhealthy competitions.
When pupils are grouped, there may be tendency of groups trying to out compete one another.
18  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 4 STORY TELLING METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of Story Telling 3.2 Rationale for Telling Stories 3.3 Kinds of Stories to Tell 3.4 Method of Telling a Vernacular Story 3.5 Method of Telling an English Story 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 3, you looked at the group method as one of the useful approaches to teaching at pre-school level.
In unit 4, you will see how story- telling attracts the attention of pupils during instruction.
Children naturally love stories.
They are interested in stories about animals adventures, fairies, giants and so on.
These stories should be meant to teach.
The aim of this unit is to explain the various ways in which the teacher can effectively use story-telling method to achieve the stated objectives of his lesson.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (1) define story-telling.
(2) explain why we tell stories.
(3) state kinds of stories to tell.
(4) identify qualities of a good story.
(5) discuss methods of telling vernacular and English stories.
(6) enumerate merits and demerits of story-telling method.
19  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of Story-Telling A story is a description or account of things that have happened.
According to the BBC English Dictionary (Six Clair, 1992:1154), “a story is a description of imaginary people and events, which is written or told in order to entertain people.
Story telling is a way of narrating or describing a past event or an imaginary people.
3.2 Rationale for Telling Stories 1.
You tell stories to give the children enjoyment at pre-School.
2.
Stories train the children’s imagination.
3.
It gives children first hand information 4.
It trains their character and gives them sense of values.
5.
Stories broaden their knowledge of their own culture.
6.
Children’s oral expressions is developed through story telling by the children themselves.
(Esomonu, (2005) In many occasions, Story telling may not be used to teach all the subjects or develop objectives in all aspects of human behaviour therefore subjects like mathematics and Sciences at pre-school may not be taught effectively using this method.
Story telling is time consuming: the teacher may find it difficult to cover the syllabus in classroom teaching.
(Mills, (1979)) 3.3 Kinds of Stories to Tell You should tell the children Stories about animals, birds and actors, ethnic stories, religious stories, stories about giants and fairies, adventure stories and stories from other lands.
You should not tell weird stories that will frighten the children.
Stories with bad morals should be avoided.
Having learnt kinds of stories to tell, you can identify from what you have learnt from the previous lessons about qualities of a good story.
Thus, a good story should be dramatic and exciting.
It should be short not involving.
It should not have so many characters.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 List out the apparatus you will use in telling stories to a pre-school child.
20  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Apparatus teachers can employ while telling stories are a picture sequence like television, cinema, video cassettes, flannel board, puppets or models, blackboard picture chart and so on.
Note that when telling a story in English or in a language which is not the mother tongue of the children, a lot of visual aids and actions must be used by the teacher.
One picture is not enough.
3.4 Method of Telling a Vernacular Story Vernacular means the language spoken in a particular area or by a particular group especially one that is not the official or written language.
(Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary Wehmair, 2000).
For instance, Igbo Language, Yoruba Language, Hausa Language and English language to mention but a few.
Take the Following Steps (a) Rouse the pupils’ interest by introducing the characters and showing pictures and apparatus.
(b) Tell the Story through, using pictures, actions and apparatus to keep the pupils’ interest.
(c) Ask questions, the answers to which will reproduce the story.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Let the children make a picture of their favourite part of the story or dramatize the most exciting part of the story or children make models or puppets of the story or children retell the story in their own words.
3.5 Method of Telling an English Story The following steps should be adopted.
The teacher must take into account the vocabulary which the children have built up.
The language used by the teacher must suit the age and vocabulary of the class.
Many teaching aids, pictures and actions must be used by the teacher as the story proceeds.
The teacher’s tone of voice and expression must change to suit what is being said.
The pace of the teacher’s speech must be slow-much slower than for ordinary speech.
With pre-school children, there should be repetition, the teacher saying the same thing in several different ways.
Before starting an English story or part of it, the teacher picks out the new and difficult words which will be used and decides before hand how these words will be explained or illustrated.
(Sister Mary Jacinta et al, 1981) 21  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 4.0 CONCLUSION Stories are used to capture the interest of the pupils during instruction.
Stories well- designed should be meant to teach.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have defined story and story telling.
The learning outcomes were spelt out.
Rationale for telling stories were highlighted.
Kinds of stories to tell were enumerated.
Suggestions were made on steps to follow when telling a story in vernacular and English.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define story-telling.
2.
Identify 4 qualities of a good story.
3.
State 4 kinds of stories to tell.
4.
Discuss at least 4 ways of story telling method.
5.
Explain 3 rationale for telling stories.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esomonu N.P (2005).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education Methods.
Awka Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Mills, M.R (1979).
Teaching and Training.
A Handbook for Instructors.
Macmillan Press.
London.
Sister Mary Jacinta et al (1981).
Primary Methods Handbook.
London Hodder/Stoughton.
Sinclair, J.
(1992) Ed.
BBC English Dictionary.
London: Harpel- Collins Publishers.
Wehrrkia, (2000) Dictionary: London: Oxford University Press.
ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 Apparatus for telling stories to a pres-school child are: A picture sequence like television, Cinema, video cassettes, Flannel board, pictures, puppets or models, blackboard pictures and charts etc.
22  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Self Assessment Exercise 2 The title of the story is “Animal Kingdom” A picture of animals in their kingdom are drawn.
Duck Tortoise Snake Dog 23  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 5 PROJECT METHOD CONENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of the Project 3.2 Requirements for a Successful Project 3.3 How to use Project Method 3.4 Advantages of Project Method 3.5 Disadvantages of Project Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Much has been said about methods in the previous units and that the methods that a teacher uses determines the extent to which his pupils will understand his lessons.
The use of appropriate method of teaching has been discussed and this has generated a lot of argument among people.
However, most people have agreed that no particular method used by the teacher is recognized by everyone as the right and best method.
However, it has been suggested that after the teacher might have planned the instructional process, he should use a combination of a variety of suitable methods and activities as deemed appropriate in presenting his lesson.
Since, you deal with children of different ages, maturity level, interest, abilities, social and economic backgrounds, it is very important that you very your methods and be flexible in the way you present your lesson to sustain interest in the learner.
We shall discuss project method as an instructional method in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit you should be able to do the following: a. define Project.
b. explain how , you can use project method to teach.
c. discuss Project Method and its Limitations.
d. differentiate between Project Method and Story-telling.
e. identify the advantages of Project method.
24  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of the Project A project is the co-operative study of a real life situation by a class under the guidance of a teacher.
Project method is one of the most effective ways of arousing interest.
A method in which the pupil is responsible for the planning and organizing the work, he is expected to cover facts by himself.
This method can be used from pre-primary, primary to the most highly regarded level of education.
(Esomonu, 2005) The role of the teacher at pre-school level is to provide materials as the need arises and encourage the pupils by showing a lively interest in their work while the project is in progress.
This project could be in form of learning: how to draw a tree, an orange, a house or compose a nursery rhyme or song.
Composed songs or rhymes could be heard by parents during the price giving day celebration.
Objects drawn too could be displayed same day.
(Aina et al.
1982).
3.2 Requirement for a Successful Project A successful Project must be well planned by the teacher.
Children should know clearly what to do.
The project and each section of it, must fully engage the pupil’s lasting interest.
It must be worthwhile and have an educational value.
It must awaken curiosity and create a demand for new information.
It must present problems which the children have to solve by thinking hard.
3.3 How to use Project Method The pre-school teacher should start by guiding the pupils to choose a project area of concern.
You should avoid putting too much of your idea into the project.
You may give a lead on the theme and then allow pupils to carry on as a way of introduction.
You as the teacher is a guide and so must you make yourself available for consultation with the pupils and be able to offer them help.
You should always provide guidelines.
You should determine the objective of the project through the group work.
You should assign the project in part or in whole to groups.
You should agree on time.
(Ogunsanya, (1984) 25  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Self Assessment Exercise 1 Explain briefly how you can plan for a learning experience using project method.
3.4 Advantages of Project Method 1.
It captures the enthusiasms of many children, stimulates their initiatives and encourages the spirit of enquiry.
2.
Pupils learn to plan and co-operate with each other, which is social training, especially in responsibility and initiative.
3.
Pupils come into close contact with the problems of ‘Subjects’ in school, ei.
it makes learning real.
4.
Subject of the curriculum are seen to be connected with real life outside the school.
5.
It correlates many school subjects.
6.
It encourages qualities of leadership.
7.
It makes learning clear, provides a concrete objective so that pupils know at the end, if they have succeeded.
8.
It uses the talent and aptitudes of class members.
9.
It fosters the good teacher/pupils relationship.
(Sister Regina, (1981).
3.5 Disadvantages of Project Method 1.
Some subject of the curriculum will be neglected.
2.
It usually does not provide sufficient drill in basic tools and skills.
3.
It can be inefficient with regard to pupil’s time.
4.
The individual may be neglected by the emphasis on social activity.
5.
It is difficult for the teacher to assess the contribution of each individual to the findings of the group.
6.
It is very difficult to ensure systematic progress in school subjects by this method.
7.
There is no certainty that all the pupils will be interested, or that all of them will take a full share in the work.
(Dunhill, (1976).
Self Assessment Exercise 2 How does story –telling differ from project method?
26  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 4.0 CONCLUSION When we consider the advantages and disadvantages, we shall probably conclude that an occasional project is a good thing, but that it should be combined with periods of formal teaching.
There are several adaptations of this method.
Smaller topics can be dealt with in a shorter time.
The important point for teachers to note is that, this is a method which is valuable at times but not a method of continuous use.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed project method as an instructional method.
We carefully look at various objectives.
The concept of project was simply defined.
The role of the teacher were highlighted.
Things required for a good project were pinpointed.
How to use project method and various advantages derived from it, were discussed.
Activities and limitation of project method were enumerated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Explain how you can use project method to teach counting of numbers 1-20 to pre-school.
2.
What are the limitations of project method?
3.
What are the advantages of project method?
4.
Distinguish between project method and group method.
5.
Identify the similarities between project method and group method.
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Aina et al (1982), Social Studies.
A Book of Methodology; Ibadan Evans Brothers Nig, Ltd. Ogunsanya.
M. (1984), Introduction to Methodology of Social Studies; Ibadan: Evans Brother Limited.
Dunhill.
J.
(1976).
A Teacher Training Manual; London: Hodder and Stoughton Education.
Esomonu N. P (2005), Pre-Primary and Primary Education; Fundamentals and Operational Methods; Awka : MarPat.
Educational Research and publishers.
Sister Mary Regina et al (1981), Primary Methods Handbook; London: Hodder and Stoughton Education.
27  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
How to plan a learning experience using project method.
- Pupils should choose a project area of concern.
- Do not put too much of your own idea into the project.
- Give a lead and theme and then allow pupils to carry on as a way of introduction.
- Always provide guidelines.
- Assign the project in parts or whole.
- Agree on time Self Assessment Exercise 2 2.
Story-telling differs from project method in these ways: 1.
Story-telling method aims at using story to activate the objectives of the lesson.
2.
A project aims at producing a finished work such as, a book, an exhibition or display or some tangible conclusion.
3.
The project method, the pupils are allowed to carry out activities that are of interest to them.
4.
Children’s oral expression are developed through story-telling.
28  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods MODULE 2 Unit 1: Discussion Method Unit 2: Play Method Unit 3: Demonstration Method Unit 4: Montessori Method Unit 5: Activity Method UNIT 1 DISCUSSION METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1Concept of Discussion 3.2 Uses of Discussion Method 3.2.1 Discussion Procedure 3.3 Types of Discussion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor –Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You may not be surprised at the ever increasing number of innovations in methods of teaching and learning.
It is an attempt to cope with increase in the technological development in the world.
Participation and involvement of the learner is an essential part of any learning method but this can take a great variety of forms.
For example, there can be some participation in a teacher centered situation in which the pupils are encouraged to ask questions from which means their contributions will be small.
But there is a point that arise from modern educational theories that pupils themselves should decide what and how they want to learn.
In this unit, the discussion method will be presented.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1. explain discussion 2. discuss hints to effective use of discussion method.
3. list the merits and demerits of discussion method.
29  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of Discussion Discussion is a learning process which requires team work among learners.
The method is based on the principle that knowledge and ideas of many people have greater merit than that of a single person.
You can easily understand the technique of discussion since you involve yourself daily in one form of discussion or the other, either within or outside the school.
It seems that many teachers are not using this method, may be because the method requires a lot of preparation which majority find difficult.
For discussion to yield any satisfactory results, you must plan with care.
There must be reasons why you decide to use the discussion method.
However, you should not allow discussion to be dominated by bright pupils but see it as an opportunity to help those who are lacking in self confidence and cannot interact easily.
At the pre-school level, oral discussion method is the most viable.
It could be oral discussion of topics of interest.
This discussion could be stimulated by visits such as: (a) visits to the school garden, zoo, airport, railway station, amusement park.
Let children discuss all that they saw.
(b) nature work: take children out on a work round the school compound to observe fruits, trees, flowers, insects, birds and other animals.
Follow it up with discussion, reading stories aloud to children, oral composition of stories, showing children films, songs, rhymes, jingles, and chorus reading, introduction and demonstration of games.
For example, what is the time Mr. John?
This is Big “A,” little “a”, Bouncing “B” etc.
Some rhythmical activities to be used should be simple and understandable by the pre-school children.
Some of the popular once in Igbo are: (1) – Akpakolo kpakolo - Onye elane anya n’azu (2) – Kpukpunkpu Ogene - Ologholoo!
Loo (3) – Onye gagba egwu?
Iyaa - ga agba egwu Iya – Ifeoma ga agba egwu Iya - O bu ifere ne mee ya Iye - ga gba egwu Iya 30  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Discussion method can be used to teach reading.
The preliminary activities suggested for reading are description of concrete objects brought into the class room, followed by description of concrete objects outside the classroom and introduction to picture books of familiar objects.
It can also be used in teaching pre-writing.
For example, freehand writing, drawing, making of strokes, curves, zig-zig and English alphabets.
It can still be used in teaching pre-counting activities in mathematics.
For example, sorting, counting, recognition and writing of numbers 1to50, recognition and identification of colours and shapes, basic mathematical signs, simple ideas of fractions.
In other words, pre-science can as well be taught using discussion method.
Pre-science activities involving rudimentary concepts of phenomena of motion, equilibrium, sound, weights, colour, shapes.
All will be ideal for science teaching at pre-school levels.
(Kellough, 1978) Self Assessment Exercise 1 You have looked at discussion method briefly; from the experience gained so far, suggest ways you can teach different pre-primary school subjects using discussion method.
3.2 Uses of Discussion Method Sensory experience activities can be taught at pre-school using discussion.
For example, get children to fill things like rough, smooth, soft, and hard with eyes closed; smelling different things like orange, pineapple, tea, coffee, guava and so on.
Tasting things like salt, milk, mango, sugar, and lime.
The above sensory activities should be done with the children blindfolded or with eyes closed.
Discussion method can be used to teach moral instruction.
Here, you teach them about the birth of Christ.
You present a picture called Holy Family.
This picture contains Jesus Christ, His Mother Mary as well as His Father Joseph.
Present a picture of where he was born in Nazareth, Bethlehem in the land of Judea.
Tell them His good work.
For example, a good shepherd presents a picture where He was working with a flock of sheep.
Show a picture of Galilee in a wedding where He made water to be wine.
These stories will help to change their social behaviour.
Tell them the do’s and dont’s of the society.
For example, small children’s should not steal, tell lies, they should love their neighbour as themselves, they should not fight or kill.
This should help to mould their characters since they are seen as future leaders.
(Kissock, 1982) 31  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods According to Inyang-Abia (1990), discussion method can be used to teach social studies topics, the duty of the Father and Mother in the family.
3.2.1 Discussion Procedure The following would be considered as step by step procedure for classroom discussion.
1.
You can select and plan a discussion lesson with some selected pupils.
2.
You should give those you select to read and acquire certain knowledge for discussion.
3.
The discussion should be conducted in such a way that a chairman or leader starts the discussion and two principal speakers are allowed to give their opinions which should either agree or disagree with the topic.
4.
You should provide adequate teaching aids.
5.
Do not allow few pupils to dominate the discussion.
Encourage as many as possible to participate in discussion.
6.
Give positive reinforcement in the form of praises for good contributions.
3.3 Types of Discussion Discussion may take several forms depending on the objectives of instruction, class size and ability of the pupils.
For example, debates, round table discussion, small group discussion, symposium, and so on.
Discussion method has the following instructional advantages: 1.
Discussion helps learners to confined in themselves.
It develops in the learners inter-personal skills i.e, how to relate with one another as every learner is actively involve in the discussion.
2.
Pupils gain knowledge on their own through active involvement and participation in the lesson.
3.
It provides good practice for problem- solving.
It provides for divergent ideas which constitute basis for creativity.
32  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 4.
The method provides the teacher with information about the pupils which can help him in better understanding of pupils.
5.
It provides good skills for critical thinking.
It inculcates in the pupils imaginative skills and the creativity.
6.
Teaching by discussion leads to positive attitudinal change because a child may through meaningful discussion with fellow pupils find his/her own values and beliefs challenged.
(Kissock, 1982) Self Assessment Exercise 2 (a) Suggest the preliminary activities for teaching and learning of pre-writing, pre-reading and pre-counting.
(b) Discuss discussion method under the headings: (i) what it is; (ii) how to use it; (iii) its main advantages.
The following limitations are attributed to discussion method (1) It is time consuming.
(2) Little ground is covered in the scheme of work because of digression.
(3) In discussion, some pupils may never participate either because they lack the knowledge of background or the topic or are not offered the opportunity to do so.
(4) It is highly dependent upon intelligence and the communication ability to talk as well as language power.
4.0 CONCLUSION Having gone through all aspects of discussion method, we can say that this method is an interactive process involving a multiple-flow of communication between the teacher and his pupils and from one child to another.
Interaction centers around problems and questions with the teacher directing affairs towards the lesson objective(s).
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has tried to look at the various aspects of discussion from different directions.
It considered the objectives to be achieved at the end of the lesson.
The concept of discussion was explained .Ways one can use discussion to teach at the pre-school were highlighted.
Many activities were discussed.
The merits and demerits of this method were listed and explained.
33  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (1) Explain the term discussion.
(2) Discuss how we can use discussion method to teach pre- writing, pre-reading and pre-counting.
(3) What are the merits of the discussion method?
(4) What are the demerits of the discussion method?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Blackwood, P.E.
(1958): Teaching High School Science; A Book of Methods.
New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Carr, J.C. (1979).
Modern Methods in Secondary Education.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Kellough, R.D.
(1978) A Resource Guide for Secondary School teaching, Planning for Competence.
New York: Macmillian Publishing Co; Inc. Kissock, C. (1982).
A Guide to Questioning: Classroom Procedures for Teachers.
London: The Macmillian Press Ltd. Inyang- Abia (2004).
Methods of Teaching Social Studies.
In: Fundamentals of Elementary Education In: A.E.O: Esu (Ed.)
Calabar: Helimo Publishers.
Okorie, J.U.
(1979) Fundamentals of Teaching Practice.
Enugu: Fourth imensions.
ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 Ways you can teach two different pre-primary school subject using discussion method.
(a) Get children to fill things like rough, smooth, soft, hard with eyes closed.
(b) Get children to smell different like tea, coffee, guava.
(c) Get children to taste things like salt, milk, mango, pepper, sugar and lime.
34  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods (d) A moral instruction teach them about the birth of Christ.
Present the Holy Family Picture.
Present the picture of Nazareth.
Write His good works on the black board.
Read them out.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 1) Activity for pre-writing - Teach them how to make Zig zig Teach them how to make strokes Teach them how to count numbers using sticks 1-10: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) etc.
Teach them reading of small letters.
Eg a, b, c, d, e, f. Teach them reading of capital letters.
A, B.C, D, E, F, G, H. 2a.
Discussion method is a multiple-flow interactive process (b) It used by providing only discussable topics.
(c) get the pupils well informed about the topic in question.
(d) avoid dominating the discussion by doing most of the talking.
(e) clarify points where necessary (f) providing follow up activities where necessary to enhance the pupils learning (g) ensure sitting arrangement that will allow close interaction among the teachers and the pupils Advantages of Discussion Method (1) Pupils are actively involved during instruction.
(2) It helps learners to confide in themselves.
(3) It provides good practices for problems so long (4) It provides good skills for critical thinking.
(5) It leads to positive attitudinal change.
35  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 2 PLAY METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of Play 3.2 Evolution of Play Method 3.3 Examples of Pre-Number Experiences 3.4 Advantages of Play Method 3.5 Disadvantages of Play Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Teaching Methods have been so vaguely and elastically used that they now need to be articulated and given better meaning, better direction and practice through the teaching skills they subsume.
No best method has yet been found; so teachers still have to continue with the ones that have always been used with good results.
Every method has some advantages but cannot be useful or suitable for every lesson.
The lesson (topic), the age of the learners and materials available are among the factors which help the teachers to decide which method to use in preference to another.
In this unit, we shall look at play method.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying the unit, you should be able to: 1. explain the meaning of play and what it entails 2. explain the importance of play in a teaching/learning process.
3. list limitations of this method.
4. design activities that will match the pre-school children.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of Play According to Oxford Advanced Learner’s dictionary of English (Wehmeil, 2000), play means to do things with pleasure as children.
In other words, play is a way of enjoying yourself rather than work.
36  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.2 Evolution of Play Method The early proponents of play method Maria Montessori and Fredrick Froebel recognized that naturally children are playful and creative, rather than receptive.
Froebel was seen as the father of kindergarten which he believed is an essential step to education.
His educational philosophy emphasized play as the chief form of self-expression and the most natural and effective way of learning and development of abilities of children.
To him, plays even when under the leadership of adults, should not be devoid of freedom and independent actions from children.
Froebel developed play materials.
These gift items include spheres and other geometric forms like balls, cubes, cylinders, and blocks of different sizes and shapes, most of which are still in use in today’s pre-schools though in modified forms.
He said through handling of the different geometric shapes, children learn to observe, compare and distinguish objects based on form, size, colour, and weight.
He also used small table blocks which when put together formed a large cube.
Other activities involve arrangement of objects like tablets, sticks and rings.
They also practice drawing, colouring, modeling clays, folding paper and weaving mats.
Maria Montessori too contributed a lot in method of teaching that bears her name “Montessori method”.
Montessori began her educational work with deprived mentally difficult children.
She later tried teaching normal children and established the first Montessori school in the slums in 1907 for children age 3 to 6.
Montessori Method recognized that a child of 3, 4 or 5 has an intuitive aim of “self-development”.
Montessori classroom contains a lot of multi- sensory, manipulative and self correcting learning materials.
Montessori Method has the basic principle of self- motivation making use of didactic materials.
(Ofoefuna, (1998) Self Assessment Exercise 1 Having gone through evolution of play method, working in small groups, identify and discuss one leading philosopher that was not mentioned in this unit.
Each group should be ready to present their findings to the class.
Esomonu, (2005) maintains that playful situations keep the children alert, active and responsive.
Using this method in a pre-school, involves incorporating the various learning activities in a subject into play.
Pre-school pupils learn through play which has a definite purpose.
37  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods In play method, the teacher provides stimulating environment with interesting materials and equipment.
This requires enough space and safe environment.
The teacher’s carefulness in selecting materials is very important in laying foundations of morality, sociability and general knowledge in pupils.
Here, a teacher is expected to give the child the freedom to choose play items, play materials so that the idea of developing self-confidence through play is not hindered.
The teacher should provide stimulating environment with a different activity going on in each group.
Make sure all have some interesting apparatus to play with.
Toys and coloured books should be freely available.
Materials for sorting should be ready for the pupils.
Sorting shapes and colours, modeling, painting or drawing with crayons, looking at picture books, sand and clay are all activities which the pupils will enjoy.
If possible, there should be simple musical instruments which the pupils can use while learning a few easy songs.
The teacher should also have pictures ready for telling a few exciting stories.
These should be brightly coloured.
Children should be allowed to sit in social groups and change activities at short intervals.
Singing and story-telling at intervals should bring the class together as a unit.
Later, children should be introduced to the play ground and there should be frequent breaks to allow them freedom to run about out side.
Allow them to go to toilet.
(Igboabuchi, (1998) 3.3 Examples of Pre-Number Experiences Suggestions for Class Work Draw two large circles on the floor and space the children around where they can see both circles.
In fine weather, this can be taken outside, “All the girls are to stand in this circle and all the boys are to stand in that circle.
Now, we have a group of girls here and a group of boys here.
Stand outside the circles and we shall make some more groups.
Stand well back so you can all see.
Now, in this circle we shall put books and in that circle we shall put pencils mark the groups.
What is this group?
Peter?.
It is a group of pencils.
What is this group?
Ada?
It is a group of books.
38  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods ILLUSTRATIONA ILLUSTRATION B Source: Adopted from Margaret Grant (1978) Make other groups.
For instance; flowers, fruits, beads, slates, chalks, sticks, and rulers.
If you put all the objects on the floor before you begin, the children will enjoy finding what you ask for and putting the things into groups.
ILLUSTRATION C ILLUSTRATION D Source: Adopted from Margaret-Grant (1978).
It is possible to have a group which is empty and this should not be forgotten.
Now, let us make some new groups.
Here, we shall put all the flowers, and here all the coconuts.
We have some flowers in this group; we have no coconuts, so this group of coconuts is empty.
Pick up the flowers, Esther.
Pick up the coconuts, Ada.
You cannot pick up the coconuts.
Why?
Because we have no coconuts.
Correct.
That group is empty.
The children will enjoy playing these group games.
Later draw arches for three groups and then for four groups.
39  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Numbers and counting are not introduced yet.
You are giving the children concrete experience of grouping.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Design how you will tech pre-number experience using small groups.
Let us now look at pre-number experience using rhymes.
These simple rhymes are quickly learnt by the children.
They can be said or they can be sung to any suitable tune.
Whenever possible, the children should act them, but when this is not practical, they can count their fingers or some seeds while they say the rhyme.
These examples will give you a few ideas.
ILLUSTRATION A One little, two title, three little, four little, five little, African boys.
Six little, seven little, eight little, nine little, ten little, African boys.
As the children say the rhyme the teacher points to different children in turn, so that at the end of the rhyme, ten children are standing up.
ILLUSTRATION B One yam in the basket knack, knackity noo.
Two yams in the basket knack, knackity noo.
Three yams in the basket knack, knackity noo.
ILLUSTRATION C The old drummer beats his drum, one.
The old drummer beats his drum, one, two.
The old drummer beats his drum, one, two Three.
The children can beat the desk.
Some apparatus used for pre-number.
Activities are bottle tops, sticks and beads.
Breads can be used to prepare abacus.
For example.
40  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Source: Adopted from Margaret Grant (1978).
Cards can also be used to teach pre-numbers.
Arrange the dots differently for each card, thus making it necessary for the pupils to count.
3.4 Advantages of Play Method 1.
Through play, the child’s body develops and grows strong.
2.
Play bridges the gap between home and school.
3.
Play relieves the tedium of the school day.
4.
Play satisfies the pupil’s sense of curiosity and their desire to initiate.
5.
Play makes the pupils to develop manipulative skill like modeling and catching a ball.
6.
Dull children very often shine at play.
7.
The child’s early mental development takes place, his ability to understand, to speak and to think.
8.
Through play, the child develops socially; he learns to share and to get on with other children.
3.5 Disadvantages of Play Method.
1.
It is expensive because the teacher has to buy some materials for costumes.
2.
It is tedious and time consuming since you are handling little kids so you have to take your time.
3.
It demands some special skills from the teacher.
(Obi-Okoye, 1998).
4.0 CONCLUSION 41  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Play Method of teaching is a method where the teacher incorporates the various learning activities in a subject into play.
Through play, pupils learn.
Some form of play that can be used in teaching include number rhymes and songs, counting and sorting numbers and so on.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit looked at play method form different angles.
The objectives of the unit were stated.
The concept of play and the evolution of play were briefly discussed.
Various activities pre-school children will enjoy using play were enumerated with some pictorial illustrations.
The instructional advantages and limitations of play method were identified.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define play.
2.
Discuss the importance of play in a teaching-learning process.
3.
List and discuss 5 limitations of this method.
4.
Briefly design 2 activities that will be used in teaching the following topics to children at pre-school.
(a) Pre-counting (b) Pre-number.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esomonu N. P. (1998).
Principles and Methods of Teaching with elements of Microteaching; Awka: Marpat Publishers.
Esomonu N. P. (2005).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education: Fundamentals and Operational methods; Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Margaret Grant (1978) School Methods with younger children; A Handbook for Teachers in Africa; Evans Brother Limited (4) Ed.
Igboabuchi B.O and Eze, Dd.
(1998).
Pre-primary Education in Nigeria conference proceeding.
Onitsha; Lincel Publishers.
Obi-Okoye, A. F. (1998).
Strategies for Effective Teaching And Learning In The Pre-Primary Education.
The Primary of Language In Learning.
In B. O. Igboabuchi and Denco Eze.
(Eds) Pre-Primary Education in Nigeria; Conference proceedings Onitsha: Lincel publishers.
Ofoefuna, J.
D (1998).
Turning Pre-Primary School Children Into Science Through Play.
In B. O. Igboabuchi and Derico Eze (eds), 42  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Pre-Primary Education in Nigeria, Conference proceeding.
Onitsha; Lincel Publishers.
Wehmeia S. (2000).
Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary London: Oxford University Press.
ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
Leading Philosopher John Dewey emphasized practical education and child-centered education.
He introduced problem solving method which is also called Activity technology which placed emphasis on what a child can do.
Curriculum should be flexible to accommodate the individual differences in children.
Children should be allowed to work in groups- project method where by child learn by doing.
To practice his ideas about childhood education, he founded a laboratory school for children in 1896, and involved parents in the education of their children.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Teaching pre-number in small groups.
1-20 A B ` Pick pebbles from the pebbles provided and put them into the available circles drawn.
UNIT 3 DEMONSTRATION METHOD CONTENTS 43  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of Demonstration 3.2 Gestural Method 3.3 Hints for Effective Use of Demonstration Method 3.4 Disadvantages of Demonstration Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The effectiveness of teaching is measured and evaluated through the methods teachers use.
Methods are techniques or strategies the teacher employs to teach.
Demonstration is one of them.
To demonstrate means displaying something.
In science instruction, it is used.
For example you can demonstrate dissection of a toad or a rabbit in Biology class.
It typically involves illustrating a technique or performing an experiment which is either difficult, dangerous or expensive for pupils.
Demonstration can be done by the teacher or pupil either in groups or individually.
In this unit, you will learn some activities using demonstration method.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1. explain the meaning of demonstration .
2. identify the shortcomings of the demonstration method .
3. discuss various activities using demonstration method.. 4. suggest ways you can utilize the method.
5. answer some questions at the end of the lesson.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of Demonstration 44  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Self Assessment Exercise 1 Consider the meaning of the title of this unit ‘Demonstration method’ and briefly explain what you understand by it.
In considering the above activity, you may have looked up in a dictionary where various meanings of demonstration are given.
The remarks made in the introduction to this unit may also have helped.
Thus, you should have deduced that demonstration refers to display of objects equipments or materials for exhibition.
At the pre-school level, you can use demonstration with some restrictions.
It is a method used to show the child what to learn and how to learn the task.
What ever the teacher wants the pupils to do, he does it first.
This method can be used to teach physical education (Esomonu, 1998) for example.
Basic skills which are simple and firm fundamental to child’s play and daily living.
Others are movement experiences like walking, running, jumping, landing, skipping galloping and exploring the range of body movements such as growing as tall as a giants, stretching, twisting and turning exercise.
At the pre-school , the physical activities should be more of this activities requiring the use of large muscles.
The activities that involve complicated skills should not be introduced.
The reason is that the pupils have poor hand-eye or foot eye co-ordination.
This is because they have low reaction time.
Because of this, they should not be exposed to competitive activities involving the use of signals.
They need to explore through activities.
Children should not be exposed to advanced gymnastics, sports, skills, relay and physical fitness exercises.
(Esomonu, 2005).
Demonstration method can be used to teach English language at pre- school for example, it can be used to teach language skills when you want them to focus their attention on a topic eg.
Verbal communication.
“Look at this picture” “pay attention to this” “Take note of this.
It is very important.
3.2 Gestural Method “Pointing to indicate an object” “Turning the body in the direction of an objective “ “Nodding the head “ “smiling or prowring”.
“Raising the eyebrows” Verbal –Gestural.
(Teacher points to picture) “Look at that picture”.
(Teacher nods in direction from which the sound is to emerge)”.
“Pay attention closely to this”.
45  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods (Teacher taps on the chalkboard)”Take note of this, it is very important”.
(Cooper et al, 1982).
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Using one of your pre-classes (at any level) ask the pupils, perhaps working in pairs to sing 2 Nursery rhymes they like.
This activities should generate some useful bases for singing the rhymes .
1.
…Baba black…sheep Have you any wool…?
Yes Sir, yes Sir….. 2.
Papaw is a kind of fruit” yellow like lemon sweet like sugar every body likes papaw… paw … paw…”…… Demonstration method can also be used two teach hand-writing at pre-school.
The curriculum content of writing includes free hand writing, drawing, making of strokes, curves and z1g-zag, writing of English alphabets (capitals/small letters), writing of few letter words and so on.
The pupils are first introduced to pre-writing patterns.
A pre-primary school child of about 3 years will have poor muscle coordination and also poor coordination between the eye and the hand.
For these reasons, a fat crayon is often recommended instead of the common slim lead pencil.
The pupils can also choose colours to use under the assistance of the classroom teacher.
What then is writing?.
Writing is art.
The child naturally develops the ability to write if he or she in introduced to in a systematic way.
It is therefore wrong to hold the child’s hand and push it to draw.
(Clark, 1977)..
Examples of pre- writing activities are as follows.
a. Nursery 1 Nursery 2 1.
Freehand writing Joining of vertical horizontal strokes 2.
Writing of vertical and Writing of capital letters horizontal strokes A, B, C. Writing of capital letters D, E, F. 3.
Writing of slanting Writing of small letters 46  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods strokes e.g.
a-f Writing of small letters g-l. 4.
Writing of curved strokes Writing of capital letters M, N, O, P, Q, R, Writing of small letters s-w 5.
Writing of z1g-zag Wring of small letters x-z Demonstration method is best used in science.
At pre-school, elementary science can be taught in Nursery 3.
For example.
The teacher can collect life objects from the garden.
Living things can be identified in the school compound.
Insects round the school compound can as we be collected.
Insects that are man’s enemy eg grasshopper cricket.
Termite.
Insects that are man’s friend eg been, butterfly.
Names of fruits eg.
Mango.
Cashew, apple, orange, pawpaw.
Drawing and colouring of shapes, identification of colours and shapes.
3.3 Hints for Effective Use of Demonstration 1.
Gather and assemble in advance all necessary materials for the demonstration.
2.
Try out the demonstration in advance with an eye on time limitations.
The rationale is to ensure that all the materials are in order.
3.
Map out how and when visual aids will be used if required.
4.
Be audible enough especially in a large class.
5.
Pupils should repeat the demonstration.
6.
Demonstration should always be used in conjunction with other methods.
(Bajah, 1983).
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Discuss 3 pre-writing activities you will use to teach hand –writing to the Nursery l pupils.
3.4 Disadvantages of Demonstration Method 47  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods The assumption made that all the pupil see and hear equally well does not follow.
Visibility of details for what is being demonstrated is not assured in large classrooms.
It could deny the pupils opportunity of developing manipulative skill.
It may not give enough room for pupils to be conclusion come familiar with material in use.
4.0 CONCLUSION Demonstration is one of the oldest methods a teacher employs while teaching his pupils.
The importance of demonstration in a pre-school can be listed out: 1. it helps the pre-school child to learn fast because the method allows the child to observe and initiate immediately 2. it saves time and materials to be used 3. it permits pupils to observe activities life.
4. a lot of accidents and breakages are avoided.
5. it helps to motivate the pupil and gain their attention 5.0 SUMMARY.
In this unit, demonstration was defined.
Learning objectives were clearly stated.
Three activities were mapped out.
Several activities suitable for the pre-school children were enumerated.
Hints on effective use of demonstration were pinpointed.
Importance and limitation of demonstration methods were identified.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Explain briefly the concept of demonstration 2.
Identify in a nutshell some shortcomings of demonstration method.
3.
Discuss 5 activities involving demonstration to teach the pre- school children writing .
4.
Suggest ways you can utilize the method.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amaefuna, P.O (1988).
Proposed physical education programme for pre-school in B.O.
Igboabuchi and D. Eze (eds).
Pre-primary education in Nigeria, conference proceeding Onitsha: Lincel publishers.
48  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Bajah T.S (1983).
Teaching Integrated Science creatively.
Ibadan: University press.
Clark, L H (1977) Teaching in the Elementary school: Planning for Competence.
New York: Macmillan Publishers.
Cooper et al (1982).
Classroom Teaching skills.
Lexington Massachsetts: D.C. Health and company.
Esomonu P.N (1998).
Principles and methods of Teaching with elements of micro teaching.
Awka: Marpat publishers.
Esomonu N.P (2005) Pre-Primary and Primary Education: Fundamentals and Operational method Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Ndagi, J.O (1985).
Teaching in the primary school: A course for active Learning.
London: Longman group of company Ltd.
ANSWERS 1.
Answers to Self Assessment Exercise 1 are supplied on PP2 2.
Answers to Self Assessment Exercise 2 are supplied on PP.4 49  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 4 MONTESSORI METHOD CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of Montessori Methods 3.2 Basic Assumptions of the Montessori Method 3.3 Activities for Reading and Writing at Pre-School Using Montessori Method in Nursery 2 & 3 Respectively 3.4 Instructional Advantages of Montessori Method 3.5 Disadvantages of Montessori Method.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This method got its name from the originator Dr. Maria Montessori who worked with young slow learners, at the beginning of this century.
It is claimed that her method was so successful with the children that she became popular.
Since then, this method has continued to be used with high measures of success all over the world.
Although the Montessori method of teaching “beginning reading” is best used with individuals, it can also be successfully adapted for use with small groups.
In this unit, you will learn different activities using Montessori method.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to 1. define Montessori method.
2. mention various activities using Montessori method.
3. discuss both the instructional advantage and disadvantages.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of Montessori Methods Montessori method is a system of education and a philosophy of human development and learning.
In this method, Montessori believed that a child of three, four and five has one intuitive aim: “self-development”.
For this reason, a Montessori school or classroom is organized around a carefully prepared physical environment with child-size furnishing 50  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods and a variety of Multisensory , manipulative and self correcting learning materials.
The beautiful, durable materials Montessori developed serve three areas: practical life, sensory perception and academic development.
So the curriculum was encompassing as it took care of every aspect of life-like exercise, muscle development, nature study, work development of sense language, reading, writing, mathematics and discipline.
The teaching aids which she referred to as didactic material include dressing frames, movable alphabet letters command cards, rough and smooth boards, finger prints and clay.
Teaching processes always from simple to the more complex, from the concrete to the abstract.
Children involved in representative games like arranging and rearranging of sets of materials with freedom given for every child to find out what is of interest to him.
In this method, a specially trained teacher prepares the environment, observes carefully and subtly guides each child as he works with the materials at his own pace.
Within this frame work, the child not only discovers the joy of learning for its own sake but develops the self confidence and self-discipline needed to take his place in society.
Montessori method had a wide influence on education especially at the pre-school and elementary levels, but its basic principle of self- motivated learning is applicable at any age.
Since the late 1950s, private Montessori schools have increased greatly in Nigeria.
In addition, public school system has initiated Montessori elementary programme as magnet or alternative.
Present day educational practices implied by such terms as ungraded schools, open classroom, learning centre and programmed instruction stem in large part from Montessori’s concepts.
Montessori books on her methods were first published in English as “The Montessori method (1914)” and “The Advanced Montessori Method (1917)”.
Other related works of hers include “The Absorbent mind” and “The Discovery of the Child”, both published later in English in 1967.
Judith Delman, (1988)in Esomonu N.P (2005).
Self Assessment Exercise 1 a) Define he following terms b) Montessori method c) Multisensory d) Self-motivation e) Didactic method 51  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.2 Basic Assumptions of the Montessori Method: This method is based on the following beliefs: 1. that writing comes before reading 2. that preparatory movements which be come habits come before writing.
3. that if he can write, he can read, 4. that the child is reading the letter when he is learning to write it.
5. that in the process of writing, the child hears the sound of the letter and sees its shape and also writes the shape.
6. that when a child sees a letter and recognizes it, he is reading it, 7. that when he traces the shape of the letter he is writing.
8. that when both processes are done continuously, the child will achieve both writing and reading skills at the same time, 9. that preparation for reading is achieved through writing 10. that tracing fixes the mental mage of a letter with the auditory sound of the letter.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 What are 5 major assumptions of Montessori method?
3.3 Activities for Reading and Writing at Pre-School Using Montessori Method an Nursery 2 And 3 Respectively.
1.
The teacher should prepare cut-out consonant letters in blue with a hard material like wood or plastic.
Vowels in red, use hard material.
2.
Each child traces with the index finger the wooden letters over and other again without learning the names of the letters.
3.
Each child them traces these letters with the eyes closed.
4.
Tracing with sticks comes next.
This activity is in preparation for handling chalk, pencil or pen.
As the child traces, he/she makes the sound each letter represents.
b d f 5.
Matching letter cards with cut –out letters.
Note that Round- shaped letters are put together.
c o All letters with strokes are grouped together e.g.
l t f Make a box about 12 inches long.
Partition it and write a group of letters inside then; let children work in small groups using letter cards corresponding to the letters printed in the box.
Children can take turns in matching the letter e.g.
52  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods a ℮ О Ė Ü İ u a e c o e u i u 6.
The teacher and the pupils interact Teacher: Ada, give me the letter that stands for the /i/ sound.
7.
Teacher holds up a letter and says “what is this”.
The whole class responds with the letter sounds.
8.
Activity corners can be introduced like Jig-saw puzzle: children are give envelopes containing jig-saw words with picture clues e.g.
Ball Box Children put the puzzle cards together using picture as clue 9.
The whole class could play another game called Graphic Language.
Teacher writes a question on the chalk board.
Children read and answer in unison e.g Can you see me?
Children respond- ‘yes, yes’.
Teacher.
Do you like my dress?
Yes ,yes!
Teacher.
What is my name?.
‘Mrs.
Eze!’ etc.
Every question must be written on the chalk board .
(Reading Association of Nigeria.
Monograph series A learning.
To Read.
Heinemann, Educational Books Nig Ltd. Ade Ajayi and Bajah 1985).
3.4 Instructional Advantages of Montessori Method 1.
It is used as a supplement for a total reading programme.
2.
It is suitable for pupil of the same age and ability.
3.
It provides a lot of activities for the four language skills.
4.
It encourages each child to work at his own pace thus making him the master of his own learning.
3.5 Disadvantages of Montessori Method 1.
This method is considered to be expensive because a lot of materials will be bought.
53  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 2.
It is time –consuming because the teacher takes his time to direct his pupils on how to carry out the activities.
3.
It does not provide enough interaction amongst children.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit: you learnt that Montessori method is an approach for teaching initial Reading.
This method should be used in conjunction with other Beginning .Reading approaches in order to achieve the best results 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you’ve discussed the concept of Montessori method.
We’ve considered a brief history of Montessori.
The basic assumptions or Montessori method were discussed.
Various activities were identified.
Useful suggestions on how to use it were highlighted.
Instructional advantages and disadvantages of Montessori methods were pointed out.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe how you can teach reading in Nursery 2 using Montessori method.
2.
Describe 2 activities involving the Montessori method you can teach to the Nursery 3 pupils.
3.
What are 4 basic assumptions of Montessori method you have studied?
4.
What are the merits/demerits of this method?
5.
The Montessori method is the best approach for teaching reading at pre-school.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Delman, J.
(1988).
Montessori Maria: In the Encyclopedia Americana (vol.
19,PP 411-412 international edition).
Danbury: Grolier incorporated.
Esomonu, N. P. (2005).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education: Fundamentals And Operational Methods ;Awka: Marpat Publisher.
Bajah, S.T.
Ade Ajayi J.
(1985).
Early-Reading Approaches: In learning to Read; Reading Association of Nigeria monograph series A; Heinemann Educational Books Nigeria Limited.
54  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Umolu, J.J. and Oyetunde T. (1991) Assessment of Reading problems in Nigeria: A close format for 2nd language Readers: In Journal of special Education and Rehabilitation; 2 (1), PP 1-16.
Abe, E.A (1983).
Basic Problems in the Reading Abilities of Nigerian Secondary School students: In Nigeria Educational Review, 6 (1), 29-35.
UNIT 4 ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 Montessori Method a) It is a system of education and a philosophy of human development and learning.
In this method, Montessori believed that a child of three, four and five has one intuitive self- development.
b) Multisensory means employing teaching aids that appeal to all the sense organs of the body.
c) Self- motivation means how do you motivate yourself as a child.
d) Didactic method means teacher-centred method.
It is a one way flow of communication.
The teacher talks/chalks all the time e.g.
lecturer method.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 5 major assumptions of Montessori method.
 That writing comes before reading.
 That if one can write, he can read.
 That when he traces the shape of the letter, he is writing.
 That when a child sees a letter and recognizes it, he is reading it.
 That preparation for reading is achieved through writing 55  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 5 ACTIVITY METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Activity Method 3.2 Instructional Advantages of Activity Method 3.3 Disadvantages of Activity Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The teacher needs to make use of the fact that children are naturally active and need to plan activities for them to do.
There is a well known educational saying that children learn by doing.
Children learn through what they do and not what the teacher does.
Learning activities are the things we expect the children to do in the lesson.
The learning activity is a planned programme whereby children are kept busy all the time on one assignment or another.
Thus a child who completes his normal class work can continue with other topics.
The advantage of extra-curricular activities is that pupils can broaden their knowledge and follow a course of study without the threat of examinations; but the work is supervised and credit for it is normally given in children’s reports.
(Bello, 1981).
According to Adeyemo (1972), children learn a little by listening, a little more by watching but they as a rule learn most by actually doing the piece of work.
He maintain that by doing things, children learn both to do and to know better.
This method is the way that enables children to learn with the same vigour that marks their natural activity.
In this unit, we shall look into various activities of learning in the pre-school 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. define activity 2. identify some activities for the pre-school children 3. state procedures for effective use of it.
4. discuss their merits and demerits during instruction.
56  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.0 MAIN BODY Self Assessment Exercise 1 Why do teachers frequently give learning activities to their children?
Give reasons.
3.1 Activity Method Regina et al (1981) maintains that the purpose of using activity in teaching is to give the child an opportunity to grow and learn in his own way and to provide each child with suitable experience at the precise moment of his need.
Since a child learns best by doing and finds interest and enjoyment in activity, a child must be given every opportunity to discover, to explore, to fine out for himself by feeling, handling variety of objects.
Ndagi (1985) stated that a good teacher includes pupils activities as an important step in every lesson he prepares for his pre-school pupils.
For obvious reasons: 1.
Learn through doing is a golden rule in teaching.
The more senses a child uses in learning, the better he will understand and remember.
Pupil activity adds interest and enjoyment to a lesson and does away with passivity and boredom.
Pupil activity ensures that the lesson is child-centred with the children actively involved in their own learning.
Pupil activity reinforces and revises what is being taught.
Good teacher/pupil relationship is fostered.
Very often, it encourages initiative, creativity, discovery of new knowledge and curiosity.
Pupil activity develops or improves skill.
Very often, pupil apply the knowledge learned to new ends.
He suggested further that this method should be well planned and supervised by the teacher.
Create time for teacher-directed activities, group activities and individual activities.
This method can be used in teaching so many subjects like mathematics.
Some mathematical operations can be taught using this method.
For instance, /addition, division and multiplication and subtraction.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Described how you will teach basic mathematical signs using objects to Nursery 2.
In teaching addition, the sign addition will first be introduced like this (+) plus.
Examples of addition.
Use pre-numbered apparatus.
The 57  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods apparatus will require some reorganizing.
Children will use group of things which are alike.
A group of two buttons and a group of five buttons will be the same as a group of eight buttons.
3 + 5 = 8 A group of six leaves and a group of one leaf equals a group of seven leaves.
6 + 1 = 7 Teaching of subtraction .
Let them know the sign of subtraction (-) examples are: From a group of five triangle, take a group of two triangles.
A group of three triangles is left.
3 – 2 = 1 Three groups of two pencils is the same as a group of six.
This is multiplication sign (x) 3 x 2 = 6 Teaching of Division: Write the sign of division on the blackboard (÷ ).
How many groups of three can l make out of a group of nine.
Three groups of three.
9 ÷ 3 = 3 The first principle for selecting activities is that the children’s activities should help them successfully to achieve the objective.
For example., if you want them to learn about metres and centimeters, they should be measuring with sticks showing metres and centimetres.
If you want them to learn about football, they should be observing the players at field and so on.
The second principle is that the learning activities should be satisfying to the children as a positive experience.
This does 58  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods not mean that the children should only be playing, but the children should feel good about what they are doing.
If we like what we do, we work harder to do it well.
So also are the children we teach.
And thirdly, the learning activities have to do with readiness that is, should be within the children’s ability to understand and to perform.
All activities have to vary according to the age and ability of the pupils and lesson objectives.
Therefore, it is necessary for teachers to understand the children they teach.
Then, they can plan appropriate learning activities and expect that the children will learn and enjoy learning.
Activity can be used by the teacher in different ways.
The three main ones are: a) a skill such as reading, drawing, singing listening, etc.
b) to discover new knowledge through investigation, experience, exploring and so on.
c) to apply knowledge learned to useful ends such as the care of animals, farming, modeling etc.
Some teachers convert the whole activity lessons or series of lessons almost entirely as activity lesson, while peter, the activity is used only to support the teaching.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 As a teacher, what factors would you consider first, while selecting the learning activities of your pupils.
3.2 Instructional Advantages of Activity Method These are (a) it is a means of gaining practical experience (b) lessons learnt are real, practical, interesting and meaningful.
(c) it develops social living or awareness in a child.
(d) self-education is encouraged.
Healthy rivalry is stimulated.
(e) it frees the teacher from being termed a “talking teacher”.
(f) it develops learning spirit and co-operation, leading to a sense of responsibility.
(g) it develops self discipline and respects the individuality of a child which makes provision for him to progress according to his rate.
(h) more than any other method, it develops the aesthetic interest in a child.
(i) it discourages learning in isolation and it turns the classroom into a learning environment.
59  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.3 Disadvantages of Activity Method 1.
It is expensive to use.
2.
It is not the method for a lazy teacher 3.
It requires plenty of space 4.
It encroaches upon the leisure of the teacher.
5.
It cannot be carried out in a poorly equipped classroom with long desks and forms.
Self Assessment Exercise 4 What are the Advantages of Activity Method?
Differentiate Between Project Method and Activity Method.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied the concept of activity.
Some activities for the pre-school children were identified and discussed.
Hints for effective use of activity method were highlighted.
Activity method has shortcomings and importance, all these were equally treated.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have seen a list of ways of teaching some subjects at pre-school level using Activity method.
There are other strategies for making teaching effective.
Activity may be done in groups or individually in order to study an aspect of learning in depth.
A major principle of effective teaching is to guide a learner to discover factors whenever possible, instead of telling him what he can learn through experience.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1a.
What is project method?
b.
Discuss the advantages of Activity method.
c. List the disadvantages of Activity method.
d. Why do teachers see Activity method as “Learning by doing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Addeyemo P.O (1964) Principles and Practice of Education; Ado Ekiti: Molayo Standard Press and Company Nigeria Limited .
Bello, J.U (1981).
Basic Principles of Teaching; Ibadan: John Wiley and Sons Nigeria .
60  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Esomonu N.P.
(2005).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education: Fundamentals and Operational Methods; Awka: MarPat Educational Research and Publishers.
ESU, A.E.O (2003).
Fundament al of Elementary Education; Calabar : Helimo Associates.
Margaret Grants (1978).
School Methods With Younger Children A Hand Book for Teachers in Africa; London: Evans Brother Limited (4) Ed.
Maduabum M.A (1989) Teaching Integrated Science Effectively; Onitsha Space Matrix Publications.
Ltd. Ndagi J.O et al (1985).
Teaching in the Primary School: A Course For Active Learning; London: Longman Publishers.
Sister Mary Regina, et al (1981) Primary Methods Hand-Book; London: Odder/Stoughton.
ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
Teachers give learning activities to their children because it.
a) adds interest and enjoyment to a lesson.
b) it ensures that the lesson is child centred.
c) it reinforces and revises what is being taught.
d) It encourages creativity/discovery of new ideas.
f) It improves skills.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 One can teach basic mathematical signs in Nursery 2 in the following ways: introduce addition sign (+), Plus use abacus for pre-counting .
introduce sign of subtraction (-) introduce sign of multiplication ( x ) introduce sign of division (÷ ) Self Assessment Exercise 3 Factors to consider while selecting a learning activity.
Age/ability of one pupil.
Needs of the children.
61  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Availability of learning materials.
Conducive atmosphere.
Background experience of the learner.
Self Assessment Exercise 4 Answers to this activity is well written on page 6.
62  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods MODULE 3 Unit 1 Role Playing Method Unit 2 Phonic Method Unit 3 Selection of Teaching Method Unit 4 Teaching and Learning Environment UNIT 1 ROLE PLAYING METHOD CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of Role Playing 3.2 Role Playing Method 3.3 When to use Simulation 3.3.1 How to Plan for Simulation 3.3.2 How to use Simulation 3.4 Games for Teaching Mathematics 3.4.1 Teaching the Concept of Money Using Games 3.4.2 Games for Teaching Social Studies in Nursery 3 3.5 Social-Drama 3.6 Merits of Role Playing methods 3.7 Demerits of Role Playing Methods 3.8 Hints on Role Playing Methods 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 10, we discussed activity method of teaching various pre-school subjects.
Instructional advantages and limitations of this method were highlighted.
From our own conclusion, children learn more by carrying out the activities designed for them during instruction.
They are made to do things rather than to read about them.
The great intent of the method is to enable the pupils to be usefully /active throughout the whole lesson.
In this unit, you will look at role playing from different perspectives.
63  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit you should be able to: 1. define role playing 2. identify types of role playing method 3. state the essence of using role playing as a teaching method.
4. differentiate any of other methods from role playing.
5. suggest a game involving role playing that can be used for any subject.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of Role Play BBC English Dictionary Sinclair (1992) defines a role as one of the characters that an actor or singer plays in a film, play or opera.
In other words, role play is the act of imitating the character and behaviour of a type of person who is very different from yourself.
Role-play is usually used as a training exercise.
Role-playing is the act of imitating the character and behavious of a type of person who is very different from yourself, either deliberately, for example as a training exercise, or without knowing it.
Umoren, (2004) sees role playing method as a pupil centred approach that assists pupils to acquire the value, proper understanding, through demonstration of the concepts and attitudes which are embedded into the content.
Wilangs (1976).
Described role playing as an activity game in which players try to get in the other person’s shoes.
Players are expected to play the roles of others, having it in mind to show specific situations for study and discussion you can use role-playing to resolve conflicts, settle problems and teach certain emotional feelings that you find difficult to express or demonstrate.
You can also use it to make pupils appreciated that at times, the demand of a person’s role and situation around him can make people to behave in a certain way.
3.2Role-Playing Methods These include simulation and games, socio-drama and dramatization.
(a) Simulation and games Simulation implies imitation, coping, pretence or faking of a particular situation.
(b) A game may be defined as a form of play but guided by rules.
64  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Simulation/games as a method of teaching , is an operational model which tries to reproduce a process in real life situations or induce certain behaviour in an artificial situation.
The learners take part in the games or episodes trying to produce the picture as it is in real life situation.
The games are guided by a set of rules, goals and resources.
If you consider the age of the pupils in pre-school, you will agree with me that games should be n important teaching technique.
You can use games to teach so many subjects like English, Mathematic seven social studies.
Simulations are usually designed to reflect the existing or inherited problems of people the society.
You can use simulation to introduce a lesson, make up a lesson and summarize the lesson as well.
3.3 When to use Simulation You can use simulation when you desire that all your pupils should be fully involved in the experience you are studying.
When you want to clarify an important aspect of a life situation to the pupils when you want your pupils to develop abilities to weigh choices or decisions .
3.4 How to Plan for Simulation The teacher should first of all choose a problem or life situation you want to study.
You should gather all the materials required together and arrange for the space that will be needed.
You must think a head the number of pupils that will participate and the role of each of them.
You should assess its relevance to the unit under study.
You should as well explain the objectives of the simulation clearly to the participants.
Finally, you should then make the materials ready for use.
(Maduewesi, 1990).
3.5 How to Use Simulation The teacher should state the objective clearly and discuss them with the pupils.
You then make a simple model of game that shows the elements to be simulated.
You should share roles for each player.
You then set the rules, conditions and time unit.
You should give the pupils opportunity to criticize any aspect of the play and give their suggestions.
You should do a belief critical evaluation of simulation to determine the extent to which; 1.
It has met its objectives, 2.
It has been able to truly reflect the real world.
65  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
What are the advantages of simulations?
2.
What are the pitfalls of simulations?
Games can be used for teaching English in a pre-school.
For example, 1.
If you want to train the child’s eyes to notice different shapes, use picture dominoes.
Picture dominoes is a very old game and the children will enjoy watching them.
The dominoes are drawn on pieces of card measuring about 5cm by 10cm.
There are 8 pieces altogether and four children play, getting 2 pieces each.
Each child looks at his own cards, but he does not show them to anyone else.
The child with double two puts the kit out first.
The other children then take it in turn to match one of the groups on the desk.
The first child to match all his cards wins.
This prepares the child for noticing the difference between the shapes of words and letters later.
Source adopted from Margaret Grant (1978).
Another example, fitting shapes into a box.
The top of the box has various shapes cut out of it.
The child is given the pieces to fit into the correct spaces.
A cheap way of making this apparatus is with a calabash.
The shapes can be cut out fairly easily with a sharp knife illustration.
66  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Shapes Source: Adapted from Margaret Grant (1978) 3.4 Games for Teaching Mathematics There are so many games you can use to teach mathematics.
Any activity that can help the pupils to acquire skills in counting thinking g, concentration and interpersonal can be converted to games.
So also, the activities that teach the concept of unit money for example ludo and Oga games are important in knowing how to calculate, in mathematics.
Buying and selling games or activity teaches the concept of money and enter personal skills.
These activities must be carried out in the classroom.
3.4.1 Teaching the Concept of Money Using Games This should be introduced through a class shop or a class market-stall.
At first articles are introduced using the first standard coin , a real one if possible.
If cardboard coins are used show the children real coins and explain, I have not enough real money to spare, so I have made these cardboard coins.
You can all have one, and wee shall have an interesting lesson pretending to buy from the class shop.
Individual children will spend their money at the shop.
The teacher will draw the 67  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods articles on the blackboard and show the class how to write one kobo.
1k.
write the vernacular beside the article to give reading practice.
1k 1k 1k The children will copy from the blackboard.
After the first lesson, let the children shop in groups of three.
One child will be shop keeper and the other two will but from him.
The two shoppers will draw on their boards what they have bought.
The shop keeper will draw what he sells.
When they have finished, three more children will; have a turn of shopping.
Money cards can be used.
5k 5k 5k Coins drawn on cards.
Used stamps stuck on card.
3.4.2 Games For Teaching Social Studies In Nursery 3 River game can be used to teach river s in Nigeria.
The number of rivers you will use depend on the number of the participants.
You will begin the game by writing the names as the one on the spaces, giving 100% to each participant.
You make somebody to stand inside inner circle and call the name of one river and everyone runs out.
The person whose 68  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods river is called runs into the inner circle while the caller runs with every other person.
As soon as the person that is called gets inside the inner circle he shouts stop and all stop.
Then he moves forward to touch the nearest individual.
Niger River Illustration.
Benue Anambra River River Imo River River Mississipi Source: Adopted from PTTP (NTI) Module Self Assessment Exercise 2 Design a lesson for Nursery 3 pupils using games.
3.5 Social – Drama Social-drama is a group problem solving approached that assists pupils to investigate real life situations through spontaneous acting, followed by guided discussion.
Dramatization is the playing of roles that has been previously assigned and prepared for in advance.
Dramatization is not the same thing as social-drama which involves an element of spontaneity and unknown resolution and actions which show how the resolution was reached.
(Umoren 2004).
Dramatic play is done by very young children and requires no prompting from adults.
Take for example, the little boy zooming around saying ‘I’ m an aeroplane; the little girl being mother to her doll-children playing ‘shop or ‘school’.
Let us discuss the hints for dramatizing a vernacular story and English Story.
1.
Ask question the answers to which will reproduce the story being dramatized.
2.
The children decide where each place mention in the story will be located in the classroom.
69  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods They choose who will act the characters.
1.
Characters “dress up” or put on labels.
2.
The class tells the narrative part of the story the actors say the sentences in direct speech they act as they speak.
3.
If there is time other children get an opportunity to act away the costumes or puppets.
4.
Cards may be used with pictures of the characters drawn on them and hung around the children’s necks.
This is the simplest way and is quite effective.
Mr. House A Cup My Pawpaw Source: Adopted From Primary Methods Handbook (1981).
3.6 Merits of Role-Playing Method 1.
This method forges a link between theory and practice.
2.
Pupils verbal communication ability is well developed 3.
Pupils abilities are explored and strengthened 4.
This method gives room for the development of interest, attention, assimilation and retention of facts and information.
5.
It helps in the development of scientific attitudes and talents.
3.7 Demerits or Role-Playing Method 1.
It is time wasting as it requires a long planning, rehearsals and gathering of materials.
2.
Since it does not allow for the participation of every individual at the same time, it leads to the undermining of interest, confidence and capabilities of those not involved.
70  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.8 Hints in Role-Playing Methods 1.
In casting the roles, take cognizance of age and the ability level of the pupil 2.
The time limit for the play should be short.
3.
Tell the pupils of the rules and modes guiding the play so that the leavening may be interesting and meaningful to the learners.
4.
Devise a method of allowing different group of pupils to participate in the role play so that no one is left out.
5.
Avoid interruption during the process of the play.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that role playing method is an approach of teaching where the teacher narrates a story that has no end.
Children take different roles in one story and act.
They can act the role of a father or mother, brother, sister, cook and wife and so on.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the concept of role playing.
It looked at the concept of simulation, games, socio drama and dramatization.
Its instructional merits and demerits were stated.
Hints on how to use them were highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define the following terms (a) Role playing (b) Simulation (c) Games (d) Socio-drama (e) Dramatization.
2.
List four types of role –playing.
3.
State the essence of using role –playing as a teaching method.
4.
Differentiate any other method from role-playing.
5.
Explain how you can teach pre number in Nursery 3 using games.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Sinclair, J.
(1992) BBC English Dictionary.
A Dictionary for the world; London: Harper Collins Publishers.
Umorem G. (2004) Science Teaching in Primary School: In A.D.E.
Esu(ed) fundamentals of Elementary Education; Calabar Helimo Associates.
Maduewesi E. J (1990) General Methodology For Primary School; Onitsha: Africana Publishers Ltd. 71  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Margaret Grant (1978) School Methods With Younger Children: A Handbook for Teachers in Africa, Evans Brother limited (4)ed.. Mary R. et al (1981).
Primary Methods Handbooks; London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Wikigs E. (1976) Education is Practice; Ibadan: Evans Brothers Nigeria Ltd.
ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 The Advantages of Simulations Are: 1. it is designed to reflect the existing problems of people in the society.
2. it is used to introduce a lesson 3. it is used to make up a lesson 4. it is used to summarize the lesson as well.
Pitfalls of Simulation 1.
It is time consuming 2.
It is too expensive and tedious 3.
It is move of teacher centred than pupils centred.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 A lesson for Nursery 3 pupils using games (you are referred to page 5 & 6 of the unit) 72  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 2 PHONIC METHOD CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Concept of Phonics 3.2 The Teaching of Phonics 3.2.1 Prerequisites for Phonics Teaching 3.3 Activities for Visual Discrimination 3.4 Teaching Auditory Discrimination Skill 3.5 Teaching Consonant Letter Sound Relationship 3.6 Advantages and Disadvantages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The phonics approach has been in use for many years in developed countries not as a total reading programme but as an essential reading skill.
It is generally accepted that if children are to learn to read, they must first learn to associate printed letters with the speech sounds they represent.
In Nigeria, the few pre-school teachers who are familiar with the phonics approach have used it with some measure of success in getting children to read.
It is hoped that other teachers will also introduce “phonics” to their children with the help of the suggestions offered.
In this unit, you will learn about phonic method.
(RAN monograph 1985) 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit; you should be able to: a) explain the term “phonics” b) design activities using phonic-method.
c) explain the importance of phonics in reading programmes d) discuss the pitfalls of phonics method.
73  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concept of Phonics: Phonics means sounds made in speech.
Phonic method is a method of teaching people to read based on the sounds that letters represent.
(Oxford Advanced Learners dictionary 2000).
Some advocates of phonics, suggest that alphabets need not be taught before the introduction of phonics, while others say it is important that children learn the alphabets first.
From classroom experience here in Nigeria, it is advisable that children learn the alphabets first.
Some teachers introduce initial consonants because they claim that consonants have no variations in beginning positions.
The use of “key words” is common in phonics approach.
Key words are used to stress the learning of each basic letter sound e.g.
“aah” sound, represented the letter “A” is found in the key word “cat”.
Phonics approach could be taught in a “Synthetic” way i.e.
putting together each sound of the letters in a word to form a whole word e.g.
buh-eah-dee = bed or phonics can also be taught in an “analytic” way i.e.
introducing a whole word and then breaking it down phonetically into its parts e.g.
mat= mm-aah-tes.
(Bajah1985) 3.2 The Teaching of Phonics The teaching of phonics can be divided into parts namely:- Prerequisites for phonics teaching A) Teaching consonant letter sounds B) Teaching vowel letter-sounds 3.2.1 Prerequisites for Phonics Teaching Before entering school; children must have had many experiences in visual discrimination i.e.
noting differences in shapes, colours, sizes 3.3 Activities for Visual Discrimination i) Matching objects that are the same e.g table to table, chair to chair etc.
ii) Sorting – i.e., picking out things that are the same from a collection of things as directed by the teacher e.g.
putting all pencils in a box.
All girls sitting together etc.
iii) Noting missing parts of objects or pictures e.g.
A broken chair with only three legs.
74  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods iv) Naming letters.
This activity is closely related to reading.
Using flash cards each containing a letter, hold each card up high and call on a child or the whole class to name the letter e.g h b v) Matching letterforms – it is used in small groups.
b b e o d b f t r f f L vi) Tracing letter forms – introduce dotted lines on the blackboard and ask children to trace.
D d d d M m m m Tracing can be done with plastics or wooden letters vii) Discriminating word forms: Children are to circle the word that is the same as the bold word on the left.
Book Cake book mat 1st Stage Fish Frog bell fish 2nd Stage Man Men man mat 3rd Stage Source: Adapted from learning to read, Bajah et al (1985) 3.4Teaching Auditory Discrimination Skill Activities for auditory discrimination skill are: a) Listening to sounds around you; Let children close their eyes and listen for a minute or two let them open their eyes and say or describe all the sounds.
They have heard birds singing, cars driving past.
This activity can be done with the whole class or with small groups.
b) Listening to Recorded sounds: Record different sounds eg.
The sound of a running tap, telephone sound, sound of sneezing, brushing the teeth, coughing, a baby’s cry.
Play the tape for children to listen to and stress the importance of complete silence in this listening activity.
After each sound, pause for children to identify the sound before going on to the next sound.
c) Grouping pictures by initial sound – cut out pictures from magazines, old calendars etc.
paste each on a cardboard.
Present children with pictures and let each child select two of the pictures whose names begin the same way e.g ball and boat, house-horse, cap-can (Grant, 1978).
75  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.5 Teaching Consonant Letter Sound Relationship English alphabets are divided into 2, vowels and consonants.
In teaching phonics, the teacher need not introduce letters of the alphabets rather introduce the consonant first.
Consonants should be taught in the following order: initial consonant letter sound (2) initial consonant blends (bl,st,cl) Initial digraphs (ch, sh, wh, th) Final consonant, blends, diagraphs.
One easy way to introduce consonants in initial position is by using children’s names e.g Biddy, Bala, Bonbon, Benji etc.
Write the children’s names on the chalkboard.
Pronounce each name and let the children repeat.
Let children say what the names have in common.
Call the names again and ask children to identify their initial sounds.
Use scrap book to make dictionary eg Each child should have a drawing book which is used for scrap book.
On each page of the scrap book, write a consonant in both capital and small forms.
From old pictures magazines cut out pictures of objects whose names begin the sound represented by the consonant letter written on each page.
The pictures will then be pasted on the pages of the drawing book.
Gradually, a picture dictionary will be built up eg 5 Fan 4 five four Fish Source: Adapted from learning to read, Bajah (1985) 3.6 Instructional Advantages of Phonic Method In most African languages each symbol stands for one sound and once the child has learnt the sounds, he can help himself to read, as he sounds out the words.
76  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Disadvantages of Phonic Method 1.
The child may lose the meaning and sense of the sentence because he is so concerned with sounding the letters.
2.
He may manage to read quite difficult words after sometime, but perhaps will not be able to understand them.
These reasons will make reading rather puzzling to the child, especially the slow child, as he wonders what all these sounds are about.
(Grant, 1975) Self Assessment Exercise 1 Design activities to show how an English teacher can teach pre-reading to an infant class.
4.0 CONCLUSION Phonics method is used for teaching reading at pre-school levels.
Phonics means sounds made in speech.
Phonics can be used for teaching in 3 ways; a) Pre-requisites for phonics teaching.
b) Teaching consonant letter sounds c) Teaching vowel letter-sounds 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, emphasis was laid on the different activities one can employ to teach reading at pre-school level.
You considered the importance of phonics method as well as the pitfalls.
Pictures that suit all the activities were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define the following terms a) Phonics (b) Phonics method (c) Scrap book (d) Picture cards 2.
Design 2 pre-reading activities using phonics method 3.
List and explain the essence of phonics in pre-reading programme 4.
Briefly identify and discuss the pit-falls of phonics method 77  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Auterman, R.R.
C.(1971) Approaches to Beginning Reading.
New York: John Wiley and sons inc. Goldbecker Sheralysn S. (1975).
Reading: Instructional Approaches- Washington : D.C: National Education Association.
Grant M. (1975) School Methods With Younger Children.
A Handbook For Teachers in Africa; London: Evans Brothers Ltd. Bajah S.T.
and Ade –Ajayi J.
(1985) Learning To Read: In Approaches to Beginning Reading: Reading Association of Nigeria.
Monograph series A; London Heineman Educational Books (Nigeria) limited.
78  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 3 SELECTION OF TEACHING METHODS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Views of Learning Theories on Teaching Methods 3.2 Factors Affecting Choice of Teaching Methods 3.2.1 Age of the Pupils 3.2.2 The Nature of the Subject Matter/Topic 3.2.3 Size of the Class 3.2.4 Ability of the Teacher to Handle a Method 3.2.5 Availability of Resource Materials to the Teacher 3.2.6 Time Allotted 3.3 Application of These Principles to the School Curriculum 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION As already mentioned, different pupils require different methods of presentation if they are to grasp and retain what they are being taught.
Some are helped to fix it in their minds by being made to repeat it aloud, others understand best what they see practically demonstrated.
Also each subject has its own methodology and different ways of presentation.
The way you present English language to a set of pupils may not be the same with that of social studies.
There is no doubt whatsoever, those teachers who adopt good and well-researched methods of teaching, stimulate and motivate their pupils to learn.
It is for this reason that approaches for selecting methods for any teaching subject are discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: (1) discuss the relationship between learning theories and teaching methods.
(2) list and explain the principles underlying the choice of teaching methods.
(3) choose appropriate teaching methods for named subjects.
(4) answer other questions that come up.
79  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Views of Learning Theories on Teaching Methods.
Teaching methods are fundamentally derived from psychological and philosophical theories consequently these theories influence the choice of teaching.
There some traditional belief that whatever the teacher gives to the child must be swallowed.
The teacher in this situation is the best all and the end all.
Similar to the traditionalist is the idealists who believe that a child must be compelled through strict discipline to absorb the principles and standards of spiritual life.
The child is not an active participant but takes passive role in the process of education.
In learning, the pupils acquire the knowledge stored in books through the guidance of the teacher.
(Onwuka, 1981).
The perennialists believe that aims of education are constant regardless of time and culture.
They believe that the teacher should dish out knowledge and it is the duty of the child to learn unquestionably.
The teacher as the authority of the knowledge determines the amount of knowledge required by the child.
The amount has no say in what he learns and his interest and development are not considered.
The pragmatists are concerned with change and experimentation.
The child is to be educated to become a regenerating force of the society to remodel or refashion the society.
In other words, the child will bring positive change to the society.
The relationship between the teacher and the learner is that the learner carries out the leaning activities with the teacher ‘suggesting and not’ v ‘directing’.
To the realist, knowledge is derived from experience resulting from observation of nature.
It shows that the child is an active participant in knowledge; he discovers knowledge by himself through his empirical observation and reasoning.
The progressive emphasizes the important of the child as being the heart of education.
Since education is for the child and the child for education, the interest of the child must be considered in terms of aims, approaches and methods.
The role of the teacher according to them is that of a guide and co-coordinator.
(Onwuka, 1981).
The essentialists believe on the capacity of the teacher to impart knowledge.
It is the teacher who should select what to teach the child.
80  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods There is a belief that the method a teacher uses should also be guided by certain psychological principles.
For instance, Ivan Pavlov’s classical conditioning emphasizes the important of motivation and reinforcement in classroom teaching.
(Bruce et al 1990).
There is Jean Piaget’s Piaget’s intellectual development theory.
Piaget believes that whatever that is presented to the pupils must be within their intellectual capacity.
The teacher should study the characteristics of the various stages of intellectual development of a child.
The clear understanding of the characteristics tendencies of children of different ages will obviously help the teacher in selecting and presenting materials to the pupils.
Piaget believes that if we teach to far above the pupils, learning is not possible (Bruce and Weil, 1990).
3.2 Factors Affecting Choice of Teaching Methods Teaching involves various activities but there are many approaches to these activities.
The method a teacher employs in teaching depends on the subject matter, the pupils, the teacher and one environmental variables.
There are several factors you need to consider before you can chose the method(s) that will be suitable for a\effective teaching, some of which includes the following.
3.2.1 Age of the pupils You need to consider the age of the pupils, their previous knowledge on the topic and their general ability before you can choose any method.
The method you will use for a class of mixed ability will be different from the method you will use to teach pupils who are high achievers and homogeneous in ability.
There are characteristics and uniqueness associated with children of each age level.
The knowledge of these are important to enable the teacher select the appropriate materials for the pupils of a particular age.
(Banjo, 1954) 3.2.2 The Nature of the Subject Matter/Topic The nature of the topic to be taught should be considered in the choice of teaching method.
For example, small group discussion will not be used in teaching measurement of length.
Demonstration method is the most acceptable.
If you want to conduct an experiment in the laboratory, the teacher needs to demonstrate first for the pupils to master the topic.
3.2.3 Size of the Class Class size is one of the factors you should consider when selecting a method.
If the class size is large, some methods will be practically 81  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods impossible.
In other words, it will not be of any value if discussion methods or demonstration methods is used in a class considering of over 100 pupils, unless the class could be divided into small groups.
It is often said that there is no one methods of teaching that can suit all situations and circumstances.
Teachers should not be dogmatic in their choice of method.
A lesson can start with one methods and end with another as the need arises.
3.2.4 Ability of the Teacher to Handle a Method A teacher needs to be competent in a method before he/she can use it.
If you feel you know project method very well, use it instead of going in for another method you are not familiar with, irrespective of its limitations.
3.2.5.
Availability of Resource Materials to the Teacher The resources that are not the teacher’s disposal should be a guide in the choice of teaching methods.
Where there are no materials or equipments for the laboratory experiment, the effectiveness will not be there.
3.2.6.
Time Allotted You should take into consideration time the lesson will take place.
If a lesson is to take place at noon, it is advisable to select a method, which requires pupils’ participation.
If you select a method that makes the pupils sit passively, you should not expect to carry students along.
Finally, a good teacher should change his method as many times as the need arises.
It is possible for you to introduce a lesson with one method and then go on to change the method when the lesson is developed.
(Esomonu, 1998) Self Assessment Exercise 1 Give the characteristics of a good teaching method.
3.3 Application of These Principles to the School Curriculum.
Let us consider some subject using these guide lines.
Mathematics lesson on multiplication may require much oral practice and memorization of facts.
For example, 2x1 = 2, 2x2 = 4, 2x3 =6, 2x4 =8, 2x5 =10, 2x6 = 12 etc.
lessons on finding the sum of two numbers can be solved using small group work.
82  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods For example, 1+1 =2, 2+2 =4, 2+3 = 5, 2+4 = 6, 2+5 = 7, 2+6 =8, 2+7 =9, 2+8 = 10, 2+9 =11 etc.
In teaching science and mathematics, you can use the combination of the following methods.
Demonstration, discussion and individual methods, talk and chalk method.
It is possible to apply all these methods in one unit, they may therefore be spread over two or more periods depending on the mathematics topics that is being taught and the understanding shown by pupils.
Other schemes of teaching are possible and the teacher should be flexible in choosing a combination of methods.
In science too, several methods exist which science teachers employ to be his pupils.
(Adewale, 1985) Self Assessment Exercise 2 Suggest other methods that can be used in teaching mathematics.
In social studies, methods exist which a teacher can use.
But make sure, it reflects on the science of living together within an environment.
This is why importance is attached to doing, knowing and mastering the subject.
The under listed methods can be used in teaching social studies in pre-school.
There are as follows: inquiry method, discussion method, Activity method.
The inquiry methods can as well be split into sub-methods.
(1) Inquiry method: questioning method and project method.
(2) Discussion method: debate, small group discussion, panel discussion.
(3) Activity method: simulation, games, role-playing dramatization, story telling, play, etc.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Identify how you would use phonics method to teach hand writing in the pre-school.
Let us consider the teaching of English.
English language has been a medium, of exchange and communication of ideas, feelings and desires.
It is in the school that pupils with faulty speaking ability are encouraged and trained to speak or talk clearly and fluently.
In other to function effectively in the society, the child needs functional language which he may employ in either of two ways-orally in writing.
Various methods that can be used for different aspects of language.
For example: Phonics method, drama, writing Oral language exercise etc.
(Ogunsanya, 1984) 83  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 4.0 CONCLUSION The art of good teaching lies in creating good learning methods.
The selection of methods for teaching should be based on the age of the pupils, their previous knowledge and general ability, the topic under consideration, the level of knowledge of the teacher on the method, the period of the lesson, the size of the class and the material resources at the disposal of the teacher.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit; you have learnt factors that affect choice of teaching methods.
We looked at it from both psychological and philosophical perspectives.
Applications of these principles in teaching were discussed.
Various activities we designed from it.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS a) List and explain the principles underlying the choice of teaching methods.
b) Identify methods you will use to teach social studies at pre-school level.
(c) Discuss the pragmatists/essentialists view on teaching methods 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adewale, J.A (1985).
A Hand Book for primary school.
Teacher and Headmasters; Ibadan Evans Brothers ltd.
Banjo S.S. (1953).
A West African Teachers Handbook Ibadan Nigeria Publishers services ltd. Esomonu N.P (1998) Principles and methods of teaching with methodology Awka May Pat, Publishers.
Onwuka, U.
(1981) Curriculum development for African Onitsha: Africana FEP Publishers limited.
Ogunsanya, M. (1984).
Introduction to Methodology of Social Studies, Ibadan Evans Brothers Ltd. 84  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 The characteristics of a good teaching method.
- Consider the age of the pupils, their previous knowledge on the topic and their general ability before you can choose any method.
- Consider the objectives - Consider the ability of the teacher - Consider the teaching resources - Consider the time it will take to teach.
- Consider the size of the class - Consider the methods you can handle.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Methods that can be used in teaching mathematics are: Discovery methods, inquiry method, discussion method and questioning, demonstration method.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Tracing letter forms: Introduce dotted or broken lines using the chalkboard and ask children to trace anything with dotted or broken lines.
Indicate the right direction for tracing using arrows eg.
d d d d 85  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods UNIT 4 TEACHING AND LEARNING ENVIRONMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition of Terms 3.2 Forms of Teaching and Learning 3.2.1 Whole/Part Learning 3.2.2 Rote/Discovery Learning 3.3 Forms of Teaching 3.4 Components of the Teaching Learning Environment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION.
In this unit, we shall take a look at the totality of the situation under which teaching and learning take place.
We shall also look at the concepts of teaching, learning and environment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (1) explain the concept of teaching.
(2) explain the concept of learning.
(3) explain the concept of environment.
(4) explain the meaning of the “teaching/ learning environment”.
(5) list factors that could militate against the creation of a conducive teaching/-learning environment.
(6) identify the major components that make up the teaching/learning environment.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition of Terms Teaching has been defined in many ways by different authors.
Ogunmosunle, (1992) sees teaching as a process through which a teacher applies his knowledge of the learner, subject matter and methodology to help an individual learn.
Teaching is the use of educational knowledge, methods and space to educate whosoever desires to be educated.
86  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods In the past, it involves eye-to-eye contact between the teacher and the taught.
But with modern information and technological and communication media teaching can go on at a distance.
You have experienced this mode of teaching as a distance learner.
Though distance learning cannot apply to children of the early age computer mediate learning can also be used.
Onwuka (1985) sees teaching as a complex variety of mutual activities undertaken by the teacher and the learner in order to promote learning.
Nwachukwu (1986) views learning as a process of adapting to and improving the environment.
What is learned can be measured either by those things that we observe in the behavior of the individual or those that can be inferred.
There is continuity in learning.
Esomonu, (1998) defines it as a relatively permanent change in behavior as a result of experience or practice.
Learning can occur through conditioning, training, trial and error, insight and imitation.
Environment to a layman means a place or surrounding.
Teaching and learning environment comprises the entire surrounding and conditions under which teaching and learning take place.
These include the entire school premises, the classroom, the teacher, the pupils, the learning resources and how they are arranged; the teaching methods etc.
are they conducive?
Are they stimulating?
Do the prevailing conditions aid or hinder learning?
Self Assessment Exercise 1 What Is Teaching?
What Is Learning?
Having considered the concepts of teaching and learning let us now look at forms of teaching and learning.
3.2 Forms of Teaching and Learning.
Types of learning are: Simple/complex, Whole/part learning and, rote/ discovery.
Learning can be simple or complex.
It is simple because everyday experience teachers us that the younger a child is, the simpler the skills and ideas which we should expect him to master.
Simplicity in learning means that we should build the necessary foundation for more demanding learning tasks.
Adults also engage in simple learning.
If the 87  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods out come of learning is defined as the ability of the learner to recognize, remember or recall a given fact, then this is simple learning.
On the other hand, learning can take a complex from in such a case, the learner is required to build on previously acquired knowledge in performing subsequent task.
With practice, it is possible for some one to move from simple sentences to the construction of compound and complex ones.
(Halam, 1971) 3.2.1 Whole/Part learning Scholars believe that there is no way in which meaningful learning can take place except the learner takes the entire parts of a learning task into account.
In grammar, their position is that words should be learnt before sentence, sentences before paragraphs.
Take the study of poetry, the serving of a ball in the game of long tennis, or the memorization of a scientific law.
We can not take these activities in bits.
One cannot really draw a distinction between these methods.
The methods to be used depend on the person who uses it.
Breaking down of units may be very necessary for those are slows at learning.
3.2.2 Rote/Discovery Learning Rote learning is learning through memorization or regurgitation of facts into memory.
We use it when there is emphasis on recitation of facts as a way of indicating brightness; children learn poems and stories by heart as adults.
In contrast, there is the discovery method of learning the method encourages, the learner to look beyond the facts, endeavor to understand the relationship be between one idea and another.
The important consideration in discovery learning is that the learner ensures that each new information that is provided makes some meaning to him.
Discovery method advocate that instead of a learner, for instance, memorizing Newton’s law of gravity, he should be engaged in kinds of activities which would lead him into establishing such a law through observation.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 State 3 types of learning.
Mention out their characteristics and explain them.
88  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 3.3 Forms of Teaching We have carefully examined forms of learning in this unit.
Let us examine forms of teaching.
Teaching can take one of the two forms.
Team teaching approach is used when the subject matter to be learned by pupils can be looked at from several dimensions.
For instance, in a history lesson on the Nigeria civil war, there may be differences among teachers in terms of how they assess the roles played by leading figures.
The involvement of two or more people may lead to a more balanced presentation of what might have happened.
As the popular saying goes, “two good heads are better than one”.
Team-teaching adds colour to learning and arouses the interest of children.
In contrast, individual teaching involves a single person who takes care of a group of learners.
In other words, he is expected to be knowledgeable about philosophy, guidance and counseling, sociology of education, child psychology, curriculum planning, classroom management and arrangement.
In the classroom, the teacher has a significant influence on the child because he not only guides learning activities but also effects policies which have been formulated by those outside the class room whose duty it is to do so.
If the new system of education which is embodied, in the National Policy on Education Succeeds, teacher’s effectiveness contributed a grate deal to it.
(Goble/Porter, 1977) 3.4 Components of the Teaching/Learning Environments.
The components of the teaching/learning environments are listed below.
During your school days, you may recall that school compound has beautiful flowers planted, well painted classroom, good furniture, pictures/charts on the wall, learning equipment like measuring instruments, for time, length, temperature weight, a library, a science room, an arts room, availability of textbooks, writing materials, art and craft materials etc.
(Hill 1979) Having looked at the components of teaching learning, let us new consider the conduciveness of teaching/learning environment.
Conducive teaching/learning environment per se is an environment where the requisite teaching/learning materials and conditions are present and in which the pupils feel comfortable, interested and are enthusiastic to learn.
Children should not be bored of uninterested in what is being taught.
Children should be actively involved.
You should ensure that there is adequate ventilation and lighting.
You should ensure that the needs of the child are taken care of.
Make sure that the 89  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods classroom environment is altercative and stimulating.
For example, you can do this by having pictures, models, maps put up on the walls and corners.
Note that it is classroom atmosphere that will determines whether or not the children will be interested, enthusiastic and involves in learning.
(Dubey et al, 1985) Self Assessment Exercise 3 What constitutes the components of teaching and learning environment?.
Let us consider the factor that affects a conducive learning environments.
Factor that affects a conducive learning environments are: (1) the presence of an inexperienced teacher, uncommitted or an untrained.
(2) the presence of an uninspiring leadership in the school; (3) poor conditions of service for the teacher.
The inexperienced teacher knows, but needs to learn how to go about translating his knowledge into reality, the uncommitted teacher however knows, but is not interest in promoting the learning environment his lack of interest teaching could be as a results of lack of interest and personal problems like accommodation problems.
(Grant, 1975) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have seen that teaching/learning environment constitutes the totality of the human and material conditions under which teaching take place.
In addition, the teaching/learning environment could be conducive or unconducive for learning.
The teacher plays an important role in the creation of conducive environment.
Some of the factors that militate against the creation of conducive teaching/learning environment are (a) poor conditions of services for teacher (b) leadership style, (c) problem of unqualified teacher.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the following (a) the introduction of the unit topic (b) the instructional objectives (c) the concepts of teaching, learning and environment, and the teaching learning environment.
(d) identified factors that affect teaching/learning environment.
(e) Identified components of teaching/learning environment.
90  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (1) Define the following terms: (a) Teaching (b) Learning (c) Environment (d) Teaching/ learning environment (2) Teaching -learning- environment components that make up the teaching/learning environment?
(3) What are the factors that affect conducive teaching/learning environment?
7.0.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esomonu, N.P.
(1998) Principles and Methods of Teaching with Elements of Microteaching; Awka: MarPat Publisher Ltd. Dubey, O.E, Dubey, C. and Ndagi, J.O (1985).
Teaching In the Primary School; Lagos : Longman.
Globe.
N and Porter J.
(1977).
The changing Role of the Teacher; Paris: the UNESCO press.
Grant M (1975).
School Methods With Younger Children; A Handbook for Teacher in African; Evans Brother limited .
(4)ed.
Halam, K. R. (1971) Learning in the Primary School.
London: Unwin Educational Books.
Hill, L. A and Dobbyn, M (1979): A Teacher Training course; London : Cassell.
Onwuegbu, O.I.
(1979) Discover Teaching.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension: Publishers.
Company.
Limited.
Onwuka, U.
(1984).
Curriculum Development for Africa;.
Onitsha Africana- Rep. Publishers limited ANSWERS Self Assessment Exercise 1 Teaching is a process through which a teacher applies his knowledge of the learner, subject matter and methodology to help an individual learn.
Learning is a relatively permanent change in behavior as a result of experience.
91  EDU 248 Early Childhood Education Methods Self Assessment Exercise 2 Three types of learning are: simple and complex learning, whole and part learning, role and discovery learning.
(The explanation to these types of learning are vividly written on pages 3, 4, 5, Self Assessment Exercise 3 The components of teaching and learning environments are beautiful flowers planted, painted classroom, furniture, pictures/charts on the wall, learning resources/ equipments e.g.
written materials art materials, textbooks, library.
92
