NoneEDU 292 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Course Developers/Writers Dr. (Mrs.) Nwokocha, V.N School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Dr. Osuji, U.S.A School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. U. Okonkwo National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Dr. Osuji, U.S.A School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiEDU 292 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by: iiiEDU 292 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………………..….. 1 What You will Learn in this Course……………………………… 1 Course Aims …………………………………………………..….
2 Course Objectives ……………………………………………..… 2 Working through the Course …………………………………..… 2 Course Materials ……………………………………………...….. 3 Study Units …………………………………………………...….. 3 Assessment ……………………………………………….….…... 3 The Presentation Schedule …………………………………...….. 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………………………………..... 4 Final Examination and Grading………………………………….. 4 Course Marking Scheme ……………………………..………….. 4 Course overview ………………………………………………….. 4 How to Get the Most from This Course …………………………... 5 Summary.………………………………………………………….. 7 ivIntroduction A method is a way one adopts in doing something.
It is an approach which a teacher adopts to explain a subject matter to a group of pupils.
Methods set the guidelines for the pattern of behaviour which are expected from the pupils in a learning environment.
They are generally procedures for promoting learning and a good teacher uses it to increase the effectiveness of the teaching process.
Primary Education, according to the National Policy on Education is referred to as “the education given in institutions for children aged 6-11 plus”.
Since the rest of the education system is built upon it, the primary level is the key to the success or failure of the whole system.
The teachers in this level of education should be committed and should utilize various and appropriate methods of teaching appropriately in order to make learning process comprehensive, vivid and easy.
Children learn with ease with teachers who are kind, friendly, patient, helpful and allow plenty of activities but at the same time maintain order.
There are many methods of teaching available to the primary school teacher.
A teacher should exhaust each method that can be used to achieve the objective of the lesson depending on the degree of efficiency of the teacher.
They include: lecture method, project, demonstration activity method, assignment, games and role-play, questioning, story- telling and others.
Occasionally, one method becomes superior to another depending on the topic of the lesson.
No method is better than the other rather; the best method to be used at a particular time depends upon ever changing factors.
Some of these factors include the topic to be taught, period of the year, age and ability of the child, teaching aids, locality etc.
However, it should be noted that any method is worthy of use if only it will produce the desired result.
What You will Learn in this Course This course guide tells you briefly what to expect from reading this material.
The material you require and how you can successfully work through this course are discussed.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you may wish to spend in each unit of the course, your tutor marked assignment and the evaluation of the course.
Primary Education Method EDU 292 introduces you to the techniques that can be adopted to impart knowledge, skills, attitudes and values to the pupils.
Children need all round development (physical, mental, spiritual/moral, emotional and social enrichment).
Teaching methods here focus on those strategies or approaches that are attained to the natural tendencies of children to achieve the desired educational objectives.EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Course Aims The aim of this course is to provide you with an understanding and appreciation of various teaching methods employed at the primary school level in order to realize the primary school objectives as stated in the National Policy on Education.
More specifically, the course is aimed at explaining how you can apply these methods in teaching primary pupils so that they can gain interest in the subjects and learn with ease.
The course will also give you an appreciation of the care of children with their individual differences.
Course Objectives In addition to the above aims, this course has 15 units with specific objectives of each unit defined.
These are always included in the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to read them carefully before you start reading through the unit.
You may wish to refer to them as you read through the unit and/or at the end of the unit to ascertain the level of your progress, and to make sure that you have done what you are required to do in the unit.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: 1. define teaching methods 2. list and explain various teaching methods 3. identify the activity –oriented methods of teaching 4. discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each method 5. enumerate the guiding principles for effective utilization of each method 6. explain the importance of effective classroom communication in teaching/learning process 7. discuss how conducive environment enhances teaching and learning.
Working through the Course In order to complete this course successfully, you are required to read the study units, read the reference books and any other material provided by NOUN.
You are also required to spend lot of time to study the content of this material.
Do your Tutor-Marked Assignment and consult your facilitator where necessary.
iiEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Study Units There are fifteen study units in this course as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 Teaching Methods Unit 2 Lecture Methods Unit 3 Discussion Methods Unit 4 Project Methods Unit 5 Questioning Methods Module 2 Unit 1 Learning Environment Unit 2 Play-Way Methods Unit 3 Games and Role-Play Methods Unit 4 Discovery Methods Unit 5 Story Telling Methods Module 3 Unit 1 Communication Unit 2 Class and Group Teaching Methods Unit 3 Demonstration Methods Unit 4 Field Trip Methods Unit 5 Assignment and Activity Methods Course Materials You will be provided with the following materials: • Course Guide • Study Units In addition, you are required to consult the recorded textbooks and do your assignments.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
These are the Tutor-Marked Assignment and the final end of semester examination.
In attending to the assignments, you are required to draw from your knowledge and techniques gathered from the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment, in accordance with the deadline given to you.
iiiEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS The Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course material gives you the important dates for the completion of Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are to submit all your assignments by the dates stipulated.
You should guard against lagging behind in your work.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You are expected to submit six tutor-marked assignments on the whole.
The best four of these six will be used for your assessment.
The tutor- marked assignments will count for 40% of your total score in this course.
You are encouraged to submit the six TMAs.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your course material.
However, it is desirable that at this degree level in education, you should demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you broader view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the course.
Try to submit your assignments on time.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for this course will be of three hour duration.
It will have a value of 60% of the overall marks.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the types of self tests, activities and TMAs.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assignment Marks Assignment 1-15 Fifteen assignments, @5% each = 30% of course mark Final exam total 70% overall course mark 100% of course marks Course Overview An overview of the meaning, history and basic principles and methods in primary education, the relevance and problems of primary education in Nigeria, assessment of learning approaches as to subjects, age, and environment of children in primary schools, a detailed analysis of ivEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS method of teaching specific primary school subject, evaluation of programmes and students’ achievement.
This table brings together the units and the number of hours you should take to complete them and the assignment that follow them.
Unit Title of work Hours Assignment Course Guide Module 1 1 Teaching Methods 3 Assignment 1 2 Lecture Methods 3 Assignment 2 3 Discussion Methods 3 Assignment 3 4 Project Methods 3 Assignment 4 5 Questioning Methods 3 Assignment 5 Module 2 1 Learning Environment 3 Assignment 6 2 Play-way Methods 3 Assignment 7 3 Games and Role-play Methods 3 Assignment 8 4 Discovery Methods 3 Assignment 9 5 Story Telling Methods 3 Assignment 10 Module 3 1 Communication 3 Assignment 11 2 Class and Group Teaching Methods 3 Assignment 12 3 Demonstration Methods 3 Assignment 13 4 Field Trip Methods 3 Assignment 14 5 Assignment and Activity Methods 3 Assignment 15 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some readings to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other materials, when to undertake practical works.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the main matter of the units and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives allow you to know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives or not.
vEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS If you make a habit of doing this, you will greatly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
Self tests are interspersed throughout the units and answers are given at the end of each self test.
Working through these self tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignment and the examination .You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any problem, get in touch with your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help he will provide them.
1) Read this course Guide thoroughly.
2) Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the unit.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of semester is available from the NOUN.
You need to gather together all this information in one place such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever methods you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each Unit.
3) Once you have created your own study schedule do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason students fail is that they get behind in their course work.
If you get into difficulty with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4) Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and objectives for the units.
5) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the overview at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
6) Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit, you will be instructed to read sections form your set books or other articles.
Use the units to guide your reading.
7) Keep an eye and an ear on your television or radio sets.
Up-to- date course information will be continuously posted there.
viEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 8) Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the due date) keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and therefore will help you to pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of them consult your tutor.
10) When you are confident you have achieved a unit’s objective, you can then start on the next unit.
Try to space your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep up with your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments both on the Tutor-Marked Assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
Consult your tutors as soon as possible if you have any question or problem.
12) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit’s objectives listed at the beginning of each unit and the course objectives listed in this course guide.
Summary The course EDU 292 presents the teaching methods which are applicable to primary school level.
After you have completed this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of these teaching methods and how to apply them in primary school.
You will be in a position to answer these types of questions.
1.
What is teaching method?
2.
List and explain various teaching methods used by primary school teachers.
3.
Mention the activity oriented methods of teaching 4.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of the teaching methods mentioned in your course book?
5.
Mention some guiding principles of the effective utilization of these methods.
6.
What is communication?
Discuss the importance of classroom communication.
7.
Mention the components of conducive classroom environment.
viiEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS MAIN COURSE Course Code EDU 292 Course Title Primary Education Methods Course Developers/ Writers Dr. (Mrs.) Nwokocha, V.N School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Dr. Osuji, U.S.A School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Dr. Osuji, U.S.A School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA viiiEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by: CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 …………………………………………………... 1 ixEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Unit 1 Teaching Methods …………………………... 1 Unit 2 Lecture Methods……………………………… 9 Unit 3 Discussion Methods………………………….. 14 Unit 4 Project Methods……………………………… 20 Unit 5 Questioning Methods………………………… 25 Module 2…………………………………………………….
30 Unit 1 Learning Environment……………………….. 30 Unit 2 Play-Way Methods…………………………… 37 Unit 3 Games and Role-Play Methods……………….
42 Unit 4 Discovery Methods…………………………... 49 Unit 5 Story Telling Methods……………………….. 53 Module 3…………………………………………………… 58 Unit 1 Communication……………………………….
58 Unit 2 Class and Group Teaching Methods………….
65 Unit 3 Demonstration Methods……………………… 72 Unit 4 Field Trip Methods…………………………… 77 Unit 5 Assignment and Activity Methods…………... 83 xEDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS MODULE 1 Unit 1 Teaching Methods Unit 2 Lecture Methods Unit 3 Discussion Methods Unit 4 Project Methods Unit 5 Questioning Methods UNIT 1 TEACHING METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Teaching 3.2 Concept of Teaching Method 3.3 Principles for Proper Guidance in Choosing Teaching Method 3.4 Qualities of a Primary School Teacher 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION School children are different in abilities, with different home backgrounds and learning capabilities.
The selection of specific teaching method involves the consideration of several complex factors such as maturity level of pupils, the nature and content of subject matter, the time, the materials and equipment available as well as the background and personality of the teacher.
Selection and utilization of appropriate instructional methods and resources are very important in the teaching of pupils especially in primary school which is the bedrock of the higher levels of education.
The method and references selected must be those that would enhance effective teaching and learning.
The teacher must make use of the methods that will stimulate the senses of the pupils and facilitate their learning abilities.
Use of concrete objects or materials is necessary to internalize teaching and learning of various subjects.
It is however important to note that no method is the best.
The best results are obtained when there is a combination of a variety of methods.
1EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that by the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • define teaching • list the factors the teacher considers while teaching • suggest guiding principles for choosing appropriate teaching methods • identify some of the abilities that will make the teacher achieve his lesson effectively • explain two qualities of a good primary school teacher.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Teaching Teaching is a process by which certain conditions are arranged for the pupils consciously to develop their knowledge by experience, in the manner set down in the lesson objectives.
It is an activity in which the teacher and the pupils and materials come in close contact with one another for the purpose of learning.
Learning is an individual matter which is achieved by the learner himself at his own pace, and in accordance with his interest, values, competence, state of readiness and constant practice.
The teacher has great responsibility in organizing learning experiences in a logical manner that will facilitate learning.
He needs to acquire proficiency in presenting skills, questioning skills and interpersonal communication skills.
A good teacher must be able to communicate with the learners, that is, pass the message across to the pupils.
He spends time explaining concepts, talking to them, using all communication strategies (verbal and non verbal) with aids to get them understand what he is saying and doing.
Before the child can learn, the materials or experiences presented must be meaningful.
A learning task is meaningful when it is so arranged by the teacher as to assist the learner link one concept with another related concept.
A good primary school teacher imparts knowledge, creates, builds and facilitates learning in a friendly and cheerful manner.
Children learn more by imitation than they do by listening to lesson.
This implies that the teacher should feel well, think well and act well.
The teacher should possess good personality, perseverance, initiative, responsibility, self- control, sincerity, honour, loyalty, good leadership amongst others.
These qualities in the teacher determine children perception of the teacher and the way they learn.
Unnecessary reprimand of the child by the teacher could affect children’s learning.
The message here is that the teacher must like children, enjoy having them around whether neat or 2EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS dirty, quiet or noisy, happy or sad, bright or dull, and be happy in their company, (Igboabuchi 1992).
Besides having interest in the children, the teaching methods and resources the teacher uses must be those that would enhance effective teaching and learning.
Use of concrete objects and materials at this stage are necessary to internalize teaching and learning of various subjects.
Teaching involves adequate planning.
The teacher must recognize the age of the pupils, the environment they come from, and their individual differences.
The teacher must select adequate content that will be within the intellectual levels of the pupils.
The teacher has to expose the pupils to acquire knowledge and skills represented by the selected content.
The teacher does this by following some systematic approaches such as making them pick interest in the lesson (set induction) introducing them to the new lesson by making the topic clear to them; exposing them to the content of the lesson by giving series of activities which take cognizance of what the pupils know already (entry behaviour) and building on the previous knowledge to develop the new knowledge.
The lesson is finally evaluated by assessing the pupils to know whether the specific objectives have been achieved or not.
It should be noted that in the process of teaching, there should be adequate cordial relationship between the teacher and the pupils.
This is necessary because unhealthy relationship may lead to pupil’s alienation.
Empirically, many investigations of pupils’ likes and dislikes in their teachers have produced results showing that children like and learn better with teachers who are kind, friendly, cheerful, patient, helpful, fair, have a sense of humor, show understanding of children’s problem, allow plenty of pupils activity and at the same time maintain order (Evans 1962).
The teacher must therefore involve all the pupils in activities, poses relevant questions considering their class abilities, in short, the lesson should be child-centred where the children will do and talk more than the teacher whose role is to guide.
The teacher should also have a certain degree of mastery over what he teaches for effective production of sound pupils.
Such knowledge enhances his self-concept and ensures that pupils spend their time in school in a worthwhile manner.
Failure to do this may make the learners to look with disdain and contempt on the teacher.
Such disregard may be expressed in form of jeering and walk-outs, or even refusal to attend the lesson.
3.2 Concept of Teaching Method What is method?
Method refers to an approach, a way or a procedure employed by individual to do a particular thing.
In the learning situation, method may be regarded as a systematic procedure adopted by the 3EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS teacher to make teaching activities more result oriented (Esu and Ntukidan 2003).
It is a clearly defined approach for accomplishing desirable changes in human behaviour (Brunner 1966).
It is a way of doing something, a planned approach which a teacher adopts to explain a subject matter to a group of pupils.
Methods set the guidelines for the pattern of behaviour which the teacher expects from the pupils in a learning environment.
For a method to be effective, it must relate the teacher and the learner effectively to the subject matter.
Hence teaching can be regarded as a special form of procedure in imparting knowledge.
Every method of teaching has a common purpose which is to make lesson understandable to the pupils.
It involves providing suitable equipment, text books, good (physical, psychological, social) environments and the teacher serves as a guide.
A child must learn effectively under stimulating environment with the guidance of a committed and knowledgeable teacher.
A good method of teaching is the one that is result oriented.
The teacher, as the prime mover of the class, takes the decision of the suitable method to adopt for the lesson to be effective.
He has to take into consideration the following factors: ability and interest of the pupils, their experience, individual differences, family background (social and economical).
Apart from these, other factors come into play to determine the success of the lesson; they include specific lesson objectives, the facilities and resources available, personality and experience of the teacher (Maduabum 1992).
It is the duty of the teacher to find out different methods of teaching suitable for use in any classroom.
Any method the teacher chooses will definitely be influenced by the way the classes in the school are arranged, the school time-table and other factors.
Learning is an individual matter which is achieved by the learner himself at his own pace and in accordance with his own interest, values, competences; state of readiness and available opportunities for study.
The teacher has to consider these factors while planning his lesson.
The teacher should be critical and discriminatory in his choice of methods to accommodate both the slow and fast learners, extroverts and introverts and also considers the subject matter.
However, most scholars have established that no particular method used by the teacher is recognized as the best method; rather a competent teacher has to use a method or combination of teaching methods to achieve its objectives as the situation demands.
To be flexible in ones teaching approach is the best approach or the best posture to adopt.
Teacher’s choice of method requires in the light of what circumstances are appropriate or inappropriate to its use.
The teacher, after proper planning of the instructional process, should use a combination of a variety of suitable methods and activities in teaching the lesson.
Since he is dealing with 4EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS children of different ages, maturity level, social and economic background, abilities and interest, it is very necessary that he varies the teaching methods to suit every child.
What matters most in teaching and learning is whether there is any change in bahaviour as a result of the interaction of the pupils with learning experiences.
The teacher cannot boast of having done effective teaching when there is no positive change in the behaviour of the learner.
Learning is said to have taken place when there is modification on the existing behaviour patterns in a way that affects future performance or attitudes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Mention four factors the teacher should consider while teaching.
2.
What is teaching Method?
3.
When do we say that learning has taken place in pupils?
3.3 Principles for Proper Guidance in Choosing Teaching Methods Generally, teacher’s knowledge of the subject matter, class, abilities of the pupils amongst others will help the teacher to employ suitable techniques in his teaching.
However he has to be guided by the following principles: 1.
The teacher’s teaching method should take into consideration the age, ability, interest and attitude of the pupils.
2.
The method chosen must evoke and maintain the interest of the pupils.
3.
It must ensure that pupils see purpose in the lesson.
4.
The method must involve the pupils’ five senses – sight, hearing, touch, feeling and taste.
5.
The lesson method must pose a problem or challenge to the pupils.
6.
It must lead the child from known to unknown, simple to complex, real to abstract.
7.
The choice of method must serve the maximum thought, co- operation and activity of the pupil.
8.
It must be result oriented and the pupils should achieve the objectives stated.
9.
It must utilize the pupils’ instincts of play, imitation, curiosity and competition.
10.
The teacher should have good knowledge of the method chosen.
Apart from the teacher choosing the appropriate teaching method to make his lesson effective and realizable, the teacher should justify the 5EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS method(s) chosen by developing or equipping himself with certain abilities: 1.
The teacher should have the ability to effectively reinforce certain difficulties of the learners.
2.
The ability to ask different kinds of questions each of which requires different types of thinking processes from the pupils.
3.
The ability to diagnose the needs and learning difficulties of the learners.
4.
The ability to continue varying the learning situation in order to keep the learner involved.
5.
The ability to utilize various kinds of technological equipment or teaching materials.
6.
The ability to recognize when the pupils are paying attention and be able to use this information to vary behaviour and possibly the direction of the lesson.
7.
The ability to be friendly and kind because it has been pointed out that warmth and friendliness on the part of the teacher have demonstrable effect on the children’s learning.
8.
Ability to communicate effectively, because children find such teachers gratifying and feel intellectually secured and relatively more confident in their academic competence.
3.4 Qualities of a Good Primary School Teacher The teacher is one who has completed a professional curriculum in a teaching educational institution and whose training has been officially recognized by the award of an appropriate teaching certificate.
The teacher is a person who, because of his rich experience or educational background in a given field is able to contribute to the growth and development of people who come in contact with him.
(Good 1945).
His duty is to assist pupils to acquire desirable knowledge, skills, experiences, attitude, competences and values that will help them to live and function effectively in the society.
The image of the teacher is an important factor in the teaching and learning process especially at the primary level of education.
At this stage, which according to Piaget is the pre-operational stage, children learn by imitating the teacher or other adults.
He follows someone he likes and admires and imitates that person.
By implication, the teacher must be responsible, knowledgeable and exhibits good behaviours because the children imitate the teacher’s manners and behaviour.
The teacher is the audio-visual aid that appears in every lesson; his image as perceived by the pupils, becomes highly important as he is memorable because he is associated with some emotional experiences.
The pupils will like to remember that they have a warm hearted, kind, friendly, 6EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS honest, loving, fair, strict and proud teacher.
These attributes affect their learning habits positively.
Grant (1977) summarized the qualities of a good teacher as follows: 1.
The teacher should be a person worth copying.
2.
The teacher should be very interested in children, and should have endless patience with them.
3.
The children should know they can rely on him and can trust his words.
He should never make idle promises or threats.
4.
The teacher should guide the children in a friendly manner and they should never be afraid to come to him for help.
5.
The teacher must be interested in things which interest children and should listen with understanding to their views.
6.
The teacher should be enthusiastic and active in his work so that he can pass on his enthusiasm and interest to the children.
7.
The teacher should have knowledge of the needs of children and of the best ways of teaching children at different stages.
8.
The teacher should have the ability to explain things in a simple and imaginative manner.
9.
The teacher should be a person who is interested in increasing his own general knowledge and he should remember that a teacher will never know everything about teaching; he should therefore continue to try to improve his methods by reading, attending various vocation courses, seminars, workshops, etc.
10.
The teacher should be a happy and lively person whom the children and their parents can respect.
All these characteristics determine the image of a good teacher.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have explained in details the meaning of teaching as a means of imparting knowledge and experiences to the learner.
The teacher is the prime-mover and implementer of the curriculum.
The teacher should create, build and facilitate learning in a friendly and cheerful manner.
Provision of adequate teaching aids and the use of effective communication patterns are sine qua non for effective teaching and learning.
The primary school teacher should endeavour to plan and organize programmes of instructions to suit the age, ability, interest and background of the learners.
7EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the concept of teaching and teaching methods have been discussed, principles for choosing proper teaching methods for primary school classes highlighted while qualities of a competent primary school teacher are explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define teaching.
2.
Explain three qualities of a good primary school teacher.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Grant F. (1977).
In Sister Mary Regina et al (1981).
Primary Methods Handbook, London: Hodder and Stonghton Education.
Joseph F. C and Clark L.H (1977).
Teaching in the Elementary School: Planning for Competence.
Macmillan Publishing Co., Inch.
: USA.
Pivotal Teaching/Training Programme (PTTP) for Universal Basic Education (UBE) (2000).
National Teachers’ Institute, Kaduna.
8EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 2 LECTURE METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Lecture Method 3.2 Values of Lecture Method 3.3 Pitfalls of Lecture Method 3.4 Guidelines for Effective Utilization of Lecture Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we will look at the lecture method as one of the oldest methods used by classroom teachers to impart knowledge to pupils.
The main aim of this unit is to explain the meaning, merit and pitfalls in lecture method and also provide hints for effective utilization of this method.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define lecture method • outline the merits of lecture method • explain the pitfalls in lecture method • enumerate guidelines for effective utilization of lecture method.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Lecture Method This is a teacher-centered approach involving largely a one-way form of communication from teacher to pupils.
The teacher, as the authority figure, does most of the writing and talking (chalk and talk) with the pupils as mere passive recipients of information-listening and writing down a few notes and asking few or no questions.
Teaching by lectures is probably one of the oldest methods used by classroom teachers.
As a widely practiced method of teaching, a teacher can reach a large number of pupils at the same time; a large amount of materials can be covered in a short period of time.
The basic underlying assumptions of this type of 9EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS method are that the teacher has knowledge, or can acquire knowledge, and that the teacher can give knowledge to pupils.
The lecture method is considerably cheap to operate since no special teaching aids are required.
It requires minimal planning.
Its expository nature provides the teacher a feeling of security as the “authority figure” (Maduabum 1989).
No matter how easy this method may appear, teachers must make efforts, to plan and organize their lecture to cover the subject matter to be presented and the manner in which it will be presented.
In the introduction, the primary school teacher should identify the subject of the lecture and fit it with past lessons and try to stimulate interest on the subject matter.
The body of the lecture should be presented in a logical order, building from what the pupils already know towards new knowledge that the teacher wants them to absorb.
Knowledge is presented in small enough doses so that the pupils can absorb the material and at a slow enough pace.
The pace however should not be too slow that the pupils become bored.
Both the level of vocabulary used and the technical nature of the subject must correspond to the capability of the pupils.
The primary school teacher should consider the audience size while using lecture method, even though it is difficult to define the optimal size of audience for a lecture.
One teacher might lecture fifty pupils and still sustain their interest and attention.
Another might lecture 200 pupils and make each of them feel a personal and individual bond with the teacher (even though very tedious).
Probably, the minimum number of pupils for suitable audience is from fifteen to twenty.
The National Policy on Education (2004:22) specified teacher: pupil ratio to be.
1:40.
Lecture method is mainly used by universities and other institutions of higher learning as an acceptable means of imparting information.
However, at primary and secondary schools, where the pupils and students have not been trained to follow chains of reasoning, it should be sparingly used with a combination of other techniques like illustration, demonstration and adequate use of teaching aids.
10EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
For effective teaching/learning in primary school, state the teacher/pupil ratio according to National Policy on Education (2004).
2.
State the sequence in which a teacher should present his lesson in lecture method.
3.2 Merits of Lecture Method 1.
The primary advantage of a lecture is its ability to present a large number of facts in a short period of time but it is necessary that the pupils should accept and understand the subject matter to be presented.
Lecture method makes fewer demands on the teacher’s time for planning and preparing and is therefore an attractive and easy method of teaching.
It is very useful in conveying factual information when introducing new topic.
2.
It is relatively less expensive as no special apparatus is needed.
3.
Lecture method gives a teacher a sense of security by reliance upon the supposed authority of the dispenser of knowledge.
4.
Lecture method channels the thinking of all pupils in a given direction.
Large materials can be covered in a short time period.
5.
It is very economical to use.
3.3 Pitfalls of Lecture Method Lecture method is a very traditional method of teaching and, therefore has received a great deal of criticism at a time when educational methods and curriculum content are undergoing extensive reforms.
However, the following are some of the disadvantages of using lecture methods in primary school.
1.
Lecture method does not promote learning since it discourages pupils’ activities thus denying ample opportunity for assessment of progress.
2.
It encourages rote-learning and allows little scope for the pupils to develop an enquiry mind and critical thinking towards their learning.
3.
It does not provide the pupils opportunities to practice communication or manipulative skills.
11EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 4.
It is not suitable for slow-learners.
5.
Lecture method is not adequate in teaching certain types of concepts for example, attitudes and feeling which are not learned through pure telling.
6.
Due to its expository nature, it is very difficult to adapt to individual differences among pupils.
7.
It makes pupils to be passive listeners and this does not allow pupils to be actively involved in both the planning and development of learning.
Consequently the desired learning outcome may not be achieved.
3.4 Guidelines for Effective Utilization of Lecture Method In the primary school, the teacher should use adequate teaching aids, good illustration and demonstration while using lecture method to achieve his objectives.
In elementary school setting, a maximum time or duration of the lecture becomes very important.
The younger the child, the shorter is his interest span, and the more limited is his ability to retain points given in the lecture.
Adults usually can sit for an hour receiving lecture but younger elementary pupils can sit for only about twenty to forty minutes.
To make a lecture effective and achieve what other participatory methods like discussion, project, play way, role modeling methods etc can achieve, the following rules must be meticulously observed: 1.
The pupils must sit on comfortable chairs, facing away from windows to avoid light rays in their eyes.
2.
The teachers should keep distracting noise to a minimum.
This is because outside noise prevents the pupils from hearing the teacher and distracts their attention.
3.
The room should neither be too cool nor hot.
If the pupils are uncomfortable they will be irritated and will not be able to concentrate on what the teacher is saying.
4.
The teacher should avoid much movements because it attracts pupils’ attention.
He should ensure that every child sees and hears him from any angle.
If aids are being used, he must not get between the aids and the pupils or he will block visibility.
12EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 5.
Teachers should avoid coverage of too many concepts for this may tend to confuse the pupils, rather the lesson should be summarized to help pupils review and understand the major concepts and retention will be increased.
7.
Teachers must encourage pupils to ask questions and make comments, as this may reduce boredom.
8.
Finally, no single teaching method should be used.
To maximize learning therefore, a lecture should be followed by discussion, questioning, practice or some other methods.
Very rarely can a lecture, by itself, accomplish a teaching activity especially at the primary school level.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that the lecture method is a teacher dominated approach to learning which involves a one-way form of communication from teacher to pupils.
The teacher can reach large number of pupils thus denying the pupils the opportunities for self- evaluation.
This method promotes rote-learning and dampening pupils inquiry mind and critical thinking.
Teacher should therefore combine this method with other activities to realize stated objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the concept of lecture method, the merits and pitfalls.
Hints on the effective utilization of lecture method were also highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define lecture method of teaching.
2.
Mention any two merits of lecture method.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Maduabum, M. A.
(1989).
Teaching Integrated Science Effectively, Nigeria: Spacematrix Publications Ltd., Onitsha.
Olatunji S. O.
(2005).
Effective Teaching and Extension of Agriculture in the Tropics.
Nigeria: Zeropoint International Publishers, Kaduna.
13EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 3 DISCUSSION METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Discussion Method of Teaching 3.2 Procedures and Types of Discussions 3.3 Guidelines for Effective use of Discussion Method 3.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Discussion Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the lecture method of teaching, the teacher dominates the teaching by doing most of the talking and often asks questions to check whether the pupils understand what is being said.
In the discussion approach to teaching and learning the reverse is the case.
This involves the pupils talking over a subject from various points of view, with the teacher properly directing questions to elicit more information from the pupils.
In this unit, the discussion method will be discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain discussion method • describe types and procedures for discussion • list some advantages of discussion method • list some demerits of discussion method.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Discussion Method A competent primary school teacher needs to acquire proficiency in presentation skills, questioning skills and interpersonal communication skills (Umorem 2003).
Discussion method of teaching is one of the most widely used and most popular methods of teaching in the modern schools.
It is a learning process which requires team work among learners.
The method is based on the principles that knowledge and ideas of many people have greater merit than that of a single person.
14EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Discussion approach is a predominantly interactive process involving a multiple – flow of communication between the teacher and the pupils and from one pupil to another.
Interaction centers around problems and questions with the teacher directing affairs towards the lesson objectives.
The teacher is a facilitator who encourages the pupils to discover things for themselves.
Children learn through active participation and involvement in the lesson.
It provides opportunities to clarify one’s own values and make informed decisions about issues.
Being an interactive process, it aids the teacher toward a better understanding of his pupils.
The pupils on their own side gain knowledge and understanding as they see relationships among their learning experiences.
This development of generalizations has several names in education such as insight, inquiry and discovery learning.
One of the most desirable aspects of the discussion method is that it helps the pupils to develop logic through comparison with their peers.
By expressing concepts, asking for clarification and engaging in argumentation, their understanding becomes sharper and more accurate, this is the real value of discussion method.
It also promotes inquiry and provides good practice for problem – solving.
Discussion method teaches on two levels at the same time.
The first is the learning of subject matter, and the second is the development of a skill in the pupils to learn on their own without constant help from the teacher.
For discussion to yield any satisfactory results, it must be well planned.
The teacher should moderate the discussion effectively; he needs to know the techniques of argument.
Basically he should know what constitutes the major and minor premise and the conclusion.
The concern of the teacher is not to inform but to lead the pupils to discover knowledge themselves through stimulating and rewarding divergent and critical thinking among the pupils.
3.2 Procedures and Types of Discussion Discussion may take several forms depending on the objectives of the instruction, class – size and the ability of the pupils.
Types of discussion include: Small group discussion, round table discussion, panel discussion, debates, symposium etc.
3.3 Guidelines for Effective use of Discussion Method Some of the steps to adopt in discussion method are: 1.
Provide discussable topics to the pupils which presuppose some background information or knowledge by the pupils and within their intellectual ability.
15EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 2.
Inform the pupils about the topic in question including pre- discussion assignments so that they can be well prepared and make significant contributions.
3.
Well designed pre-determined questions to be asked to elicit more information on the topic.
4.
Arrangement of seats to be in circular or semi-circular formation that will allow close interaction amongst the teachers and pupils.
5.
Discussion should not be dominated by the teacher or brighter pupils rather it should provide equal opportunities for all pupils.
6.
The teacher should clarify points when the pupils wander away from the topic.
7.
There should be positive reinforcement in form of praises for reasonable contributions while at the same time, irrelevant comments should be tactfully rejected.
8.
Summary of important points to be drawn largely from the pupils’ correct contributions.
9.
Provision of adequate teaching aids is imperative.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Select a topic for discussion among your course mates at the study centre e.g.
“Is sex education necessary in primary school?” There is an over-riding need to learn about the opposite sex in relation to one’s own sex.
Sex education does not mean sexual intercourse only.
During the age of adolescence, children would like to know some sex characteristics.
Through curiosity, they would like to know also about some sex impulses.
Whether we tell them or not, they would know them by trial and error, which sometimes brings them bad experiences or consequences.
But why should we worry about sex at all?
We should worry because it is part of life.
It is about the only natural way of reproduction.
We cannot achieve much by preventing our youths from benefiting from sex education programmes.
16EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Types of Discussion Discussion method may be done in the following forms: (a) Debate Debate is a formal discussion of an issue in a classroom, at a public meeting or in a state or national assembly.
In a debate two or more speakers express opposing views and then there is often a vote on the issue.
For example, there had been much debate on the desirability or otherwise of sex education on the school curriculum or the issue of legalizing abortion in the National Assembly.
(b) Small Group Discussion This is a number of people that are together in the same place as in a classroom or outside the classroom.
For example, a number of students discussing the timetable for a semester examination in the classroom.
A number of students could also be revising towards an examination under a shady tree within the school compound.
(c) Round Table Discussion You are likely to have participated in a round table discussion either in the classroom or at a community meeting.
Within the school system, a round table discussion involves a healthy academic interaction between the teacher and the pupils; or between the pupils.
It is a pleasant confidence building experience among pupils.
(d) Symposium etc.
This is a meeting at which experts have discussions about a particular subject.
For example, the desirability or otherwise of corporal punishment in school or the desirability or otherwise of boarding school for primary pupils.
No matter the form it takes, the main objective is to ensure that it involves a healthy academic interaction between the teacher and the pupils and between pupils and pupils.
Pupils are given the opportunity to build confidence, gain knowledge and discover things by themselves.
3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Discussion Method Advantages Discussion in the classroom makes a teacher to be well prepared and to organize the classroom for best results.
It gives the pupils good opportunity to participate fully in the lesson and contribute their ideas.
By expressing their ideas about concepts, they are exposed to some 17EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS clarifications, engage in argumentation thereby gaining more knowledge and confidence.
Discussion method, being an interactive process, aids the teacher towards a better understanding of his pupils.
It can be used to promote inquiry mind and to provide good practice for problem–solving.
Socially, pupils develop the spirit of accepting peers’ ideas and views.
Hidden talents are discovered while creativity and initiative are promoted.
Disadvantages Discussion method is a predominantly interactive process involving a multiple flow of communication between pupils and pupils and pupils and teacher, therefore takes a considerable length of time.
Little ground is covered in the curriculum because of digressions.
Teaching aids, such as recording and video equipment are some times not available to enhance the discussion.
Again, some pupils may never participate either because they lack the knowledge of the background to the topic or they are not afforded the opportunity to do so.
Slow learners feel shy to contribute or be part of the exercise because the brighter pupils may dominate the discussion.
Since the discussion method is highly dependent upon intelligence and good communication skills, majority of the pupils may be cheated because they may shy away from the exercise.
4.0 CONCLUSION Having gone through all aspects of discussion method, it can be concluded that this method is a predominantly interactive process involving multiple-flow of communication between the teacher and the pupils and from one pupil to another.
It enhances effective teaching and learning because it allows the children opportunity of full participation in the lesson.
Interaction is centered around problems and questions with the class teacher directing affairs towards the lesson objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, attempt has been made to explain the meaning of discussion method, forms of discussion methods were highlighted, and procedures to achieve good discussion were pinpointed.
The merits and demerits of this method were also explained.
18EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain discussion method of teaching 2.
List and briefly explain two types of discussion method.
3.
Mention three steps or procedures to be taken in discussion 4.
Explain two demerits and merits of discussion method.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Joseph F.C and Clark, L.H (1977).
Teaching in Elementary School: Planning for Competence.
19EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 4 PROJECT METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Project Method 3.2 Values of Project Method 3.3 Pitfalls in Project Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Project method of teaching is one of the approaches of teaching which involves purposeful learning activity that is usually based on interest and undertaken by an individual or small group.
It is one of the most effective ways of arousing interest in pupils under the guidance of a teacher.
According to Adeyemo (1972) children learn a little by listening, a little more by watching but learn more by actually doing the piece of work.
This method exposes the pupils to real life situation by finding facts and meaning of concepts (gaining first hand information) by themselves.
In this unit, we are going to discuss project method as an instructional approach toward goal achievement in school.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to do the following: • define Project Method • explain various types of projects pupils in primary schools can embark on • distinguish the merits of project method of teaching • identify the limitations of project method • outline some guidelines for effective utilization of project method in teaching primary school children.
20EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Project According to Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (1999:926) “project means a piece of work that is organized carefully and designed to achieve a particular aim” It is an approach of teaching that involves a purposeful learning activity which is usually based on interest and can be undertaken by a pupil or group of pupils.
This method of teaching centers on assignment under thorough supervision of the teacher.
Pupils are given free hands to fulfill the requirement with the teacher giving guidance.
Although this method is not commonly used in the primary school as it ought to, however, it is thought to be mainly for higher schools.
Teachers should avail the pupils the opportunity of involving in little or small projects, it is a process of finding solution to problems or gaining new knowledge by doing.
It consists of pupils taking a task to be accomplished under the guidance of the teacher.
In this method, the teacher holds discussion with the pupils and gives advice and instruction on the procedures for accomplishing the task either individually or in groups.
Project has always been considered as the realm of independent study.
It requires an active learning effort on the part of the pupil.
The purpose of research is discovery which is both exciting and broadening.
It not only generates interest in subject matters but also develops ability in a child to grow in depth and maturity, to self directing, and self-sustaining.
Project method of teaching helps to reduce the clutches of dependency.
The learner is no longer a passive receiver of someone else’s knowledge, rather the learner is a generator of his own knowledge and an interpreter of that which the teacher has generated, his mind has wings, and he is not confined to the beaten path of a predetermined classroom experience (Rice and Rice 1977).
Project approach is a part of the pragmatic method of learning by doing and it is encouraged in primary schools.
The project method provides opportunities for pupils to carry out investigation on their own thereby providing greater understanding of how to learn.
A time unit is usually given within which the pupils are expected to complete the task.
The method enables the pupil take his own initiative and find out things for himself.
The pupil takes up the responsibility for which he can accept success or failure.
Project method provides a workable means for caring for individual differences.
Group work gives opportunities for socialization and development of leadership skills in the pupil.
Children acquire new skills and attitudes 21EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS and those with special abilities have the opportunities to fulfill themselves.
In the primary school setting, projects can be in form of handwork e.g.
basket making, knitting, planting of flowers, drawing of different shapes, collection of harmless reptiles and comparing their physical features, catching of insects and so on.
For a project to be successful, it must be well planned by the teacher.
The pupils should be well briefed on what to do or look for; it must be stimulating and arouses the pupils’ interest.
Pupils should be allowed to work on their own.
The project must awaken curiosity and create a demand for new information.
The teacher should ensure that the project is worthwhile and has educational values.
According to Ogunsanya, (1964) the primary school teacher should use this method effectively by proper guiding of the pupils to select a project area of concern and interest.
He should lead and provide guidelines by determining the objectives of the project.
He should avoid putting much idea on the people because it is an inquiry to discover new knowledge.
The pupils do most of the work while the teacher supervises.
They learn through an active effort on their part.
Emphasis is not on the teacher’s teaching but on the pupils’ learning.
The teacher is a facilitator who encourages his pupils to discover things for themselves.
Pupils gain knowledge and understanding as they see relationships among their learning experiences.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 As a primary school teacher, give reasons why you should use the project method approach in teaching primary pupils.
3.1 Merits of Project Method of Teaching 1.
Although project method can be used to introduce new learning, its best use is probably to reinforce what the teacher has already covered in the classroom.
It gives the child a chance to try what the teacher has told him, and this often makes the subject take on meaning or become real to him.
2.
It makes pupils have first hand experience.
3.
Pupils learn to plan and co-operate since it involves group work which is social training especially in responsibility and initiative.
4.
Children also learn to endure and tolerate one another.
5.
Motivation to work is high since it is based on natural interest and ability of the pupil.
It promotes creativity in pupils.
Regina (1981) highlighted the following as advantages of project methods of teaching primary school children: 22EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS (a) It fosters good teacher/pupils relationship (b) It encourages good leadership in children (c) It captures the enthusiasm of many pupils, stimulates their initiatives and encourages the spirit of enquiry.
(d) It makes learning clear, provides a concrete objective that will help the pupils assess when they have succeeded or otherwise.
(e) It unfolds the talents and aptitudes of the pupils.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Teacher asks primary four pupils to use individual cans to plant maize and keep record for one month.
3.2 Limitations of Project Method 1.
One major criticism about the project method is that it is time consuming for both teacher and the pupils.
2.
The pupils often get sidetracked especially when they lack a deep grasp of facts necessary to carry out the task or when the teacher is not friendly and accessible or when the task is above their intelligence.
This may lead to frustration.
3.
Teachers on their own part may be strained because of the advice and guidelines they have to offer to the pupils especially when the class size is large.
4.
The project method of teacher favours the independent pupil more, pupils without independent study skills often suffer.
5.
In project method of teaching, there is no certainty that all the pupils will be interested, or that all of them will take a full share in the task.
6.
It may affect the teaching of other subjects since the topic that could have been summarily discussed in a lesson is assigned to individuals or groups who take some time to accomplish the task by themselves.
4.0 CONCLUSION Project method of teaching is an effective approach of teaching which exposes the pupils to tasks that will enable them discover new knowledge under the guidance of the teacher.
It involves active participation of pupils in tasks assigned to them.
It is a process of learning by doing, which makes for retention of learning and helps pupils to have the first experience of knowledge.
Though, project method encourages leadership training and co-operation amongst pupils and teachers, but it should not be over used since it consumes much time and encroaches on other subjects.
23EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have defined the project as a purposeful learning activity which is based on the interest of the learner.
It gives the learner opportunity to discover new knowledge by himself.
The values and pitfalls of this method were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the project method of teaching.
2.
Name four projects pupils in primary four can embark on.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Maduabum, A. M. (1992).
Teaching Biology Effectively.
Owerri Nigeria: Whyte and Whyte Publishers.
Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary Hornby, A. S. (1999).
Oxford University Press.
Rice, J.G.
and Rice G.H.
(1977).
Teaching in the Elementary School: Planning for Competence.
Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.: New York.
24EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 5 QUESTIONING METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Questioning or Socratic Method of Teaching 3.2 Types of Questions 3.3 Characteristics of Good Questions 3.4 Importance of Questioning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Questioning is one of the methods used by teachers to assist pupils attain certain educational objectives.
Questions are statements for which a reply is expected (Maduabum 1989).
They constitute an important tool of teaching and when used by experienced and skillful teacher, serve numerous useful purposes.
One valuable use of the questioning method is to motivate a reluctant pupil, make him/her a more active participant in classroom activity and less passive in his/her learning effort.
It is used to evaluate the lesson.
Used correctly by a competent teacher, the questioning method of instruction is a very useful educational tool, but if used incorrectly, it is potentially the most dangerous of all methods for possible damage to the pupil.
It is expected therefore that a teacher should use it very carefully to achieve his lesson’s objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that at the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • explain the concept of questioning as an instructional tool • mention some purposes of questions • name the types of questions • differentiate between higher order and lower order questions • outline the guidelines for effective construction of good questions.
25EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Questioning as an Instructional Tool Socrates, a great philosopher was associated with this method of teaching in which he posed series of questions to elicit information from his pupils.
Questions make pupils to discover facts through critical thinking.
Questioning is one of the teaching approaches used by teachers to help pupils achieve the desired educational objectives.
It is a series of words which are usually understood by the listener and gear him into thinking in order to make a reasonable response (Agusiobo, 1981).
It is an inevitable strategy in teaching and learning because it serves several purposes.
It is used to establish what the pupils know and also gives the teacher feedback on how well he is accomplishing his teaching objectives, how well the pupils understand the subject matters and what they remember of the facts involved.
Questioning method also establishes a level of present knowledge so that instruction can be planned to take the class forward.
It serves as an extrinsic motivating device for the pupil, offering reward to those who learn, and punishment to those who fail to learn.
It poses a threat to pupils who must prove that they know certain things.
Some pupils find this situation very unpleasant, even when they give correct answer.
Although the teacher praises a correct answer, the reward gained from praise does not match the sense of ridicule or shame the pupil feels when he fails the answer.
Teachers are therefore advised to pose questions that are commensurate with the child’s age and ability.
3.2 Types of Questions Teachers should think critically about the questions they pose to pupils.
Bloom and others (1956) have divided intellectual skills into six categories.
This taxonomy classifies intellectual skills as knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
Most teachers focus their questions at the memory level (knowledge, comprehension and application) with little attention given to higher intellectual skills-analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
Sanders (1966) suggests that teachers use at least one third of their class time asking questions that are above the memory level.
Questions are generally divided into two main types: a) The lower order cognitive questions which involve recall, comprehension and application.
The lower order questions are factual questions which involve recalling of facts or concepts e.g.
26EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS b) The higher order questions which border on analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
Knowledge a) What is your name?
b) Name the organs in your body.
Comprehension b) What are the differences between your father and your mother?
c) State the differences between night and day.
Application a) What do you think will happen if you fight your fellow pupils?
b) Find out the type of work your mother does in the house.
Higher Order Cognitive Questions These types of questions are thought provoking or reasoning questions.
To develop pupils’ critical thinking abilities, teachers should endeavour to challenge them with these types of questions which go beyond mere recall.
Divergent and Convergent Questions Divergent questions are reflective questions.
Such questions encourage pupils to think reflectively, and more importantly, to think of several correct solutions to a given question.
While Convergent questions demand specific correct responses that are just correct in each instance.
Analysis b) What things do boys and girls have in common?
c) What are the effects of overfeeding in little children?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Differentiate between higher order questions and lower order questions.
27EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.3 The Characteristics of Good Questions 1.
Good questions should be concise and clear to suit the age and abilities of the pupils.
2.
It should be specific and not vague or general.
3.
Good question should not start with who can tell me?
Does anybody know…?
Do you understand…?
Such questions lead to chorus answers.
4.
Question is to be asked before designating a pupil to answer it.
Otherwise, all pupils except the one who is called to answer will relax and will not formulate any response for themselves.
5.
Good questions should be distributed evenly to all corners of the classroom to both the slow learner and brighter ones.
6.
Good question will not be confined to memory or recall form only, rather higher order questions should be considered also.
7.
Good question should follow interrogative form e.g.
who, which, what, Why, where, when, how.
8.
Good questions allow time for a response.
A teacher should pause after asking a question and allows the pupils time to think, and organize themselves for responses.
This is known as “waiting-time” or “thinking-time” 9.
Too many questions should not be asked at a time.
When a teacher asks many questions from the pupils at a rapid pace, it is the teacher that is doing the classroom work.
Questions should be short or brief.
10.Good question should be rewarded by either verbal or non verbal responses e.g.
‘good’, fine, excellent or facial expressions such as smiling or nodding.
The teacher should not harass or penalize a pupil who gives wrong answer, or humiliates the pupil with harsh words.
Pupils are emotionally vulnerable naturally; the teacher can strengthen his self-confidence by words of encouragements instead of ridiculing him.
3.4 Importance of Questioning 1.
Questioning develops process of thinking, guiding, inquiry and decision making in children.
2.
It is used to arouse pupils’ interest and gain attention at the beginning of the lesson.
3.
It provides motivation by encouraging active participation in learning.
4.
Question helps teachers to assess the effectiveness of their teaching.
5.
It gives feedback on how the pupils understand the subject matter.
6.
Questioning guides the development of the lesson towards the accomplishment of the lesson objectives.
28EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS One of the main characteristics of a good teacher is the successful use of questioning techniques in teaching.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Questioning method is one of the oldest methods of instruction.
Very often the involvement and activity of the pupils throughout the lesson depends largely on the teacher’s skill in formulating good questions that will challenge and stimulate thought.
Teachers should pose appropriate questions to pupils considering their age, abilities and background in order to achieve educational objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we looked at the questioning technique of teaching from different perspectives – definitions, types of questions, characteristics of good question and the purposes served by questioning in teaching.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define questioning as a technique in imparting knowledge.
2.
Name two main types of questioning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Maduabum A.M. (1989).
Teaching Integrated Science Effectively, Onitsha.
Nigeria: Space Matrix Publications Ltd. Olatunji O.S and Agusioba N.O (1981).
Principles of Practice in Teaching.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Sanders, N.M (1966).
Classroom Questions: What kinds?
New York: Harper and Row, Publishers.
Bloom, B.S.
(1956).
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, Handbook I Cognitive Domain.
New York: David Mckay Co. Inc. MODULE 2 Unit 1 Learning Environment 29EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Unit 2 Play-Way Methods Unit 3 Games and Role-Play Methods Unit 4 Discovery Methods Unit 5 Story Telling Methods UNIT 1 LEARNING ENVIRONMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Teaching/Learning Environment 3.2 Classroom Organization and Management 3.3 Benefits of a Good Classroom Environment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The teaching/learning environment is a place where teaching/learning takes place.
It constitutes the totality of the human and material conditions under which teaching and learning take place.
It comprises the teacher, pupils, the classroom, the learning materials, teaching methods and even the surrounding of the school.
The teacher must have many important skills and characteristics in order to succeed and one of his duties is to organize and manage what goes on in the classroom.
He has to create a stimulating learning environment that will make the pupils active and get involved in learning.
In this unit, we are going to discuss the learning environment and its implications to teaching and learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you complete this unit, you should be able to: • define teaching/learning environment • explain the components of teaching and learning environment • explain the benefits of a good classroom environment • list the ways the teacher can provide a conducive classroom environment • mention the factors that militate against the creation of a conducive classroom environment.
30EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Teaching/Learning Environment According to Olatunji (2005), a classroom is a place that is specially designed for the teacher and students to meet and engage in the teaching/learning process.
Classroom represents any place where teaching and learning take place under the guidance of a teacher.
It can also be defined as all the activities and processes involved in controlling and coordinating human and material resources in order to achieve educational objectives.
It therefore comprises the totality of the human and material conditions under which teaching/learning take place.
It could take place in a bright, neat and furnished place or otherwise.
That is, it could be a classroom without chairs and desks, with floors not cemented, without roof, chalk board and teaching materials.
In other words, there can be conducive and unconducive learning environments.
While the former encourages and promotes learning, the latter inhibits it.
Teaching/learning environment comprises the teacher, pupils, classroom, learning materials e.g.
charts, pictures, models, good library, laboratory, teaching methods and the surrounding of the school.
A competent teacher should establish an environment that is conducive for learning.
This is an obvious task he has to achieve because it is in an environment of trust that the teacher can respond appropriately to pupils’ problems.
An educative and stimulating environment can influence pupils’ motivation to learn with ease, it can also influence their decision to come to school.
Unconducive school environment leads to pupil’s alienation from school and it is characterized by conflict among staff and pupils.
A conducive teaching/learning environment is a pre-requisite for effective learning.
School is built for pupils to acquire knowledge, skills, attitudes, values etc.
The major task of the teacher is to ensure that pupils learn effectively with ease.
To achieve this, the teacher should create a conducive teaching/learning environment where pupils feel comfortable, interested and enthusiastic to learn.
In other words, pupils are not bored, or uninterested in what is being taught, rather, they are actively involved in learning.
The teacher should ensure that both the physical and psychological needs of the pupils are met.
It is also very important to establish a cordial relationship between pupils/pupils and teacher/pupils.
A disharmonious social setting could do a great deal in retarding the pace of learning of pupils.
In a good school environment, learners are cared for, valued and encouraged to learn.
The classroom is attractive and stimulating with pictures, models, 31EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS charts, maps amongst others.
These materials are hung on the walls and corners of the classroom.
Pupils are comfortably seated and there is adequate ventilation and light.
The teacher recognises the pupils’ efforts and does not use harsh words or abusive language on them.
He emphasizes safety, care, respect and acceptance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain the concept of teaching/learning environment.
2.
Mention the components of teaching/learning environment.
3.2 Classroom Organization and Management Classroom organization refers to the process of planning, organising, directing, leading, and controlling all resources in a classroom so as to achieve effectiveness in the teaching and learning process.
The classroom houses pupils, furniture, facilities etc., all of which must be properly arranged by the teacher for the comfort of the learners and for effective and efficient teaching/learning process.
The way the class is organized shows the relationship that exists between the pupils and the teacher.
Classroom should be well organized to avoid confusion, chaos and accident.
Organization of classroom includes what is done with the school’s structures, seating arrangement, learning materials, methods of instruction and the learning environment.
Classroom management refers to all techniques and efforts which the teacher puts in place to ensure that the pupils make the most of classroom interaction.
A well managed classroom offers pupils the opportunity to learn maximally and with little or no difficulty.
Proper management of the classroom is essential so as to avoid display of indiscipline behaviors by pupils.
According to Olatunji (2005), “Poor classroom management can lead to lateness to class by pupils, pugilism, diverting activities, disobedience and moving around in the class to disturb other pupils.
The teacher organises and manages the following in the classroom for effective realization of educational objectives.
1.
Classroom Structure The physical classroom environment can make or mar the pupils.
The way the desks, chairs and windows are arranged affect the child positively or negatively.
Some questions to solve the problems could be 32EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS raised as follows: Is it well ventilated?
Does it have a good chalk board?
Are there enough and good quality desks and chairs for pupils?
Are the desks and chairs properly arranged for easy and free movements of teachers and pupils etc.
Classroom should be designed in such a way that pupils make eye contacts with the teacher during instruction, and the teacher should have clear view of the pupils so as to monitor their behaviours.
The classroom must be pleasing, neat, comfortable with wall charts, posters, maps, and pictures etc which beautify and stimulate learning.
Pupils who are tall should sit behind those who are short, those with poor sight and hard of hearing should be in front seats.
2.
Learning Materials Any learning material being presented by the teacher to the pupils must be appropriate to the level and ability of the children for proper mental development.
It must be attractive and harmless.
It must not be too easy to avoid pupils getting bored; neither will it be too difficult as this will make learners loose interest in the lesson.
If any of these occurs, problem will be created for the learners.
The teacher therefore should be meticulous in planning the school curriculum by considering the age and developmental level of the child.
3.
Method of Instruction The teacher should be academically competent, physically, socially and emotionally balanced.
He should have a mastery of the subject matter, prepares his lesson adequately and teach according to plan.
He should use a variety of teaching methods to stimulate pupils’ learning and give the learners opportunity to carry out activities which will sustain their interest in the lesson.
The teacher should be an effective communicator, which means that his language must be simple, clear, unambiguous and relevant to the understanding of the pupils.
He should be prompt to all classes and keep pupils engaged in worthwhile activities.
While teaching, he should give due respect to pupils and avoid all forms of favoritisms either on the ground of religion, sex, ethnicity or socio- economic background of the pupils.
He should not talk “AT” but “TO” pupils.
He should ensure that democratic classroom organization and procedure exist in his class.
To enhance effective teaching and learning, the teacher should give the pupils individual and group assignments and projects to do.
This will enhance meaningful interaction amongst pupils and teachers too.
Reinforcement motivates pupils to work harder; therefore the teacher should give positive reward where necessary.
Reinforcement must not be with money rather praises, clapping of hands, appointment as a leader 33EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS in the class, certificate of merits amongst others can be used to encourage learners’ hard work.
3.3 Benefits of a Good Classroom Environment The teaching position: to teach, one must be active because teaching is not a passive activity.
It requires alertness and energetic output.
Teachers largely control opportunities for children to create for themselves the kind of school atmosphere that has in it little fear and tension and more security.
If pupils learn only to stay out of the teacher’s way and hide their problems, there is little hope of the school contributing constructively to the emotional adjustment of the children.
To establish good rapport and climate with the pupils whom you teach, teachers should observe the following: 1.
Be friendly but not familiar: Children prefer you to be a sympathetic kind teacher.
They may respond to teacher’s manner, his gestures, facial expressions and his silence as much as they do to his words.
2.
Maturity level of the pupil: The teacher should take into account the maturity level of each pupil and group level too.
It is an error to assume that all children aged five will reveal identical characteristics and that all will function at the same level of maturity.
Make every effort to match the educational activities with their maturity and ability level so that difficult tasks do not infect the group with feelings of panic.
This is because many children give up very easily or become seriously disorganized when they are not able to live up to the teacher’s expectations.
3.
Demonstrate your love to them: The teacher should demonstrate that he has genuine love and enjoys being with his pupils or class rather than that he just tolerates them or endures them because it is part of his job.
He should be accessible to all his pupils irrespective of religion, sex, ethnicity or social class.
4.
Involve pupils in some administrative work: A competent teacher should develop a good relationship by involving his pupils in most of the administrative work.
He should delegate responsibilities to the children, eg, recording pupils’ absence in school, distribution of materials and running some important errands within the school.
These exercises will draw the children closer to the teacher and make them to have a sense of belonging.
5.
Give adequate audience to your pupil: The teacher should take time to listen to his children’s problems, questions, joys and 34EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS hopes so as to help them out as needed and requested.
He should treat their confidence clinically and confidentially.
The teacher should also create an atmosphere whereby each pupil feels free to be himself and free with others.
6.
Strive for consistency of professional behaviour in yourself: This is necessary because pupils can develop a system for responding to you the way you behave.
Strictness followed by laxity tends to confuse children and may retard their progress towards relaxed self control.
A good classroom is made into a friendly place, a nice place to be, and where good things are happening.
4.0 CONCLUSION A conducive teaching/learning environment is a pre-requisite for effective learning.
It constitutes the totality of the human material and conditions under which teaching/learning takes place.
The teacher’s role is central in the creation of a conducive teaching/learning environment.
Establishing necessary rapport and good classroom climate in the school will facilitate learning.
A good primary school teacher should therefore ensure that the classroom is properly equipped and managed to prevent disorder which may affect the attainment of educational objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have explained the meanings of teaching/learning environment and classroom management and organization.
General suggestions for teachers regarding school climate were also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is classroom management?
2.
Mention the components of teaching/learning environment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Callahan J.F and Clark L.H (1977).
Teaching in the Elementary School: Planning for Competence.
New York.
Macmillan Publishers Co. Inc. 35EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Olatunji S.O (2005).
Effective Teaching and Extension of Agriculture in the Tropic.
Kaduna.
Nigeria: Zero Point International Publishers.
Pivotal Teaching Training Programme (PTTP) for Universal Basic Education (UBE) Course Book on Education.
National Teachers’ Institute Kaduna (2000).
36EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 2 PLAY–WAY METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Play-way Method of Teaching 3.2 Advantages of Play-way Method of Teaching 3.3 Disadvantages of Play-way Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Play-way method of teaching is receiving a great deal of attention at the present time.
It is a method of using play to teach pupils in such a way that they learn almost unconsciously.
Children learn not only physically, but also learn such social traits as co-operation, respect for law, planning and strategy, interpersonal (interaction) skills, self- discipline and self-confidence.
For the play-way method to achieve its objectives, the teacher factor is very crucial.
He must be knowledgeable in child’s psychology.
The teacher must provide stimulating environment with interesting teaching aids and equipment.
His carefulness in selecting suitable materials is a condition in laying foundations of morality, sociability and general knowledge in pupils.
In this unit, we are going to discuss the play-way method of teaching as an effective strategy of motivating the pupils to learn with ease.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that by the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • explain the concept of play-way method of teaching • explain the value of play in learning • mention the advantages and limitations of this method.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Play-Way Method of Teaching Play-way method is one of the effective strategies for teaching and learning especially in the primary school.
The Federal Government of Nigeria recognized the intrinsic values of play in the lives of children 37EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS when it emphasized its use in the teaching of children as stated in the National policy of Education (2004).
The early proponent of this unique method of teaching was Plato, one of the most celebrated Greek philosophers.
Others include Fredrick Froebal and Maria Montessori.
They recognized that the child is naturally creative rather than receptive, and that self-activity, play, freedom and experience are part of the ways children can learn effectively and unconsciously too.
Play, according to Kuppuswamy (1974) is a voluntary activity pursued without any ulterior purpose: an activity that one enjoys.
It is a way of using play to teach pupils in such a way that they learn almost unconsciously and with happiness.
Children are by nature curious.
They want to know what is, who that is, what that is used for, what that is called and a thousand other questions all directed at unraveling the world and seeing under it.
SEPA (1978) is of the view that children learn through doing activities and by direct experience at play.
This is necessary because children find this mode of learning natural, interesting and exciting.
Sylva (1983) defined play as active, persistent, manipulative or locomotor experimentation with objects, with environment, with ones body and or with other organisms.
Play is an enjoyable activity which is related to growth.
It has emotional, social, physical and intellectual functions.
In play-way method, teacher sets enabling environments full of interesting teaching materials and equipment that will provide opportunity for creativity on the part of the pupils.
This method affords the teacher the opportunity to break down resistance to learning because pupils are active participants in playing.
It makes pupils become familiar with subject matter as they delve into play with enthusiasm.
Play-way method offers the pupils the chance to use skills that are not rewarded in the usual classroom situation e.g.
creative ideas, social interaction or strategy.
As the pupils interact with others, they learn from each other and develop skills of coordination and cooperation.
One valuable contribution of play-way method is that it involves pupils who are not scholastically skilled.
The teacher should consider the curiosity in children and provide stimulating environment with different activities going on in each group.
For instance the teacher can use play to teach moral, discipline, honesty, neatness etc.
He has to plan and organize his lesson considering the class size, age and abilities of the children.
Group the pupils and assign them what to do and give effective guidance.
He can tell exciting stories, singing with simple games that involve fundamental movements like skipping, galloping, hopping and dancing.
Children should be introduced to the play ground and there should be frequent breaks to allow them freedom to run about outside.
The safety of play ground is necessary, enough space is imperative for 38EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS children’s safety.
In case of mathematics lesson, enough materials with varieties of shapes and colours should be provided, picture books, sand and clay for moulding should be adequately provided so that children can make choice and work according to their interests.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define Play-Way Method of Teaching.
2.
Explain the values of this method.
3.2 Advantages of Play-Way Method of Teaching 1.
Play helps in the total growth and development of the child (physical, social, intellectual and emotional).
2.
It develops a child to accept other person’s view; this helps the child to decrease his egocentric view of the world.
3.
Verbalized play can stimulate and aid language development.
(Communication skills) 4.
Well planned play can be used to teach the pupils to perform their duties under natural conditions.
5.
Play can be used to motivate the pupils and get them ready for learning.
6.
It can be used by teachers to break down resistance to learning because play involves the pupil’s active participation.
7.
Play-way method can be used to force pupils to interact with other pupils in the classroom.
They learn from each other and develop skills of coordination, co-operation and understanding.
8.
Another valuable contribution of play is the involvement of those pupils who are not scholastically skilled, that is those who do not excel in intellectual activity.
Through play, they use their own personal skills and self worth that can carry them through some very difficult classroom experiences.
9.
Play leads the pupils to discovery, reasoning and thought.
It is a bridge to social relations and can lead to emotional equilibrium Sussan – Isaac (1972).
10.
Very often, play is a good way to wind up a lesson.
11.
It satisfies the pupils’ sense of activity and their desire to imitate.
Hartley (1992) from his observations outlined eight functions of play to include: i.
To imitate adult ii.
To play out real life roles in an intense way iii.
To reflect relationships and experiences iv.
To express pressing needs v. To release unacceptable impulses 39EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS vi.
To reverse roles usually taken.
vii.
To mirror growth and to work out problems and experiments with solutions.
Through play therefore, pupils work through problems and conflicts and come to realize the things that concern them.
This is because play is one of the basic means by which pupils strengthen their thinking capacities in several important ways.
Through Play-Way Method, the learners learn almost unconsciously various fundamental skills eg- matching objects, separating colours, sing to rhythm, etc.
They learn with ease the rules and regulation of the school and even the community.
They learn endurance and patience.
Play helps withdrawn pupils to come out from self pity and shyness.
They develop social interaction, eg team spirit, co-operation and understanding as they play together.
Play also stimulates the learners’ imagination thereby developing their creative thinking.
3.3 Disadvantages of Play-Way Method 1.
It consumes a lot of time and very tedious for the teacher, especially when the class size is large.
2.
It is expensive because it requires the use of teaching aids and equipment.
3.
Play-way method according to Okoye, (1998) demands some special skills from the teacher in order to make it effective and realize its objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION SEPA (1978) stated that children learn about nature, by asking their own questions, by finding their own answers to their own questions, and from day to day, build a foundation for their own future understanding of the world around.
Children should be given freedom to exploit their environment through play under the guidance of the teacher.
This is because as they exploit, they discover things for themselves.
They learn by doing, not by listening and watching but rather by active participation in learning activities.
Secondly, parents and teachers should provide the pupils with stimulating environment, rich with play materials that will allow them to perform physical and mental operations as they use them in order to exercise their capacity to think critically and logically.
40EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Therefore, teachers who have accepted the responsibility for serving children should also accept the moral imperative to prepare themselves to serve them well.
This can be done by creating a conducive teaching/learning environment that will motivate the pupils to learn with ease.
Plan rich programmes full of educative activities that will move the pupils forward in their pursuit of knowledge.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, play-way method of teaching was discussed, some play activities were suggested, and advantages and disadvantages of play- way methods were highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the play-way method of teaching.
2.
Mention two advantages of play-way method.
3.
Name two disadvantages of this method.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Kuppuswamy B.
(1974).
A Textbook of Child Behaviour and Developmen.
Vikas Publishing House PVT Ltd. Obi-Okoye, A.F (1998).
Strategies for Effective Teaching and Learning in the Primary Education: In B.O Igboabuchi and Denco Eze (Eds).
Primary Education in Nigeria, Conference Proceedings, Onitsha: Lincel Publishers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education, NERDC Press: Lagos, Nigeria.
41EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 3 GAME AND ROLE-PLAY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Game Method of Teaching 3.2 Concept of Role-play 3.3 Merits of Role-Play Method of Teaching 3.4 Demerits of Role-Play Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION New development taking place in almost all the areas of our lives has given rise to increasing number of innovation in methods of teaching and learning.
Since teachers deal with pupils of different ages, maturity levels, interests, abilities, social and economic backgrounds, it is very necessary that they vary their methods and be flexible in the ways they present their lessons to sustain learner’s interest using game and role- play.
The method of role-play using game instill in children such social traits as co-operation, respect for law, planning and strategy, interpersonal skills, self discipline, self confidence amongst others.
This unit presents game and role-play as effective teaching approaches in making the learners to learn with ease.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • define game and role-play • mention some types of games in teaching primary pupils • explain some values of games and role-play • highlight the guidelines for effective utilization of role-play method in teaching.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Game Method of Teaching 42EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Game as a vital teaching method is receiving a great deal of attention at the present time especially in primary schools.
Games have been with mankind for a long time.
Chess, Whot, Ludo, Scrabble for example have been played in their present forms for so many years.
Sports have been used to train pupils not only physically but socially, emotionally, spiritually/morally and mentally.
Game can be defined as a form of play but guided with rules.
Game motivates the pupils to learn with happiness and ease.
Children like playing games and by using this method, a teacher can often break down resistance to learning.
Much of what passes for education in the classroom involves the pupils only passively, but through games, pupils are actively involved and they participate fully in the lesson with joy.
They gather and use the information, knowledge and skills necessary for learning and become familiar with the subject matter.
Games make pupils to learn with enthusiasm what they ought to learn.
They can be used to influence pupils to interact with other pupils in the classroom and learn from each other, thereby developing skills, co-ordination and co-operation.
The use of games in teaching pupils can help those children who are not scholastically skilled to wake-up and unfold their talents.
For instance in the classroom, there are some pupils who do not excel in intellectual activities, but often they are good at sports, interpersonal relationships or other activities, yet they are capable of making valuable contributions to the society.
The use of games can help these students to obtain a sense of confidence and self worth that can carry them through some very difficult classroom experiences.
Game method of teaching gives the child an opportunity to grow and learn in his/her own way and provide each child with suitable experience at the precise moment of his/her need.
Since the child learns best by doing, and finds interest and enjoyment in activity, a child must be given every opportunity to discover, explore and find out for himself/ herself by touching, feeling, handling, singing, drawing etc.
Game can be used for teaching various subjects like Mathematics, English, and Physical Education etc.
Scrabble game can be used in teaching English Language.
For instance, in teaching new words to the class, you should prepare the pupils for a special game.
Tell them to cut the letters of the alphabets and bring them to the class e.g.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.
Group the pupils in group of 5 to 6 according to the strength of your class.
Make each group to form words by giving them the letters of new words you want to teach for the day or week e.g.
Birds, father, Mother, Lorry, Uncle, Snake etc.
You should give mark for correct words, formed or spelt.
From the correct words, you can then call out the new words to be taught.
At the end of the exercise, you praise the 43EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS winners by congratulating them, and encourage the other groups to put more efforts.
You can use spelling competition to teach English language also.
This can be done either on individual or a group basis.
If you want it on an individual basis, you can direct the children as follows: Call out the word and any child that is ready will be given the opportunity to spell it to the hearing of every member of the class.
If it is on the group basis, form groups of 5 or more pupils.
Then call a word for each group to spell.
Any group that gets the spelling correct should be awarded marks, but if the group misses the spelling at the given time, extra mark should be given to any other group that gets the correct spelling of the word.
At the end of the competition, the winner should be commended by praises or clapping, while those who could not perform well will be encouraged.
Games for Teaching Mathematics There are so many games that can be used to teach Mathematics effectively to pupils e.g.
Oga, Swell, Skipping with rope, Ludo, Draught.
These games can assist the pupils to acquire skills in thinking, counting, concentration, calculating, constructing and arranging out logically.
Buying and selling develop in pupils the skills of interpersonal relationship and how to use money.
Pupils can buy and sell, add and subtract, co-operate with others in the market place.
The teachers should carry out these games in the class by introducing a class shop as a class market-stall.
Some activities should be brought into the class, cardboard sheet to be cut out as coins or paper money.
Where possible, real money could be used, pupils should be grouped as buyers and sellers.
Make provision where change should be given.
The chalkboard can be used for illustration.
In physical education lesson, moral values like honesty can be taught using games e.g.
simple games like there is fire on the mountain run, run, run Rats and Rabbits, simple relays etc.
In the game “there is fire on the mountain”, the pupils are grouped in twos and kept in a circular formation.
They are advised to continue to run forward whenever the “fire is out” instead of going back.
Anyone that violates the rules should be penalized.
It is also applicable to “Rats and Rabbits” where any child caught within the restricted area will accept defeat.
In this process of teaching and learning, children learn various types of values unconsciously through games.
Teachers should devise effective means of ensuring that pupils are actively involved in learning using games.
Oga games, skipping with ropes are ways little children learn simple addition and subtraction with rhythms.
They can even use these games to recite poems.
44EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS However, there are some limitations in the use of games in teaching primary school pupils and the teacher should be aware of them.
Children are naturally playful and active.
Games give them the opportunity to be excited.
It is possible that the children will become so excited that they find it very difficult settling down to other activities.
If there is high reward for winning, some may become addictive to the game.
Games consume a lot of time and very expensive especially in terms of providing adequate equipment.
To the teachers, it affects their health especially when the class strength is large.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Give reasons why game method of teaching should be used in primary schools.
2.
Mention two games that can be used to teach Mathematics in primary schools.
3.2 Concept of Role-Play The definition of role-play is a bit difficult to describe because the term is used to describe the type of game and attitudinal conditioning experiences.
It has both educational and therapeutic overtones.
According to Advanced Learners’ Dictionary 1999: Role play means “an activity in which people act a situation.
To Umoren (2004:64) it is seen as a pupil-centred approach that assists pupils to acquire value.
It is used especially in training of pupils to develop communication skills, attitudes and values.
For the purpose of this module, role-play is defined as the acting out of structured or designed situations.
Its purpose is to permit pupils to be problem solvers, particularly in the area of interpersonal relationship.
Role-play has been used by good teachers for many years to help pupils develop their attitudes, values and interaction skills.
Role-play method include: (a) Simulation: This is a deliberate making of certain conditions by means of model that could exist in reality.
It is a way of creating certain conditions by means of model.
Simulation is role-play in which an individual acts a part to express his own interpretation of how a person might behave in a given circumstance.
It is used in training pupils in different roles e.g.
army officers, traders, policemen, Nurses, businessmen/women.
One of the first learning routines in which a child engages is the act of simulation.
Pretending is apparently a natural approach to this modeling experience.
Simulation game as a method of teaching is an operational model which tries to reproduce a process in real life situation or induce certain behaviour in an artificial situation (faking).
Here, little girls play with dolls and pretend to be mothers; little boys play with trucks and pretend to be 45EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS fathers.
In Christian religion class, pupils can act the birth of Jesus with Mary mother of Christ and Joseph her husband at Bethlehem.
By the time the pupils reach adult age, they have developed strong confidence, communication skills and good attitudes that will help them face future challenges.
The use of simulation approach in teaching primary school pupils has proved to be productive.
This method requires the teacher to design play areas or study areas to resemble adult or real life situations.
On the playground, the pupils may form the model of a house, a kitchen or an airplane.
The pupils take part in the episodes trying to produce the picture as it is in real life situation.
Simulation involves the active participation of a pupil in a simplified representation of real-life situation.
It might involve symbolic models of social situations, physical models, fieldtrips etc.
Considering the age of primary school children and their characteristics which include playing, the teacher can use games to teach so many subjects like English, Mathematics, Social Studies, Christian Religious Knowledge, Physical Education to mention but a few.
Simulation can be used to introduce a lesson, make up a lesson and even summarize the lesson.
(b) Social drama is another form of role play which assists pupils to investigate real life situation through spontaneous acting followed by guided discussion.
In this approach, pupils enact roles using their pre-knowledge of how that situation should be played.
The presentation is snappy and takes not more than five to ten minutes.
This approach does not require the pupils to rehearse or memorize the series.
It is followed by general discussion after the presentation.
(c) Dramatization is another aspect of role-play.
Here, the roles have been previously assigned and prepared in advance.
Children are told the character they are to act and what is expected of them.
It is an important skill because it allows the pupil to have insight into the characters.
Dramatization affords the pupils an opportunity for emotional expression.
It is almost second nature to the child, for instance, pupils playing house, driving a bus, shopping, cooking etc.
These activities help the children to develop self control, greater poise and self confidence.
Children in primary school enjoy drama and should be allowed to dramatize when the need arises.
This exercise makes them to have literary appreciation, improves class atmosphere and builds good pupil/pupil and teacher/pupil relationships.
Through drama, pupil develops imaginative and creative thinking.
Role-play has been a useful strategy for teachers for many years to help pupils develop their attitudes, values and interaction skills.
It can be a means of connecting many subjects, oral language, art (making scenery, designing costumes), music (singing and dancing during the play) and the social studies subject for example when portraying a historical 46EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS episode.
Role-play, can also help to form in the children important work habits like co-operation, perseverance, critical thinking etc.
Role-play requires warm-up period, or preparation of class before it can be successfully conducted.
Warm-ups are not only for physical activities, but they are necessary for intellectual or emotional experience.
The class teacher has to prepare or create proper atmosphere for the role playing issue.
Some pupils are selected by the teacher according to their abilities and capabilities as role players, while the rest of the class acts as the audience or as observers.
The pupils then act out a situation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Differentiate between simulation and social drama.
Guidelines for Effective Utilization of Role-Play Method 1.
The teacher should choose a practical exercise that will influence the attitude of the learners positively.
2.
The feelings of the pupils must take upper consideration 3.
Age of the pupils should be considered when choosing a topic 4.
Decision that involves values should be made in an agreeable or co-operative manner.
5.
The teacher should be firm and have sympathetic ears and sensitive to hidden issues.
3.3 Merits of Role-Play Method of Teaching 1.
Role-play affords the pupils opportunity to develop their emotional expression, for instance, persistence in choice of roles by pupils may indicate an insight into the pupils’ emotional life.
2.
It helps the pupils to develop good verbal communication ability (language skills).
3.
Role-play gives room for pupils to develop interest, attention, assimilation and retention of facts and information.
4.
It helps in the development of scientific attitudes, values and talents.
5.
It gives the children enjoyment.
6.
It improves class atmosphere and builds cordial pupil/pupil and teacher/pupil relationships.
7.
It develops the child’s imagination and encourages creativity.
47EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.4 Demerits of Role-Play Method 1.
It is time wasting as it requires a long planning rehearsals and gathering of materials.
2.
Since some pupils are selected as role players and others as observers, it leads to the undermining of interest, confidence and capabilities of those not involved.
3.
It is expensive in terms of resources required for the role players.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have learnt about game and role-play as active and participating techniques of imparting knowledge to the learners.
In game, children learn various skills, attitudes, values and knowledge almost unconsciously.
They are actively involved while role-play gives the pupils the opportunity to act in situations.
It is used in training pupils in different roles e.g.
mother, father, police, teachers, etc.
The teacher should use these approaches to ensure that learners learn with ease and understanding.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the game and role-play methods of teaching as effective and enthusiastic ways learners can learn without difficulties.
Some games were suggested for teaching various subjects and types of role-plays were discussed.
The merits and demerits of game and role- playing were also highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between game and role-play methods of teaching.
2.
Mention two games that can be used to teach Mathematics in primary school.
3.
What are the merits of role-play?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Igboabuchi B. C. and Denco E. (1998).
The Tradition of Renowned Educators, Preprimary Education in Nigeria-Conference Proceedings.
Jacinta, M. and Regina, M. (1981).
Primary Methods Handbook.
48EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Pivotal Teacher Training Programme (PTTP) for Universal Basic Education (UBE) National Teachers’ Institute: Kaduna.
UNIT 4 DISCOVERY METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Discovery Method of Teaching 3.2 Advantages of Discovery Method 3.3 Disadvantages of Discovery Method 3.4 Hints for Effective Utilization of Discovery Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are various methods that can be used in teaching and learning in primary school.
One of them is the discovery method.
This is a method that a teacher uses to help the pupils find out by themselves new discovery.
It is a participatory process which helps the pupils to investigate, analyze, discover, evaluate, question, search, explore, experiment, update or validate knowledge and information.
This is done by gathering information, processing it in order to find solutions and to draw conclusions from them.
The teacher’s role is to stimulate the pupils with rich environment, initiate problems, ask thought provoking questions and guide them to analyze the data.
One of the advantages of this method is that pupils plan and organize their activities and find facts by themselves by developing self confidence and logical reasoning.
In this unit, we are going to discuss discovery method of teaching in details.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that by the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • define discovery method • mention the advantages of this method • explain the disadvantages of discovery method • highlight the hints for effective use of discovery method in primary school.
49EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Discovery Method of Teaching Discovery method is a teaching approach which enables the pupil to use his mental process to meditate, and or find out things for himself.
It is learner–centered approach hence it is called a heuristic method.
Discovery method is not new; its history dates from Aristotle and John Dewey to modern times.
Its various components are problem identification, Pupil self awareness, reasoning, method of seeking evidence and deliberation (Rice and Rice 1977).
Discovery method is controversial because it teaches pupils to do things that many people think children should not do.
For instance, it teaches pupils to question, to analyze, to disagree with, and occasionally to depart from what others think is true, good, best or appropriate.
This method exposes the child to think for himself and many adults find this both disconcerting and dangerous.
For this method to achieve good results, the atmosphere of the school must be open so that the pupils can think for themselves, ask questions and seek resources other than the teacher for information.
Discovery method of teaching encourages pupils to look beyond the available facts, endeavour to understand the relationship between one idea and another, and to attempt to relate new ideas to what had already been learnt.
The important consideration in this method is that the pupil ensures that each new information/knowledge that is provided makes some meaning to him.
It discourages memorization of facts and advocates for active participation in activities that will help him to establish facts through observation.
Discovery method involves two extremes notably the guided discovery and the pure discovery.
In guided discovery, the teacher provides the setting, the structure and the materials and guides pupils to discover answers to problems.
This method leads to learning by exploring.
Here children are taught to face the “unknown” with little guidance by the teacher.
Thus the desire to make learning more and more self managed can lead to employment of problem solving approach.
The essential thing in this approach is to allow the pupils to figure things out by themselves through active participation in physical situation.
The teacher’s role is to provide them with the general principles and not the solution to the problem.
The free or unguided discovery is the type that involves the pupils discovering for themselves the general principles and solution to a scientific problem.
It is sometimes called the pure discovery.
According 50EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS to Brunner, teaching by discovery implies disposing the pupils to find out events and phenomena with the teacher giving away the information to the pupils.
The teacher only initiates the approach and the pupils formulate hypotheses that are likely to lead to the solution of the problem.
This method can enhance the child’s autonomy since appeal is made to the child’s independence in finding out things for himself.
It will also review and confirm knowledge presented to them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Differentiate between guided discovery and free or unguided discovery 3.2 Advantages of Discovery Method 1.
Discovery method, being a heuristic method, makes the pupil an active participant rather than mere passive listener.
2.
It helps pupils plan and organize their own learning.
3.
Since the pupils initiate their learning, what is learnt is retained; hence there is conservation of memory.
4.
The joy in discovering things by themselves will provide pupils with intrinsic motivation.
5.
Discovery method helps pupils to develop manipulative skills, attitudes, knowledge etc by finding things out for themselves.
6.
As pupils begin to work with discovery method at early stage, they will develop reasoning logically and have analytical and synthetic thought as well as intuitive thinking.
7.
It gives confidence and promotes self initiative in pupils.
8.
It encourages pupils to search for knowledge by themselves and brings added interest to the learning activity.
9.
The excitement and satisfaction in discovering some things provide reinforcement in pursuing further learning activity.
3.3 Disadvantages of Discovery Method 1.
This method is time consuming; progress is comparatively slow as results of investigations have to be awaited.
2.
The method is expensive considering that equipment and materials have to be purchased to go round all the pupils.
3.
Effective teacher supervision is hampered especially where the class size is large.
It affects the emotional health of the teachers.
4.
This method cannot be effectively used in school settings operating strict syllabus/examination oriented system.
5.
It can lead to frustration and interfere with learning especially when adequate guidance is not properly provided for pupils (Maduabum 1989).
51EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.4 Hints for Effective Utilization of Discovery Method 1.
Discovery method should be undertaken with small groups for proper guidance and supervision.
The teacher should endeavour to group the class in small group for efficient supervision.
2.
Discussion strategy to be adopted prior to the discovery lesson in order to sensitize the pupils on what to look for.
3.
Free discovery should be exposed to classes that have wide spread of abilities among pupils, that is, those pupils who are intellectually endowed or gifted.
4.
The teacher should provide class discussion at the end of the discovery lesson to cater for questions based on pupil’s activities.
4.0 CONCLUSION A good teacher uses many teaching methods for effective teaching and learning.
There is no best method of teaching.
A teacher is therefore free to consider the use of any (or combination) of several alternative teaching strategies available, and then select the most suitable one considering the age of learners.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the discovery method of teaching as one of the powerful emotional tools for easy and quick learning.
Its merits and demerits were pinpointed and hints for effective utilization of discovery method were highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define discovery method of teaching.
2.
Mention two advantages of discovery method.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Brunner, J.
(1961).
The Act of Discovery, Harvard Educational Revision, Vol.
31.
Maduabum, M. A.
(1989).
Teaching Integrated Science Effectively, Nigeria: Spacematrix Publication Ltd.: Onitsha.
52EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Rice, J. G. and Rice, G. H. (1977).
Teaching in the Elementary School: Planning for Competence: New York Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc. UNIT 5 STORY-TELLING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Story-Telling 3.2 Value of Story Telling 3.3 Qualities of a Good Story 3.4 Method of Telling an English Story 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Story-telling is one of the exciting techniques of teaching in primary schools.
In this unit, you will see how story-telling motivates and sustains pupils’ interest in learning.
Naturally, children love stories especially fairy tale, stories about adventures, animals e.g.
Tortoise, giants etc.
These stories no matter how funny are very educative and enhance learning.
Story-telling technique is mainly used in arts subject like Christian Religious Studies, Literature, English, and History etc.
The main aim of this unit is to explain different ways the teacher can use Story-Telling method to realize the objectives of his lesson.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • differentiate between story-telling and discussion method • explain why we tell stories • identify different types of stories • explain qualities of a good story • list out the teaching aids used in story-telling.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Story-Telling Story means an account of past events and incidents, invented or imagined.
It can be in form of someone’s life story, adventure story for 53EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS children, bedtime stories, fairy story etc.
B.B.C English Dictionary (Six Clair, 1992: 1454) defined story as a description of imaginary people and events, which is written or told in order to entertain people.
It is a way of narrating or describing a past event or an imaginary people.
Very often, teachers have occasions to narrate or tell stories, give account of events, recount transactions and the like to their pupils.
Narration is an art in itself which aims at presenting to the children, through the medium of speeches, clear, vivid, interesting and ordered sequence of events in such a way that their minds reconstruct these happenings and they live in their imagination through the experiences happenings recounted either as spectators or participants.
Narrating involves a very skillful use of language and other personal qualities of the teacher.
The speech used by the teacher must be appropriate with not only the situation and happenings depicted, but also the language level of the listeners.
Description also is similar, to narration, both need effective language command.
The teacher uses these two skills to attune the mental level of the children.
They are clothed in language sufficiently vivid and interesting to hold their attention and triggered off their creative mental ability which will enable them to see in their minds’ eyes what is described, or to reconstruct the events which are recounted.
Children naturally make use of imagery in their mental activities.
A competent teacher exploits this by word pictures as he describes, narrates and depicts scenes, events and features which he himself imagines in his own mind.
The teacher has to provide lots of pictures, charts, models etc showing different forms of stories that can be dramatized.
Accurate and vivid portrayed will make a story to achieve its aim.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Mention three forms of story children tell.
2.
Outline the factors that could enhance effective story-telling.
3.2 Values of Story-Telling Good stories make positive impression on the children especially when they dramatize or role-play them.
However, stories exist and motivate pupils to develop their mental abilities and creativity.
Other rationale for telling primary pupils stories include: 1.
Provision of enjoyment and relaxation to the pupils.
2.
Development of creative and imaginative thinking.
3.
Story-telling trains the character of the pupils and gives them moral value.
4.
It broadens the knowledge of their culture and those of others.
54EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 5.
It provides them with information and knowledge.
6.
Children develop their language expression while fluency and social interaction are enhanced.
Teachers should strive at exposing the pupils to stories that will bring out positive change in behaviour for instance, Religious stories that teach moral: the good Samaritan, the prodigal son, the rich man and Lazarus etc; others include adventure stories, suitable ethnic stories, stories about tortoise, giants and fairies, and stories about other lands.
Stories with bad morals, weird stories that can frighten the pupils or complicated stories with too many characters should be avoided as this can do more harm than good to the growing children.
3.3 Qualities of a Good Story A good story should be educative and have positive moral influence on the children.
It should be short and meaningful.
It should not have too many characters.
A good story should be exciting and motivating.
It can be dramatized or role–played by the pupils, more importantly; it should provide joy and happiness to the children and also should improve their creativity.
It should also help the pupils to solve problems.
In using story-telling in teaching primary school children, the teacher must take cognizance of their ability to conceptualize concepts.
He needs to provide adequate and sufficient teaching aids to complement the story, for instance, he should provide pictures in sequence, flannel, blackboard pictures, puppets or models.
Whether the story is in English language, or mother tongue of the children, a variety of visual aids and actions must be provided and used by the teacher to make his lesson effective, exciting and enjoyable.
55EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.4 Methods of Telling Story Before the teacher starts telling the pupils story, he should first of all arouse their interest.
This can be done by introducing the characters and showing pictures and apparatus to the pupils.
He tells the story through using pictures, actions to keep the pupils alert and interested.
He asks series of questions which will produce the story.
Methods of Telling an English Story 1.
The teacher should treat the new words which will be seen in the story.
2.
Use pictures or teaching aid to introduce the characters.
3.
With simple and clear English Language, tell the story slowly to the pupils.
4.
Ask questions, the answers will come from the pupils.
Children make a picture of their favorite part of the story and dramatize.
However, when telling an English story, the teachers should consider the age and ability of the class and ensures that he builds the vocabulary up.
He should provide suitable and enough teaching aids to the pupils.
Repetition is essential.
The story must be broken down into parts, it should not be lengthy rather it should be short and straight forward.
4.0 CONCLUSION Story telling is one good method of teaching the primary school children to acquire good behaviour.
We should realize that primary school age is a formative stage where the child can learn all types of behaviours good or bad.
Through story-telling approach, good moral behaviours could be imparted to the pupils.
It could be used also to trim down or completely wipe out the bad behaviours like-cheating, killing, telling lies, stealing and fighting from the pupils.
Teachers should use this method and a combination of other methods to capture the interest of pupils during instructions and develop various good habits in them.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the story-telling method of teaching as one of the effective strategies of making the children to learn with joy and ease.
Rationales for using this method were explained while procedures for telling English stories were pinpointed.
56EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention four values of telling children story.
2.
Identify the different kinds of stories we tell little children.
3.
Explain two qualities of a good story.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Otal M. J.
(1981).
Primary Methods Handbook, London: Hodder/Stoughton.
Sinclair, T. (1992).
Ed.
BBC English, Dictionary.
London: Harpel- Collins Publishers.
57EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS MODULE 3 Unit 1 Communication Unit 2 Class and Group Teaching Methods Unit 3 Demonstration Methods Unit 4 Field Trip Methods Unit 5 Assignment and Activity Methods UNIT 1 COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Communication 3.2 Process of Communication 3.3 Importance of Classroom Communication 3.4 Factors for Ensuring Effective Communication in Classroom 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Earlier on we had discussed about teaching, various teaching approaches and their implications to learning.
At the back of all teaching is the attempt to pass on some useful messages, learning experience or information from the teacher to the pupils.
This passing of information, messages, feelings, emotions, values, attitudes etc.
from the teacher to the pupils, and from the pupils to the pupils is the process of communication.
Communication is the process by which information passes from the teacher to the pupils and vice versa during instruction.
The contents of the lesson are passed on to the pupils and the teacher receives feedback from the pupils.
It is through communication that the teacher will know if the pupils have learnt or not.
In short, communication is an on-going process between the teacher and the pupils in the classroom.
It is an indispensable tool for effective teaching and learning.
58EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that by the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • define communication • explain the process of communication • mention the importance of communications • identify the factor that enhances effective communication in classroom.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Communication Communication is the process by which information passes from the teacher to the pupils and back in the classroom during instruction.
Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary (1998:229) defines communication as the exchange of information, news, ideas or feelings.
To Eweninyi (2002:16) it denotes “the art of talking to one another to spread information and involves social interaction through messages”.
It is the exchange of information, feelings, and actions among organizational members in order to achieve organizational goals.
In school communication, the contents of the lesson are passed on to the pupils and the teacher receives feedback from the pupils.
The pupils give feedback by way of the answers they give to the teacher’s questions or the questions that they ask.
The media or means by which the messages are passed between the teacher and his pupils can take many forms.
It goes beyond mere word and stretches to non-verbal cues like tone of voice, facial expression, posture, eye contacts, drawing that stand for idea and images, modes of dressing and even absolute silence in the face of provocations.
Communication could be by verbal means that is, using words of mouth, or could be by visual means that is by seeing with the eyes what is written on the board or some pictures.
It could also be by means of smell e.g.
the teacher may ask the pupils to describe the smell of rotten animal.
The point being made here is that communication can be through different media.
If the teacher smiles, it may mean an approval of the child’s behaviours, this is visual communication .This signifies that we can use non-verbal means to communicate ideas or feelings.
The senses are involved in communication e.g.
eyes, ears, nose, skin and tongue.
The teachers should ensure that he does not pass contradictory 59EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS messages, feelings or use ambiguous language to impart knowledge to the pupils.
He should use variety of media during instruction as situation demands.
He should accompany verbal words with diagrams, charts, or model to help in clarifying the concept being learnt.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the concept of communication.
3.2 Process of Communication In every usage, communication is the process that people use to exchange significant messages and share meanings about their ideas and feelings with one another.
All aspects of communication involve meaningful interaction between at least two persons for example, teachers do not communicate in a vacuum rather with peoples, fellow teachers, pupils and society.
It is a continuous and cyclical movement which involves stimulus –response relationship.
In the process of communication two or more people interact together and exchange message with the intention of bringing about some actions in the individuals receiving the message or changing some aspects of their beliefs or behaviours.
In teaching, the aim is mainly to inculcate in the pupils some new values e.g.
the ability to differentiate between noun and verb or add single digit figure etc.
In the process of communicating these ideas, someone is sending the message and we can refer to him as the source or sender.
The means through which the message is sent is called the channel/medium (which could be verbal or non-verbal).
There are certain factors which interfere with the message before it gets to its destination or intended receiver.
Noise is one of them.
It could be in form of language, hunger, physical and psychological discomfort.
The receiver then gives response and feedback.
The diagram below shows the communication process.
Fig.1 Communicatee C o m m u n i c a t o r evieR rc e Sender Message Model of one –way Communication Sources: Hoy & Miskel (2001) 60EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Fig.
2 Message Sender Receiver Receiver Sender Message Model of two-way communication loop (Cyclical) Source: Hoy and Miskel, (2001).
There are different communication processes.
These are the one –way and two –way communication processes.
One-way communication does not allow for feedback and it is discouraged to be used in teaching in primary school.
Teachers should use the two-way communication which gives room for feedback from the pupils.
Feedback is beneficial to teachers because it provides information as to whether the message has been received and has actually produced the intended responses.
It can be said to be cyclical rather than linear because each person in the communication loop acts as a source or a receiver temporarily with the role shifting as messages are passed.
Two-way communication can be said to be the best means of communication amongst the learners because it is a reciprocal interactive process with all participating in the process of initiating and receiving messages.
In the classroom situation, when the teacher makes an explanation, he is the sender and when the pupils reply to the explanation (feedback) they become the sender or sources and vice versa.
Noise is a factor that interferes with the message and can lead to inaccurate understanding of the message.
Use of ambiguous language, hunger, physical or psychological discomfort could act as the noise factor and may lead to poor communication.
3.3 Importance of Communication Social life in an organization cannot exist without effective communication.
Ejiogu (1999:57) asserts that “communication is an indispensable tool for any meaningful interaction and understanding in any organization”.
It is used to sensitize teachers, pupils, arouse their 61EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS interest, and strengthen their willingness and enthusiasm to participate actively in school activities.
In schools, the basis of learning is in the effective use of communication in the classroom.
When communication between the teacher and his pupils is effective, learning automatically takes place.
In the classroom, messages are usually sent via verbal or sound medium or channel.
Vision, taste, smell or touch can be used as a medium of communication depending on the type of message.
Teachers are advised to create enriched environment with good teaching aids like picture, chart, models and real life objects that can communicate information to the learners effectively.
Instead of embarking on oral communication always, they should seek repeated feedback while communicating so that mistake can be detected and corrected as soon as it occurs.
Through communication, the class teacher evaluates the knowledge of his pupils with respect to the topics taught.
It can be used in teaching and learning, in setting goals, standard, making decision leading and influencing others etc.
The teacher also uses communication to resolve conflicts, to preside over meeting and to supervise pupils’ work.
It is an effective tool for the realization of school objectives.
To ensure effective communication in the classroom, the age, ability level, use of simple, clear and unambiguous language and use of adequate teaching material should be borne in mind.
Noise factor, in the physical and psychological environment should be avoided because they discomfort the learners thereby inhibiting learning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Briefly explain why classroom communication is important.
3.3 Factors that Enhance Effective Communication in Classroom Many factors influence effective communication in the classroom.
These include the age of the learners, their ability level, clarity of language used, the presence/absence of noise factor in the environment and familiarity with the materials or examples used.
1.
Age of the Learners This is a factor the teacher should consider while communicating with the pupils.
Very young children may not have adequate ability and experience to understand the message and language especially when ambiguous language is used.
The teacher should be elaborate in his explanations and use simple and clear language that the pupils will 62EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS understand.
He should provide teaching materials in whatever he wants to teach for more clarifications.
For instance, if he wants to teach addition or subtraction of numbers, specimen materials like counting sticks, pebbles, bottle tops should be provided to enhance learning.
2.
Ability Level of a Child Because of individual differences in pupils, some understand things/concepts easier than others.
The use of effective communication to elaborate fact will help learners, especially slow learners to assimilate what is taught faster.
The teacher should consider the learner’s ability level and use clear language that they will understand.
From the feedback, the teacher will know if what is taught is understood or not.
The language use should be commensurate with the ability level of the learner.
3.
Clarity of Language/Message Noise can distort effective communication, and the use of ambiguous, unclear language inhibits learning.
To ensure effective communication in the classroom the language to be used should be simple, clear and unambiguous.
Communication should be provided at the right time, in the right quality and quantity with effective communication skills.
It should also be packaged and disseminated in such a way that its availability and utilization will be possible and clearly targeted in the language of understanding devoid of ambiguity (Nwokocha, 2005).
4.
Absence of Noise The teacher should ensure that the environment of learning is free from noise and there are no distractions around.
Pupils’ comfort must be provided.
5.
Familiarity with Teaching Materials The teacher should provide teaching materials that are familiar with the pupils and harmless.
If the real objects cannot be provided, the pictures or models will be acceptable.
For instance, in the teaching of animals, especially wild animals, it is very wrong for the teacher to bring into the classroom wild animals like lion, security dog, snake etc, rather pictures or models of these animals can be provided.
The teacher will use good communication skills to explain these concepts in details.
63EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is an indispensable tool in any institution or co-operation.
Educational objectives cannot be achieved without effective communication in the classroom.
This is because it is used to co-ordinate all school activities especially teaching and learning.
The teacher should use good communication to motivate pupils to learn and maintain good relationship which is essential for the realization of school goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that communication is the exchange of information among organizational members in order to achieve school goals.
There are various types of media in the classroom.
It was explained that communication process involves the sender or source, the message, the channel/media, noise and feedback.
Certain factors like age, language, ability level etc affect the communication system in the school.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Define communication.
2) Why is classroom communication important?
3) List out the processes of communication.
4) Draw the one-way communication process.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Eweninyi G. B.
(2002).
Communication Strategy in Conflict Resolution Around Organization, (1) 66-72: The Compeller.
Ejiogu.
A M. (1990).
School Personnel Management: A Nigerian Perspective, Lagos University Press.
Hoy, W. K and Miskel G. (2001).
Educational Administration Theory, Research and Practice, New York: McGraw Hill International Edition, Education Series.
Hornby, A. S. (1999).
Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary, (1978), Canada.
Random House, Inc. Nwokocha, V.N.(2005).
Assessment of the Relationship between Communication Process and Administrative Culminate in Nigerian Secondary School, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis Abia State University, Uturu.
64EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 2 CLASS AND GROUP TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Class Teaching 3.2 Advantages of Class Teaching 3.3 Disadvantages of Class Teaching 3.4 Concept of Group Teaching 3.5 Types of Grouping 3.6 Advantages/Disadvantages of Group Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teaching is a complex activity because it involves the subject-matter, methods, and materials as well as human beings who have physical, emotional, psychological and intellectual reactions.
The teacher and pupils must be sufficiently motivated so that teaching can be productive resulting in pupils learning.
This implies that the competent teacher needs to create a conducive environment and demonstrate certain skills using different methods and techniques of teaching to achieve his goals.
In this unit, we are going to look at class and group teaching.
Their characteristics will be discussed while various roles of grouping the pupils will be highlighted.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • differentiate between class and group teaching • list the advantages and disadvantages of class and group teaching methods • enumerate different ways of grouping pupils for effective teaching /learning.
65EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Class Teaching Class teaching is one of the oldest methods of teaching.
It resembles the lecture method only that it differs in the number of pupils the teacher faces.
Lecture method takes any number of pupils up to two hundred and above while class teaching takes between 35 to 40 pupils according to the National Policy on Education specification.
Class teaching is a process whereby the teacher takes up a prominent position in the classroom, with the blackboard behind the teacher, and his eyes on the class.
He talks very often too much.
The teacher develops his lesson by posing questions and answers using blackboard illustrations and often visual aids.
The teacher dominates the class activities by asking a lot of questions most of which the teacher gives the pupils little chances to participate.
The teacher can make the lesson real by involving the pupils to participate in what is going on in the class.
This brings the child-centered element into it, but if he is not competent, the teacher will talk too much and dominate the lesson while his pupils become passive recipients with empty minds and his lesson will be entirely teacher-centered.
3.2 Advantages of Class Teaching 1.
It saves time and effort as the whole class is taught the same thing at the same time.
2.
It gives the children the desire to work together with other methods.
It gives the pupils opportunity to learn from each other.
3.
Classroom teaching affords the learners the opportunity to compete among themselves.
The challenges posed by competition could influence the weak pupils to work harder.
4.
Social interaction is built as learners work co-operatively as a team rather than as individuals.
3.3 Disadvantages of Class Teaching 1.
As in lecture method, class teaching does not cater for the pupils’ individual differences, their needs, interests and capabilities are neglected.
2.
The slow learners can hide among the other pupils in the class without participating actively in the lesson.
3.
Initiative and creativity are killed.
4.
Teachers are often misled to believe that majority of the pupils understand the lesson because a few of them answer questions correctly.
66EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 5.
The teaching/Learning process is teacher-centered where the teacher does almost everything.
6.
It kills sense of self expression and creativity.
Class teaching method is an organizational method; other methods are to be continued with it before it can yield good result.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define class teaching.
2.
Differentiate between teacher-centered method and learner- centered method of teaching.
3.4 Concept of Group Teaching Grouping is a flexible kind of classroom arrangement for adjusting the curriculum to the needs, aspirations and abilities of the class members.
It is a means to an end.
It helps learners to learn more effectively than they would if the class were always taught as a unit, with every child taught the same thing at the same time.
This implies that group teaching takes place when the pupils are divided and taught in groups and not as a unit.
Group teaching is a modification of class teaching.
It can be used normally to simplify the problem of teaching big classes with the wide ranges of abilities.
To use this method effectively, the teacher can divide the pupils in the class into small groups and give them special tasks according to their interests and abilities.
He can then attend to each group in turn while he gives individual help to pupils in difficulty.
When to use Group Teaching 1.
Group teaching can be used when there is need to examine in greater detail, various aspects of a larger issue.
For instance, during an excursion, three or more groups may be set up to get information on different questions.
2.
Grouping can be used, when a serious stand on matters that require in-depth study, resolution or decision making is to be taken.
How to use Group Teaching 1.
The class teacher can divide the class into small groups of four or six (depending on the size of the class).
He can group them based on compatibility or ability.
2.
Allow each group to appoint a leader and a recorder.
67EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.
The teacher may guide the leader of the group on how he will direct the discussion and how the recorder should write the decision reached or points arrived at after discussion.
4.
He should ensure that no pupil is inhibited from learning and that no one dominates the discussion.
Types of Grouping Competent teachers group their pupils in various forms according to the prevailing situation in the class, their experiences with the pupils and their objectives thus: a.
Ability grouping.
b.
Sex grouping.
c. Interest grouping.
d. Mixed grouping.
e. Random selection grouping.
f. Social or natural grouping.
g. Needs grouping.
a) Ability Grouping In the ability grouping (according to intelligence), pupils are grouped according to their intelligence or academic abilities.
The highly intelligent ones may be assigned group A, and the pupils who are least advanced will be assigned group D, and the average pupils will be assigned group B and C respectively.
The teachers should never call the pupils A, B, C and D but can allow the children to choose their names either from animals, great heroes or colours.
Grouping in this way allows the pupils to learn at their own pace, however, much as the brilliant group may be proud of their group; those in the weak group may be demoralized or unhappy.
The teacher has to be prudent in handling the different groups to ensure effective teaching and learning of all groups.
Advantages of Ability Group 1.
Learners are given work according to their ability hence they learn with ease and happiness.
2.
In terms of those who come from literate families, they are allowed to follow the already established pace while those who come from illiterate background who have not got much academic experience will not be overworked.
Therefore ability grouping is necessary to give stimulation and encouragement to each child.
68EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.
Special aids and instructions are given to each level, and there is no competition between different groups rather both are encouraged to learn at their pace.
Disadvantages of Ability Grouping 1) If a child discovers why he is kept in group D, he may become discouraged and shy while those in A will be proud.
2) There can be no academic competition.
3) It kills academic competition within the whole class groups since competition is only within the group.
4) If the slow or dull pupils are left together all day, they will become duller.
5) This kind of grouping is unnatural.
Children and adults are not grouped according to ability within their own families.
This type of grouping is only important in the social training of children that they learn to understand and get along with those who are different from themselves.
b) Sex Grouping In sex grouping, the pupils are divided according to their sexes.
This is mostly used in physical education class and in upper class of the primary school.
One of the values of this type of grouping is that boys have some interests and abilities which girls do not have hence the grouping for effective teaching /learning.
c) Interest Grouping In this type of grouping, pupils are divided according to their interests.
Their common interest should lead to social interaction, exchange of ideas for better learning, for example in physical education class, some pupils may be interested in gymnastics and floor activities while others are interested in climbing activities or rhythmical activities.
The teacher, through his observations on their interests, groups them according to their interest and attitude.
The advantage of this type of grouping is that if pupils are given the activities they like, it will improve their performances and also helps them to develop hidden or special talents in them.
However, this method makes the pupils to choose their friends rather than a subject or activity.
Timid pupils may be afraid to volunteer for any new challenging activity.
69EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS d) Mixed or Non Ability Grouping In mixed or non –ability grouping, brilliant, average and dull pupils are grouped together to interact.
This is to avoid lapses of ability group.
The brilliant ones are expected to encourage or pull up weak ones.
However, teacher should ensure that the reverse is not the case.
This group is taught as a unit and there is equal distribution of learning and responses over the whole class.
This method boosts the morale of the average and weak pupils to be grouped with the clever children.
The shy and timid pupils also gain courage from sitting beside those who are confident and happy.
However, clever or brighter pupils may be frustrated if the pace of learning is too slow for them.
e) Random Grouping In this method of grouping, pupils are chosen haphazardly without any consideration or criteria.
This is a good grouping when one considers fair play.
But it may result in many of the pupils with the same ability, sex, or interest fall into the same group.
f) Social or Natural Grouping In this type of grouping, pupils are free to sit wherever they like in the classroom, beside their friends, or in a favourite place.
It is normally used during subjects like history, religious education and story-telling.
Generally, there should be no rigidity in grouping.
A pupil who is good in one subject may be poor in another.
Grouping requires good planning and organization.
In teaching of groups, there is need for the teacher to prepare and assemble the materials to be used in the teaching/learning process.
Individual differences should be observed and positive competition among groups can be encouraged.
The teacher should ensure that there is a good class control and discipline.
Another type of teaching method is the individualized method.
In this method, each child is taught separately.
This method has been found to be a very effective way of teaching young children, because they like to work on their own.
They are not interested in what others are doing, rather they are egocentric.
In this method, the teacher pays special attention to the needs of the child and each child works at his own rate.
This approach helps the teacher to form opinion of each pupil’s mental ability and his ability to get on with other children.
The teacher sees that the clever pupils are given the chance to work at a faster pace than the slower pupils and the slow learners are also given adequate attention.
70EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Individualized approach enables the teacher to know in what subject or subjects each pupil is most gifted.
g) Need Grouping Sometimes, teacher may discover in his class a group with the same or similar problem e.g.
inability to pronounce words correctly, form letters correctly and poor writing of words etc.
These groups of pupils are put in a special group and more attention is given to them.
4.0 CONCLUSION Class teaching takes place when the teacher instructs the learners in the class collectively as a unit.
The teacher takes a prominent position and makes the lesson what he wants it to be either child-centered or teacher- centered.
In the group teaching, the pupils are divided into groups to allow for more effective learning.
The teacher needs to plan and prepare for the materials that will enhance learning to take place with ease.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed various approaches the teacher can use to ensure that children learn effectively.
They include: Class teaching, individualized teaching, grouping the pupils according to different abilities, interests and traits for easy learning.
Child-centered and teacher-centered methods were also explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between teacher-centred and learner-centred approaches of teaching.
2.
What is ability grouping?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education, Lagos: NERDC Press.
Olatunji S.O.
(2005).
Effective Teaching and Extension of Agriculture in the Tropics, Kaduna: Zero Point International Publishers Pivotal Teacher Training Programme (P T T P) For Universal Basic Education (UBE).
National Teachers’ Institute: Kaduna (2000).
71EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 3 DEMONSTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Demonstration Method of Teaching 3.2 Demonstration Planning and Pre-demonstration Activities 3.3 Advantages of Demonstration Method of Teaching 3.4 Disadvantages of Demonstration Method of Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every activity requires a specific method for efficiency.
In this light, there is need to adopt the appropriate method in teaching.
Teachers need to vary their instructional approaches in different classroom situations to cater for individual differences and to ensure over-all effectiveness of teaching and learning.
In this unit, we are going to discuss the demonstration method as an effective technique in teaching primary school children especially sciences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: • define demonstration method and explain the pre-demonstration activities • mention the advantages and disadvantages of demonstration method • discuss the criteria for effective utilization of demonstration method.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Demonstration Method of Teaching Schools traditionally have used verbal tools as the major or primary form of instruction.
As learning theories have had more influence upon practices in the classroom, teachers with the help of research findings have started making deliberate efforts to provide children with enriching experiences.
These experiences have their root in the real world.
To a 72EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS child, the things that are real are those that related to the five senses, can be taken apart, put together, labeled, given names, seen, touched and even used.
Demonstration is one of these concrete experiences that teacher can provide for the pupils to help them internalize learning.
In the context of teaching and learning situation, a demonstration refers to a display or an exhibition usually done by teacher while the pupils watch.
It involves performing an act in the presence of the pupils either as a means of showing them how to do it themselves, or to illustrate a principle.
The use of demonstration requires that a teacher practices before presenting it to the pupils.
He should be able to foresee what kind of demonstration is likely to achieve the objectives of the lesson.
He may need to add oral explanation to give meaning to the demonstration.
Demonstrations ask the questions “what is it?” and “How does it work?” They apply to physical things, rather than to abstract ideas or value.
Demonstrations are particularly useful in showing activities that require a high level of skill.
In demonstration method, sight rather than hearing is the major means of communication.
It is useful in illustrating facts, reviewing a lesson, and showing methods and technique of doing something (Olatunji 2005).
However, the major function of this method is to enable pupils develop skills that can be used to perform certain responsibilities e.g.
drawing of different kinds, display of activities in Physical Education, Home Economics, Biology classes etc.
The teacher employs this method to teach pupils how to perform a particular operation.
In teaching of a topic like purification of water to primary III pupils, the teacher should provide all the necessary teaching aids e.g.
water, filter, stove or gas cooker, pot, white cloth amongst others.
The pupils will sit in a comfortable position where they can see what the teacher is doing.
The teacher carries out the experiment before the pupils, by boiling the water, filter it and allows the dirt to settle down.
The pupils watch and ask questions while the teachers explain what he is doing.
After this experiment, he allows the pupils to demonstrate while he supervises and makes necessary corrections.
Demonstration method is an effective way of imparting knowledge to pupils because, most subjects especially sciences requires these techniques.
According to Esomonu, (1998), Demonstration can be used to teach Physical Education for instance basic concepts and skills in movement experience, e.g.
walking, running, jumping, skipping, talking, etc.
Demonstration can also be used to teach language skills in primary school.
For instance, in teaching “Verbal communication, the teacher displays some pictures or models, e.g.
“look at this” “Pay attention to this” etc.
73EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Gesture method is a good example of demonstration method.
The teacher uses body sign movements to teach the pupils e.g.
nodding of the head, smiling, raised eye brows, blinking of eye, absolute silence in the face of provocation.
It can be used to teach some concept in mathematics e.g.
fraction, measurements, addition and subtraction etc.
The teacher provides the teaching aids e.g.
oranges, sticks, card board sheets and divides them to show different fractions e.g., 1/ , 1/ , ¼, 2 3 ¼ ½ 1/ 3 Demonstration can be used to teach writing to the pupils e.g.
1.
Writing of capital letters ……….
ABCD 2.
Writing of slanting strokes……… /// \\\ 3.
Writing of curved strokes……….. ((( ))) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the values of using demonstration method in teaching primary pupils.
3.2 Demonstration Planning and Pre-demonstration Activities There are several things that a teacher should do to increase the effectiveness of a demonstration.
Pupils must be able to see and hear what is being demonstrated.
It is also important that the pupils be well prepared for the demonstration in advance so that they know its significance and what to look for.
The teacher articulates the purpose of the demonstration and gets ready all teaching aids needed.
He ensures that the quantity and quality of teaching aids required are provided and in good conditions, the time and site of the demonstration should also be determined.
The teacher should strive to involve every child, he should also know that the exercise needs practice, as such he should prepare himself before hand as far as the position of demonstration is concerned.
74EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Demonstration Stage The place for the demonstration must be very conspicuous so that every pupil see and participate in what is being demonstrated.
The pace of the demonstration should be reasonable, not too slow or too fast and demonstration should be visible to the pupils.
Pupils can be grouped so that they can perform in their groups, but if the class size is small, demonstration can be done individually.
Use pre-determined questions first to provide a sense of direction, and secondly to determine the weaknesses and strengths in presentation.
Make use of pupils’ questions during demonstration to provide feedback.
Let the pupils repeat the demonstration and the teacher should be audible especially when the class is large.
The use of demonstration requires that a teacher should practise before presenting it to pupils.
The rehearsal should include a complete presentation, using all props, models, speeches, manipulations, drawing in order to achieve good results.
This will help the teacher to know the time required for the demonstration, the nature or condition of the equipment and also ensures that the expected result will be obtained during the demonstration section.
A demonstration loses its effect if the teacher fails to get the results which she has told pupils to expect.
3.3 Advantages of Demonstration Method 1.
It can be presented to a large audience.
2.
It can cover a great number of points quickly.
3.
Demonstration concretizes learning and makes use of more than one sense organ e.g., (sight, hearing, touch, etc.).
4.
It stimulates learner’s interest in the learning process by holding pupil’s attention to the skill being demonstrated.
5.
It reduces the boredom of classroom teaching.
6.
It can be used to motivate pupils and gain their attention.
3.5 Disadvantages of Demonstration Method Demonstration method has its own limitations: 1.
It requires a great deal of time and trouble for its preparation.
2.
When the teacher alone does the demonstration, pupils are denied manipulative skill and this reduces pupils’ learning.
3.
It can lead to accidents and noise making by pupils especially when the equipment or teaching aids are insufficient.
75EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 4.
Visibility is a problem especially in large classes or circumstances where extreme sharp objects are used.
5.
It affects the health of the teacher especially when the class size is too large.
4.0 CONCLUSION Demonstration, as one of the oldest methods of teaching, is still useful in the present time in teaching primary pupils especially sciences.
The teacher should plan and produce adequate teaching aids that will give every child the opportunity to participate in learning using demonstration.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, demonstration method of teaching is defined as a deliberate planned effort by the teacher to produce enriched experiences through displays or exhibition to pupils while they watch the teacher demonstrate or illustrate some principles.
The major function of this method is that it helps to develop skill that can be used to perform certain tasks.
The advantages and disadvantages of this method were discussed and some subjects that can be taught effectively using this method were pinpointed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define demonstration method of teaching.
2.
What are the advantages of this method?
3.
Mention two limitations in the approach of teaching.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esomonu, P. N. (1998).
Principles and Methods of Teaching with Elements of Micro-Teaching, Awka: Marpat Publishers.
Maduabum M. A.
(1989).
Teaching Integrated Science Effectively, Spacematrix Publications Ltd.: Onitsha.
Pivotal Teacher Training Programs (PTTP) For Universal Basic Education (UBE) National Teachers Institute, Kaduna (2000).
76EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 4 FIELD TRIP METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Field Trip 3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of Field Trip 3.3 Disadvantages of Field Trip 3.4 Guidelines for Effective Utilization of Field Trip in Primary School 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION If pupils are to grasp and retain what they are being taught, they must be exposed to practical learning experiences which will broaden and deepen their understanding of a topic or topics on syllabus.
One way of achieving this is by employing field trip method of teaching.
This method is child-centered where pupils’ participation and involvement help them to gain first-hand experiences outside the classroom.
This unit will present to you what field trip method of teaching is and how it can be used effectively to achieve the educational objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • define field trip method of teaching • mention ways the teacher prepares the pupils before going for a field trip • explain some educational values of field trip • list some pitfalls in field trip method of teaching • discuss the guidelines for effective utilization of field trip.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Field Trip 77EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS One of the methods of teaching especially sciences in primary school is by taking pupils out to the field to have first-hand experiences of happenings in natural and technological settings.
These types of experiences cannot be had within the normal classroom setting.
Field trip is an act of going on sight-seeing usually done in a group and in a school system.
It is an exercise which you can carryout to help pupils have first hand information about subjects, places or concepts.
In using this method, you can take the pupils to places like factories and industries.
It is where the concepts you want to teach can either be seen or touched or manipulated.
For example concept terms such as mountains, valley, zoo, mechanized farming e.g.
tilling of land by tractors, irrigation to mention but a few become more meaningful when affected sites are visited by the pupils than when such concepts are thought theoretically in the class.
Field trips are very popular and important because they provide pupils with real experiences in the community outside the classroom.
They allow pupils to expand the horizons beyond the limits of the family and school’s classroom.
The community becomes a laboratory and pupils often become more interested in school work when they see a relationship between what they are studying and the real world.
It is an established fact that field work is an important part of any effective instruction because children internalize more by seeing and doing than by hearing.
It is one of the most enjoyable and exciting experiences for studying sciences.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Ask the primary one pupil to go to the field and catch grasshoppers each and count their legs and wings.
2.
Take the primary III pupils into the community and ask them to pluck some leaves.
Lead them to identify different parts of the leaves.
These exercises will give them first hand information rather than discussing it in the class theoretically.
Not all field trips require transportation, but when the teacher wants to take the pupils outside the community, much preparation must be done before the exercise is carried out.
The first thing the teacher should consider is how the trip fits in with subjects being studied in the classroom.
Will the trip be valuable enough to justify the time used?
Will it be educative?
After a decision has been made to embark on a field trip, much preparation is required of the teacher.
Permission must be obtained from the places to be visited and this requires that the teacher makes an advance visit.
Transportation must be scheduled.
The teacher has also to prepare the 78EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS pupils for the trip.
The purpose of the trip should be well explained and pupils should be asked to look for specific things and what is expected to be learnt will be told them.
They will be asked to go with jotters or exercise books for taking down useful information.
A strict time schedule should be observed for the convenience of parents, bus drivers, cooperating teachers, and hosts of the visit.
Adequate rest stops should be scheduled.
Discipline must be enforced, while teachers on duty should ensure that pupils are disciplined.
They should do thorough supervision to ensure that no child gets lost or injured.
This aspect of the field trip should get adequate attention because if the class creates a good impression with its host, a teacher will find it much easier to get permission for another trip next time.
He should therefore take proper time to count the pupils boarding the bus, check off their names, put name tags on them, count them off the bus, count them into and out of each rest stop, set up a “buddy system”, make older pupils responsible for younger ones, possibly get a whistle and always ensure that someone watches the pupils throughout the entire visit.
For the teacher to exonerate himself from blames and unnecessary threats, the problem of liability should be mentioned.
To offset law suits, it is necessary to require any pupil who goes on a field trip to give a release note before going.
This may take the form of a “parents’ permission slip” and the teacher should check with the headmaster to be sure that license insurance is adequate to cover the trip.
Pupils can visit places like post offices, market squares, supermarkets, orthopaedics hospitals, dams, parliaments etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Lead the pupils to a deep valley or high mountain within the community and allow them to discuss the features they observed.
3.2 Advantages of Field Trip The field trip promises rewarding educational experiences when properly planned and organized.
1.
It provides pupils with direct first-hand experiences.
This implies that the children learn practically.
2.
The experiences gained during field work are vivid, lasting and often more meaningful to the pupils because they are real-life situation.
79EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.
Through field trips, pupils get to know their community or its surroundings better, that is, it brings a social studies unit on community helpers (builders) alive.
4.
It reinforces what has been taught.
The experiences gained during a field work, can motivate pupils to read about what they have observed so as to harmonise actual field experiences with information gathered from text books.
5.
Field trips develop an enquiring mind, correlates many subjects and skills.
6.
It gives pupils opportunities to observe and study something which cannot be brought into the classroom for example the irrigation system of farming and the production of different items like soap and toilet tissues in the factories.
7.
It also develops in pupils aesthetic appreciation of nature and the attitudes they adopt towards natural events and phenomena.
8.
It develops a sense of responsibility as pupils are given specific work to do and question to answer etc.
9.
Field trip helps children to get true and accurate knowledge from experts or workers.
3.3 Disadvantages of Field Trip 1.
Although a field trip can yield much if it is well planned and conducted, it is tedious to carry out.
If field work is not properly planned, it creates conflict with other classes.
2.
It consumes a considerable amount of time, especially where it requires traveling outside the community.
The arrangements are often difficult and may be expensive.
3.
Class control and supervision may be difficult, since pupils are curious and will like to move around to watch events or activities.
4.
At times, even after most thoughtful preparation and planning, accident can occur.
5.
Most parents feel reluctant to give co-operation especially when it requires long distance.
3.4 Guidelines for Effective Utilization of Field Trip in Primary School 1.
The teacher should get permission from the Headmaster, the area educational officer and parents in writing.
2.
Get advance permission in writing at least two weeks ahead from the officials of the site, industries or centres etc, to be visited.
State clearly the number of pupils, age-group of pupils, purpose of the visit, time and date of the visit; if possible, visit the place before hand.
3.
Make provision for transportation and feeding arrangements.
80EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 4.
Ensure that the field trip experience fits properly into the instructional sequence.
In other words, that it relates to what has been discussed in the classroom.
5.
Before the trip, alert pupils on where they are going, the purpose of the trip, possible dangers, what to look for, what materials to take along (e.g.
note book, biro/pencils etc.)
and how they should give their reports.
6.
The teacher should serve only as a guide during the exercise and should avoid much lectures or discussion.
7.
Encourage the pupils to ask questions at any point where they need further information.
8.
Keep pupils together and do not allow rushing ahead or lagging behind.
9.
Food should be packed and stored in luggage compartment and eaten at a convenient time together.
10.
After the visit, write a letter of appreciation to the manager of the factory or centre visited.
11.
Hold group discussions and compare notes and ideas.
One spokesman makes a report to the class on their findings.
12.
Since the school and the teachers are legally responsible for the safety of the pupils: a.
Make sure that the bus and driver is licensed; b.
See that the bus is not overcrowded; c. Make sure that all pupils are properly supervised at all times by the teachers; d. It is desirable to get a letter from the parents; e. If a pupil is injured, he must receive prompt treatment-include first aid box in the bus.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain how you will use field trip to teach a combination of lessons e.g.
Mathematics, English etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that field trip is an educative method of teaching which provides pupils with first class experience in the community outside the classroom.
It gives the pupils opportunities to expand their horizon beyond the limits of family and school’s classroom.
For field trip to yield good result, it must be well planned and properly supervised.
Children will be encouraged to ask series of questions and observe phenomena as they exist.
Field trip is important in teaching primary school pupils especially in teaching primary science.
81EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the concept of field trip was discussed, preparations before, during and after the trip were highlighted; advantages and disadvantages of field trips were pinpointed while guidelines for effective utilization of field trips were explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define field trip.
2.
Mention areas pupils can visit for experiences and learning.
3.
Mention two advantages of field trip.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Maduabum, M. A.
(1989).
Teaching Integrated Science Effectively, Spacematrix Publications Ltd.: Onitsha, Nigeria.
Pivotal Teacher Training Programme (PTTP) for Universal Basic Education (UBE).
National Teacher’s Institute, Kaduna, (2000).
82EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 5 ASSIGNMENT AND ACTIVITY METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Assignment 3.2 Merits and Demerits of Assignment Method 3.3 Concept of Activity Method 3.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Activity Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Assignment and activity methods are among the teaching methods which keep pupils busy and make them to study on their own.
They are child-centred learning approaches.
They are considered in the realm of independent study where the child is challenged to work on his own to solve problems.
They require active learning efforts on the part of the pupil.
These methods are widely recognized methods of teaching that professional teachers need to be aware of and use as occasion demands.
They help to develop creativity and sustain pupil’s interests.
In this unit, we are going to discuss assignment and activity methods as effective strategies in getting the children to learn independently.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • differentiate between assignment and activity method • discuss the merits and demerits of assignment method • highlight the major principles to be considered while giving assignments to pupils.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 83EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 3.1 Concept of Assignment An assignment is referred to as an act of giving tasks to someone for his learning.
This approach of learning is a method which sees the individual as his own teacher and assumes a certain maturity and educational attainment for the learner.
It is called Dalton method.
The name Dalton is given to the strategy because it was developed in Dalton, United States of America by Helen Parlhurst.
The teacher should carefully plan the assignment to accomplish what he wants the pupils to learn from his effort.
The main purpose of assignment is just to keep the pupils busy.
It is used to introduce new lesson and also reinforce what the teacher has already covered in the classroom.
Assignment gives the child a chance to try what the teacher has told him and this often makes the subject take on meaning, or become real to him.
It also gives the teacher feedback on the ability of each child.
Assignment can be in form of essay writing, finding meanings of words in the dictionary, drawing of animals, various shapes, measurement of materials, improvising teaching aids, e.g.
(counting sticks, pebbles, bottle tops, provision of different types of soils).
The teacher should consider the class, time, age and ability of the child before giving out assignment.
He should always keep in mind that he shares the pupil’s study time with other teachers and therefore cannot give too many assignments that a pupil does not have time to do all his work adequately and have some rest.
3.2 Merits and Demerits of Assignment Assignment method has several advantages.
Among them are: 1.
It gives the teacher opportunity to assess the great range of skills and knowledge acquired by pupils in all the domains.
2.
It makes the pupils to generate interest in the subject matter.
3.
Assignment techniques develop ability in the child to grow in depth and maturity, to be self directing and self sustaining.
4.
It reduces dependency, the child is no longer a passive receiver of someone’s knowledge, rather he generates his own knowledge.
5.
Assignment encourages initiative and creativity and also provides the pupils with the maximum amount of individual practice.
6.
It gives the teacher feedback on the performance of the child.
7.
By giving the pupils an occupying task, the teacher is forced to give individual attention to the less active pupils.
8.
It helps the teacher to cover his syllabus on time.
However, there are some pitfalls in assignment method.
84EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS 1.
If used wrongly, the assignment approach can scare the pupils away from learning.
2.
Pupils can be wrongly assessed since their parents or siblings can do the work for them at home.
3.
If not properly supervised, many pupils will not be involved.
Points to Emphasize while drawing up Assignments 1.
Instructions on what the pupils should do should be clearly spelt out.
2.
Vary the activities to be done so that both the slow and fast learners will benefit.
3.
Give the pupils concrete assignment to do which will proof what they have done, e.g., drawing, painting, knitting etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Outline five assignments you can give to pupils in primary III.
2.
What are the benefits of assignments to the pupils?
3.3 Concept of Activity Method That pupils of primary school age are flexible is undeniable.
Every classroom teacher should spend a considerable amount of time providing direction, correction and encouragement to his pupils.
Considering the fact that children are naturally curious and active, he needs to plan suitable activities for the children to do.
It is an established fact that children learn by doing, they learn through what they do and what the teacher does.
Learning activities are the things we expect the pupils to do in the lesson; it is the interaction between the learner and his educative environment.
Children must practice before they learn and constant practice enhances learning.
Normally, pupils enjoy activities, they easily become involved and when they are actively engaged, they become engrossed in the subject.
The teacher needs only to define the skill level he is seeking and schedule practice sessions until the skills are acquired.
The learning activity is a well planned programme whereby pupils are kept busy all the time on one assignment or the other.
It broadens the pupils’ knowledge and makes them to acquire first hand information.
Learning is internalized and made permanent through activity method.
The teacher should ensure that children’s learning activities should assist them successfully to achieve the objectives.
For example, if you want them to learn about weight, provide weighing instruments and objects to be weighed and expose them to the practical aspect of the lesson instead of describing and talking most of the time.
In the case of 85EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS addition and subtraction in Mathematics, provide suitable teaching aids for it, e.g., counting sticks, bottle tops, pebbles, beads and other suitable materials to concretize the lesson.
Let the pupils be actively involved.
Learning activities should satisfy the pupils as a positive experience.
Children should feel happy about what they are doing instead of doing them with fear.
The teacher should also understand the importance of readiness, age and ability of the child in learning.
These will guide him plan activities that will be educative and realizable.
The teacher should provide variety of activities in each subject, for instance, in the teaching of English Language, he should expose the children to activities like debate, class discussions on events, places or things.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention two activities in English Language you will teach pupils in primary two practically.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied the concept of assignment and activity methods as ways of assisting the pupils to develop initiative, creativity and independence.
In this line, the teacher is seen as a “gardener” or guidance who helps out where there is difficulty.
The assignment technique keeps the pupils busy and reinforces what has already been taught in the class.
Both methods are child-centred and encourage children’s active participation in the lesson.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the concept of assignment and activity methods of teaching primary pupils.
Their merits and demerits were highlighted while the principles to consider when drawing up assignments were pinpointed.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define assignment as a teaching approach.
2.
Mention two advantages of assignment.
3.
Mention two activities you will engage primary five pupils in, in English Language.
7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bello, J.U (1981).
Basic Primary Teaching, Ibadan, Nigeria: John Wiley and Sons.
86EDU 292 PRIMARY EDUCATION METHODS Callahan, J.F.
and Clark, L.H (1977).
Teaching in the Elementary School: Planning for Competence, Macmillan Publishing Co. Inc.: New York.
Pivotal Teaching Training Programme (PTTP) for Universal Basic Education, National Teachers’ Institute, Kaduna, 2000.
87
