 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 314 COURSE TITLE: COMPARATIVE EDUCATION  EDU 314: COMPARATIVE EDUCATION COURSE DEVELOPER.
Dr B O Lawal Faculty of education University of Ibadan COURSE WRITTER .
Dr B O Lawal Faculty of education University of Ibadan COURSE EDITOR J K Adeyemi Faculty of Education University of Benin PROGRAMME LEADER Dr Gbenga Ojo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria,vic island Lagos COURSE COORDINATOR Dr B I Ajufo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria,vic island Lagos 2  THE COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION This course consists of fourteen (14) units divided into two modules which provide basic knowledge for the learners about Comparative Education.
The course spreads through topics such as: Education, the scope of Comparative Education, historical development of Comparative Education, approaches to the study of Comparative Education, determinants of National Education System, the Future of Comparative Education, Japanese Education, the System of Education in Brazil, Education in England, Education in France, the system of Education in Jamaica, Teacher Education in Nigeria and Tanzania and Education in Afghanistan.
THE COURSE GUIDE This course Guide is out to teach you about things you should expect from reading this material.
Taking the learners through the concept of education will enhance their knowledge about education.
Exposing the students to the scope of Comparative Education will afford the students the opportunity to understand that the subject is an interdisciplinary subject.
In the same vein, the knowledge of historical development of Comparative Education will assist the students to have a better understanding of the subject.
Exposing the learners to approaches to the study of Comparative Education will afford them the opportunity to know the various methods which can be used to study the discipline.
Taking the learners through the determinants of National Education System will help the learners to identify the factors that can help in the formulation of education policy.
The knowledge of the future of Comparative Education will give the learners broader knowledge about the subject.
Also, exposing the students to foreign education systems such as Japanese education, the system of education in Brazil, education in England, education in America education in France, the System of education in Jamaica, Teacher education in Nigeria and Tanzania and education in Afghanistan will afford the students the opportunity to understand what is going on in the area of education in other countries of the world.
This will also help them to be in the position to compare and contrast the practices of education in Nigeria and other countries of the world.
COURSE AIMS This course intends to provide an opportunity for the learners to understand better the practices of education not only in their country but also other countries of the world.
COURSE OBJECTIVES Specifically, this course sets to achieve the objectives below: (a) Explain the meaning of education 3  (b) identify the other subjects from where comparative education draws its ideas.
(c) Discuss the historical development of comparative education.
(d) Mention the approaches to the study of Comparative Education.
(e) Highlight and discuss the factors that determine the National education system.
(f) Discuss the future of Comparative Education.
discuss the foreign education systems in: such as: Japan , Brazil , England, France,America, Jamaica ,Nigeria, Tanzania and Afghanistan.
WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE This course expects you to spend a lot of time to read it.
You need to spend more time to study the contents of the material so as to be able to justify the effort that has been put into its development in order to make it readable.
You are hereby advised to attend the tutorial sessions where you will meet with your mates for the purpose of comparing knowledge gained from the material.
STUDY MODULES Each unit of each of the modules has introduction, objectives, content, conclusion, summary, tutor marked assignment, recommended textbooks and answer kit to the tutor marked assignment.
TEXTBOOKS Adeyinka, A.A. (1994): Popular Topics in Comparative Education for Nigerian Tertiary Education Students, Ilorin, Success Education Services.
Aaibi, I.O.
et al (1998) Comparative Education.
A handbook for Teachers: Oyo, Odumat Press and Publishers.
Anyanwu, C.N.
(1983).
An Approach to Comparative Adult Education.
Owerri, African Educational Services Ltd. Awolola, A.
(1986).
Readings in Comparative Education.
Ibadan.
Stevelola Educational Publishers.
Lawal, B.O.
(2004).
Comparative Education, Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig.
Ltd. Fafunwa, A.B.
(1982) Education in Africa.
A Comparative Survey, London, George Allen and Unwin.
ASSESSMENT This course has two components of assessment: the tutor-marked assignment (TMA) as well as the end of course examination.
TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT The tutor marked assignment is the continuous assessment component of your course.
It carries 30 percent of the total score.
Each unit has a Tutor Marked 4  Assignment.
You are going to be given some Tutor-Marked Assignments to attempt.
Three out of these must be attempted before you will be allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The Tutor - Marked Assignment will be given to you by your facilitator and they must be returned after you have attempted them.
END OF COURSE EXAMINATION Examination concludes the assessment for the course, it accounts for about 60 percent of the whole course, you will be told about the time for the examination.
SUMMARY This course provides you information about Comparative Education as a discipline.
In addition, the following topics were also discussed in the course.
Education, the scope of Comparative Education, Historical Development of Comparative Education, Approaches to the study of Comparative Education, Determinants of National Education System, the Future of Comparative Education, Japanese Education System, the System of Education in Brazil, Education in England, Education in America, Education in France, the System of Education in Jamaica, Teacher Education in Nigeria and Tanzania and finally, Education in Afghanistan.
5  EDU 314: COMPARATIVE EDUCATION COURSE DEVELOPER.
Dr B O Lawal Faculty of education University of Ibadan COURSE WRITTER .
Dr B O Lawal Faculty of education University of Ibadan COURSE EDITOR J K Adeyemi Faculty of Education University of Benin PROGRAMME LEADER Dr Gbenga Ojo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria,vic island Lagos COURSE COORDINATOR Dr B I Ajufo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria,vic island Lagos 6  MODULE 1 UNIT 1 Meaning of Education 1.0 Introduction Education and comparative education as concepts can be given different interpretation.
The reason is that different people from different angles will see them from different perspectives.
In other words, there can be as many definitions to the concepts of Education and Comparative Education.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, students should be able to provide an acceptable definition to Education.
3.0 The Content 3.1.1 Education Education is very difficult to pin to a particular definition, because the concept may be perceived from different angles.
The concept has been traced to two Latin words.
The Latin words are (a) and (b) educere .
While educere can be interpreted as "to draw out" or "to lead out", educare Educare on the other hand means "to nourish" "to bring up or "to raise".
The interpretations of two Latin words no doubt, are more than what can be offered by the school alone.
Adesina (1985) noted that education is always related to variable such as purpose of the learner, the aim of the teacher as well as the technological problems of the society.
He, therefore, defines education as: The tool for the integration of the individual effectively into a society so that the individual can achieve self-realization, develop national consciousness,promote unity and strive for social, economic, political, scientific cultural and technological process.
While relating education to culture, Nduka (1982) sees the concept as the process of cultural transmission of the people at least part of such 7  culture from one generation to the next.
Education, according to Lester Smith cited by Osokoya (1987), is the culture which each generation purposely gives to those who are to be its successors in order to qualify them for at least keeping, and if possible for raising the level of improvement which has been attained.
Horton, cited by Akinpelu (1984) sees education as an enabling agency by which the Africans could restore their self confidence, and make those who doubted the humanity of Africans begin to revise their views and learn to respect Africans.
Education according to Nyerere (1982) is the transmission of accumulated wisdom and knowledge of the society from one generation to the next and also to prepare the young people for their future membership of the society in which they find themselves.
At this juncture, we can define education as a process through which an individual becomes integrated into his society, becomes a promoter of his societal culture, contributor to the development of his society and becomes an adult who will be able to stand on his own.
3.1.2 The Meaning of Comparative Education Naturally, human beings are in the habit of making comparison of the things that are around them particularly when such things exist in different places.
This may be done as a result of man's desire to know the relationship existing between, or among the things being compared.
Man may also involve himself in this kind of a business when he wants to choose between two things before him.
The idea of comparison is not peculiar to the people in the business of education alone.
The children at home or anywhere do make comparison between their parents because one of them may be more loving than the other.
The school pupils also make a comparison of their teachers particularly when the teachers are not with them.
The parents themselves can make a comparison of their children morally and academically.
Comparison can take place wherever we have two or more things at the same time either for the purpose of having a better understanding of the relationship existing between them or for the purpose of having a better choice.
8  Like other concepts, comparative education is a concept that attracts varied interpretations or definitions.
In other words, there are as many definitions as there are many Educational Comparativists.
Adeyinka (1994) gives the following definitions for the concept.
(a) A study of two or more education systems.
(b) A study of how the philosophy, objectives and aims, policy and practice of education in other countries influence the general development, policy and practice of education in a particular country.
(c) A study of how the development of education in the past, across the ages and continents, has influenced the development of education in particular countries.
(d) A study of the school systems of two or more countries, and of the administrative machineries set up to implement or to control the implementation of government policies at various levels of education systems.
Comparative Education according to Good (1962) is a field of study dealing with the comparison of current educational theory and practice in different countries for the purpose of broadening and deepening understanding of educational problems beyond the boundaries of one's own country.
From the above definitions, the study of Comparative education allows the person involved to have a better understanding of the system of education outside his own country.
To Kandel (1957), Comparative Education is the comparison of various philosophies of education based not only on theories but the actual practices which prevail From this above definition, Kandel is of the opinion that comparative education goes beyond the comparison of education philosophies but also includes the comparison of the real education practices.
Perhaps, from the definition, comparative Education can be regarded as being pragmatic.
In his own contribution to the concept of comparative Education, Mallinson (1975) defines the subject as: a systematic examination of other cultures and other systems of education deriving from those cultures in order to discover resemblances and 9  differences, and why variant solutions have been attempted (and with what result) to problems that are often common to all.
In his own remark on the concept of Comparative education, Adejumobi (1994) defines the concept as a critical study of educational similarities and differences prevailing with a particular society or culture or among various societies and cultures.
From the definition given by Adejumobi, it is obvious that the idea of comparing educational systems is not peculiar to countries or societies alone but it can as well take place within a country or society.
In the same vein, Osokoya (1992) observed that: Comparative Education could be the comparison of educational theory and practice within a society, state, region and nations ... that scholars could engage in the comparison of educational programmes, theories and practices even within one society.
Therefore, there could be a comparative study of educational programmes within the local governments of a state, between states of a country and between countries of a continent.
Alabietal (1998) sees comparative education as; a way of comparing and contrasting different educational systems at national, infra-national as well as international levels.
The major implications of their definition is that comparison of educational philosophies, systems and practices is not peculiar to two cultures or countries alone but it can also be localized as it has been rightly pointed out by the other scholars in the field.
In his own reaction to the concept of Comparative education, Awolola (1986) defines the subject as the study of aims and objectives of education, the curriculum methods of teaching, teacher - student relationships, school calendar, mode of discipline, design of school buildings, school administration among others which may be at the international or national levels.
10  4.5 Conclusion The unit above discussed different definitions of comparative education.
5.0 Summary In this unit , you have learnt about: the Meaning of Education and Comparative Education 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Define the form Comparative Education 7.0 Reference Alabi, I.O.
et al (1998); Comparative Education: A Handbook for Teachers, Oyo, Odumat Press and Publishers.
Adeyinka, A.A. (1994) Popular Topics in Comparative Education for Nigerian Tertiary Education Students, Ilorin, Success Education Services.
Adesina M O, (1985) Foundation Studies in Education, Ibadan, University Press.
Adejumobi P A cited in Adeyinka A.A. (1994) Popular Topics in Comparative Education for Nigerian Tertiary Education Studies, Ilorin, Success Education Services.
Akinpelu, J.A (1984) An Introduction to Philosophy of Education, London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Awolola, A.
(1986).
Readings in Comparative Education; Ibadan, Stevelola Educational Publishers.
Good F (1962 cited in Lawal B.O.
(2004).
Comparative Education, Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nigeria Ltd. Kande L. (1957) Studies in Comparative Education, London, Harrop 11  Ltd. Mallinson V. (1975).
An Introduction to the Study of Comparative Education, London, Heinemann Publishers.
Nyerere, J.
1982 cited in Fafunwa and Asika (1982); Education in Africa; A Comparative Survey, London, George Allen and Unwin.
Osokoya, I.O.
(1992): Comparative Education, Ibadan, University of Ibadan.
12  Unit 2 SCOPE OF COMPARATIVE EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction Exposing students to the scope of comparative education will afford the students the opportunity to have an idea of other disciplines from where comparative education draws ideas or points.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: (a) Explain the scope of comparative education.
(b) Discuss the purpose of comparative education (c) Explain the reasons for studying comparative education.
3.0 The Content 3.2.1 The Scope of Comparative Education The term "scope" according to Longman dictionary of contemporary English could mean: (a) The area within the limit of a question, subject, action etc.
(b) Space or chance for actions or thought.
From the above, scope of comparative education means the area or areas covered by the discipline.
The scope of the subject also connotes the various subjects or disciplines from where Comparative education draws its information directly or indirectly.
A critical look at the various definitions of the discipline no doubt reveals that Comparative Education is an interdisciplinary subject since it relies on other subjects to be able to accomplish its objectives.
As an interdisciplinary subject, its scope covers the historical development of education right from the Roman as well as the Greek civilization.
It also includes the historical development of non-formal education in any country of study.
The discipline has its scope extended to the purpose or purposes of education systems of the countries being studied, an investigation into the similarities as well as differences existing in the educational practices of the countries under investigation.
However, subjects from where Comparative Education draws its contents include the following: 13  (a) History of Education (b) Philosophy of Education (c) Sociology of Education (d) Anthropology (e) Economics (f) Geography (g) Psychology (h) Statistics (i) Literature (j) Political geography (k) Political science and (l) International relations.
The above explanation clearly shows that the subject is not independent of other subjects; it is a discipline that relates to other subjects for the accomplishment of its aims and objectives.
It may be reasonably concluded that the interdisciplinary nature of the subject has contributed to the wideness of the discipline.
3.2.2 The Purpose of Comparative Education Comparative education like other disciplines being offered in the education institutions is not a purposeless subject.
In other words, the subject has some goals which it aims at achieving.
While giving the purpose of comparative education, Hans (1992) concludes that: The analytical study of these factors from historical perspective and the comparison of attempted solution of resultant problems are the main purpose of comparative education.
It can be concluded from the above that comparative education tries to compare educational problems as well as the solutions applied to such problems with a view to helping one's educational practices.
The purpose of Comparative Education was given by Mallinson (1975) when he noted that: To become familiar with what is being done in 14  some countries ... and why it is done, is a necessary part of the training of all students of educational issues of the day.
Only in that way will they be properly fitted to study and understand their own systems and plan intelligently for the future which given the basic cultural changes that have taken place with such astonishing throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, is going to be one where we are thrown into ever closer contact with other peoples and other cultures.
From the above, it is evident that the study of Comparative Education assists the learners to understand their educational systems better.
In his own contribution to the purpose of comparative education, Marc - Antoine Jullien de Paris (1817) cited in Hans (1992) notes that: The purpose of Comparative Education is to perfect national systems with modifications and changes which the circumstances and local conditions would demand.
Like other Education Comparativsts, the purpose given above is a pointer to the fact that the study of Comparative education assists in the flexibility of educational systems of one's country.
In the same vein, Kandel cited by Hans (1992) was of the opinion that the primary purpose of comparative education is to discover not only the differences existing in the Education systems of two countries but also the factors that bring about such differences in the educational system.
Also, to Hans (1992) the purpose of Comparative Education is to discover the underlying principles which govern the development of all national education systems.
3.2.3 Other reasons for Studying Comparative Education include: 15  (a) To assist in the understanding of one's educational institutions as well as educational practices.
(b) To assist in the understanding of the factors that are responsible for various educational changes.
(c) To educate the students and teachers on the procedure through which educational changes occur.
(d) To contribute not only to the educational development of the society but also to the general development of the society.
(e) To serve as an academic discipline.
(f) To assist in solving one's educational problems (g) To open one's eyes to the educational philosophies, theories and practices of other countries.
(h) To assist both the students and teachers of discipline in gathering reliable information concerning educational system.
(i) To assist in the Promotion of international relationship.
(j) To contribute to the formulation of a country's educational systems.
4.0 Conclusion Comparative education is an interdisciplinary course as it borrows ideas from other subjects.
As a course of study, it has reasons for being taught by teachers and being learnt by the students.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about the scope of comparative education, the purpose of comparative education and other reasons for studying comparative education.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Mention five reasons for studying comparative education.
7.0 References Hans C.N (1992) cited in Lawal B.O.
(2004).
Comparative Education, Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nigeria Ltd. Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English.
16  Malison V. (1975).
An Introduction to the Study of Comparative Education.
London, Heinemann Publishers.
17  Unit 3: Historical Development of Comparative Education 1.0 Introduction The historical development of comparative education can be divided into three stages.
They are: descriptive stage, predictive stage and scientific stage.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the historical development of comparative education.
3.0 The Content 3.3.1 Historical Background In the beginning, Comparative Education was not really Comparative but descriptive as the people were mostly concerned with the description of educational systems of each country without necessarily comparing one educational systems with another.
However, the 19th Century witnessed an increased interest in the study of Comparative Education as education started to be studied in a Comparative form.
As a matter of fact, what can be regarded as serious studies in the field of Comparative Education could be traced to the early 19th century after the Napoleonic wars.
Since there was no war among the Europeans, there was peace among them and they needed something that could enhance their interaction with one another.
Therefore, a consideration was given to the study of comparative education as a strong channel through which the youths of various European countries could be more unified.
To this end, John Griscom travelled to Europe and on his return, he published his findings on educational institutions in the countries visited such as Great Britain, France, Switzerland, Italy as well as Holland between 1818 and 1819.
In the same vein, Victor Cousin, a representative of the French Minister of education visited Prussia in 1931 and also on return home, published his findings on the Prussian educational institutions and practices, His findings were later translated to English and enhanced the educational development in France, England as well as in America.
Another pioneer in the field of Comparative Education was 18  Horace Mann of America who after a six-month visit to Europe also published his findings in 1843 on educational institutions and practices in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany as well as Holland.
His report was purely on the comparison of the school organization and methods of instruction.
Matthew Arnold of England visited both France and Germany in 1859 and 1865.
On his return home, he made some remarks particularly on the educational institutions and practices in both France and Germany.
Like others, he advised that some useful aspects of the educational system of France and Germany should be integrated into the systems of education in England.
What can be viewed as second generation in the study of Comparative Education could be traced to Sir Michael Sadler who in one of his publications: how far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of Foreign Systems of Education which was published in 1900, went further than other pioneers before him who were more utilitarian and straight forward in the description of the foreign educational systems studied by them.
While contributing to the development of Comparative Education study, Kandel cited by Hans (1958) observed that: The chief value of a Comparative approach to educational problems lies in an analysis of the causes which have produced them, in a comparison of the differences between the various systems and the reasons underlying them and finally, in a study of the solutions attempted.
In other words, the comparative approach demands first and appreciation of the intangible, impalpable spiritual and cultural forces which underlie an educational system, the factors and forces outside the school matter even more than what goes inside it.
In the same vein, Friedrich Schneider, a German speaking and Director of the Institute of Comparative Education, Salzburg started the editing of the international Review of Education in four languages in 19  1930.
In his 1947 publication, he gave the following as the factors that can influence the educational theory and practice of any country: (a) National character (b) Geographical space (c) Culture (d) Sciences (e) Philosophy (f) Economic life and politics (g) Religion (h) History (i) Foreign influences and (j) The development of pedagogies Like others, he applied historical approach to the problems of education of all the countries visited by him.
In his own contribution to the development of Comparative Education, Sergius Hessen, a Russian Philosopher looked at Comparative Education from a Philosophical Education point of view.
In his book published in 1928, he selected four problems as an educational policy focus.
The problems are (a) compulsory education (b) The school and the State (c) The school and the church and (d) The school and economic life.
Hessen was perhaps the first education philosopher to apply philosophical approach.
Also, the Comparative Education Society, introduced by Brickman, .
came into being at a conference in New York in 1956.
This society assists in the publication of journal called "The Comparative Education Review".
In addition, it holds national as well as regional conferences and seminars.
In 1961, a similar society was established in Europe after launching the new society in London.
The membership of the Society was extended to the experts in the field of Comparative or International Education in the tertiary Institutions or the International organizations.
Like others, it holds its conferences every two years and publishes the proceedings of its conferences.
Meanwhile, similar societies have been established in Canada, Korea as well as Japan.
Perhaps World-Wide 20  today, the discipline is one of the subjects being offered in all the Universities and Colleges of Education.
The Society for Comparative Education was founded in Nigeria in 1983 while the World congress on the discipline came into being in the year 1982 for Cooperation among the people involved in the study of the subject as well as the general development of Comparative Education.
3.3.2 factors responsible for increased interest in the study of Comparative Education.
Osokoya, P G (1992) gives the following as the other factors responsible for increased interest in the study of Comparative Education.
(a) The emergency of newly independent states and developing countries who wanted a good educational system as soon as possible.
For instance, the newly introduced educational system in Nigeria 6-3-3-4 which was borrowed from America took the Nigerian delegation to schools and companies manufacturing the educational equipment in Sweden.
(b) The greater frequency of travel to attend conferences, seminars as well as workshops abroad.
(c) The improvement in the modern means of transport as well as communication.
(d) The awareness of scientific and technological achievements in the advanced countries such as Russia and Sputnik.
(e) The socio-economic and political problems facing other countries.
3.3.3 Phases in the Development of Comparative Education The phases in the historical development of Comparative Education can be divided into three namely: (a) Descriptive and borrowing stage (b) Predictive stage (c) Scientific stage.
First phase During the first phase of the development of Comparative Education, the educational comparativists involved in this stage include: Marc-Anthony Jullien de Paris, 1817, Mathew Arnold of England, 21  Victor cousin of France, Leo Tolstoy and K.D.
Aushinsky of Russia, Domingo Sermiento of Argentina, Horace Mann and Henry Barbard of America.
At the borrowing stage, the education data collected would be compared so as to make use of it for the best educational practice of the country studied for the purpose of transplanting it to other countries.
3.3.4 Second Phase The second phase in the study of comparative education took place in the first half of the 20th century.
The stage could be regarded as a stage of Prediction because at this stage, the study of comparative education has gone beyond the borrowing stage.
At this stage, the educational comparativists studying the educational institutions and practices of another country will be in the position to predict what is likely to be the success or failure of adopting the educational practices of the country studied by his own country.
It should be remembered by both the students and the teachers of comparative education that the students and the teachers of comparative education that the basis on which a country's educational practice is based may not necessary be the same thing with that of education comparatives studying the education system of other countries.
The educational comparativists involved in this stage included: Friedrich Schneider and Franz Hilker of Germany, Isaac Kandel as well as Robert Ulich of America., Nicholas Hans as well as Joseph Lanwerys of England including Pedro Rosselo of Switzerland.
They tried to find out the reasons behind the educational practices of the country visited by them and they became more careful in transplanting the educational practices of another country to their own.
3.3.5 Third Phase The third stage can be regarded as the scientific period or analytical period.
This stage took place in the second half of the 20th century.
The period witnessed rigorous analysis as well as objectivity in the study of educational practices of other countries.
At this stage, before transplanting the educational practices of another country to one's country, such educational practices have to be subjected to a critical analysis unlike the first stage when the educational practices of the 22  country visited can be borrowed or the second stage when the implication of transplanting the educational practices of another country can be easily predicted.
The comparativists involved in this stage included: Schneider, Kandel as well as Uich.
4.0 Conclusion The treatment of the historical development of comparative education will enhance the students' understanding of the discipline.
5.0 Summary In this unit , you have learnt about the historical development of comparative education as well as the phases involved in it.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Highlight the three major phases involved in the development of comparative education.
Discuss only one of the three phases.
7.0 References Hans 1958 cited by Lawal B.O.
(2004) Comparative Education, Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig Ltd. Osokoya, I.O.
(1992) Comparative Education, Ibadan, University of Ibadan.
.
23  Unit 4 Approaches to the study of comparative education.
1.0 Introduction There are many approaches that can be used to study comparative education.
They include: (a) Problem approach (b) Case study approach (c) Area study approach (d) Historical approach (e) Descriptive approach (f) Philosophical approach (g) International approach (h) Gastronomic approach 2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to mention and discuss some of the approaches to the study of comparative education.
3.0 The Content 3.4.1 Approaches to the Study of Comparative Education Awolola (1986) identified eight approaches to the study of Comparative Education.
They are: (a) Problem Approach or Thematic approach (b) Case study approach (c) Area study approach (d) Historical approach (e) Descriptive approach (f) Philosophical approach (g) International approach and (h) Castronomic approach 3.4.2 Thematic or Problem Approach Here, the investigator will first of all identify a particular educational problem in his own country.
Then, he will begin to look for 24  another country that has the same problem.
The researcher will also study the education problem of another country in relation to their culture.
The researcher will not only study the education problem of another country but he will also examine the solution applied to such problem by the affected country.
From this, he will think of how he will be able to solve their own educational problem as well.
It should be noted that Culture, economic, Socio Political factors vary from one country to another as a result of which educational problems and solutions may not necessarily be the same.
3.4.3 Case Study Approach In this approach, an education Comparativist from Nigeria can go to Iraq to study the primary education Level of the country.
His report (is believed) will be very comprehensive for his readers to understand.
If it is possible for the researcher, he can take all the educational systems of the country and compare such educational system with his own educational system.
The problem with this approach is that as a human being, the investigator may not be totally objective in his report.
3.4.4 Area Study Approach The world area here could refer to a village, a town or country depending on the educational comparativist who wants to carry out the study.
Under this approach, the educational comparativist will engage himself in the educational practices of only one country, if it is a country that he has chosen.
The investigator is going to involve himself in several activities as a result of which he is going to arrive at a body of generalizations on the educational system he is studying.
The study under this approach is always based on geographical, linguistic or racial boundaries.
However, Bereday (1958) is of the opinion that "one of the oldest and clearest ways of introducing the subject (Comparative Education) is to study one geographical area at a time" He therefore identified the following stages in the area study approach: (a) Descriptive Stage - At this stage, an Educational Comparativist can make a description of his own educational system as well as practices.
The researcher has to start by reading extensively.
He will start by reviewing the available literature 25  on the educational system of the country being studied.
To enable the investigator have on the spot assessment, he can personally visit the country whose educational system is studying.
(b) Interpretation Stage - At this stage of the study, the investigator will now collate and analyse the data gathered from various sources to enable him do justice to the educational system of the area being studied.
(c) J uxtaposition Stage - At this stage of the study, the investigator will put side by side the result obtained from the interpretation stage with the educational system of his own country.
(d) Comparative Stage - At this stage of the investigation, the researcher will objectively compare and contrast the educational practices of the country being studied with that of his own.
It is at this stage of the study that whatever hypotheses that might have been formulated by the researcher that will be rejected or accepted.
3.4.5 Historical Approach Under this approach, an investigator will only take a village, town or country for the examination of its educational historical development right from the first day when education was introduced into the place and the time of study.
This approach will enable the researcher to identify the factors that are responsible for the current educational system of the country being studied.
However, the problem with this approach is that greater emphasis is always placed on the past.
3.4.6 Descriptive Approach Here, the investigator will have to describe everything he finds on ground.
Such things to be described could include: Number of schools, student enrolment, number of teachers, number of the school buildings including classrooms as well as the number of subjects being offered.
However, the approach is not very popular among the modern educational Comparativists.
26  3.4.7 International Approach This is an approach whereby all the variations existing from one area to another within the same country are taken into consideration while comparing the system of education of a foreign country with one's educational system.
3.4.8 Gastronomic Approach This is a method whereby both the diet as well as the eating habit of the people in a particular country are related to the practices of their education, the approach is not very popular among the modern educational comparativists.
3.4.9 The Field Study Approach This approach is not new in the area of the subject.
On this approach, Brickman (1966) cited by Alabi and Oyelade (1998) observed that: Visitation of foreign countries whether for the purpose of commerce, conversation curiosity or conflict, goes back to ancient history, travelers in all historical periods must have brought back facts and impression concerning the cultures of the other countries they had visited, included in their reports must have been comments relating to the young and their upbringing.
They may also have made some remarks regarding the similarities and differences in the ways of educating children.
Some, indeed, may have arrived at conclusions involving the expression of value judgments.
In using this approach for studying comparative education Halls (1965) cited by Alabi and Oyelade (1998) identifies three stages in the field study of approach.
They are: 1.
Preparatory stage 2.
Investigatory and analytical stage as well as 3.
Evaluatory and Comparative stage.
27  Preparatory Stage This is the stage in which the investigator will have to prepare himself very well before traveling to his country of interest.
He has to be familiar with the country he wants to visit by reading very extensively about the country.
Investigatory and Analytical Stage At this stage, the researcher will have to formulate some hypotheses on the educational practices of the country he wants to study.
The formulation of these hypotheses will give him a focus on what to look for.
Evaluatory Comparative Stage At this stage, the investigator after coming back from his travel to the foreign country, will now examine the practices of education of the country he has visited in relation to the educational practices of his own country with a view to establishing the similarities as well as the differences existing in the educational practices of the two countries it is also at this stage that the hypotheses earlier on formulated will either be rejected or accepted.
The field study approach unlike area study approach, concerns itself with the study of the educational systems of many countries at the same time.
It also involves visiting the foreign countries of interest to enable the investigator make an objective comparison between the foreign educational practices and that of his country.
3.4.10 The Scientific Approach This is an approach in which the study of comparative education is carried out empirically by formulating hypotheses, defining the important concepts, setting out the variables as well as the conditions for establishing the validity of the hypotheses formulated.
Since in any scientific research, data collection its interpretation with the help of statistics of analysis are very important,.
These must not also be lacking in the study of Comparative Education to enhance the quality and credibility of whatever may be the result of the investigation.
28  3.4.11 The Integrated Approach This is an approach in which other disciplines such as history, philosophy, geography; economics, anthropology and statistics are integrated in to the study of Comparative Education because of their usefulness.
As it has already been stated, it is not possible for Comparative Education as a discipline to stand on its own as it has to draw from other subjects which include the disciplines mentioned above.
3.4.12 The Philosophical Approach A Russian Philosopher by name Serguis Hessen was the first man to apply philosophical approach to the study of Comparative Education when he published his book in 1928 which he tittled "Kritische Vergleichung des Schulwesens der Anderen Kuturstaaten".
In the book, he chose four main philosophical problems.
The problems chosen by him are: (a) Compulsory education (b) The School and the State (c) The school and the Church and (d) The School and Economic life.
He analysed the underlying principles and later followed it by giving a critical account of modern legislation in many countries.
Kosemani (1995) believes that philosophical approach is a step forward to solve the problems in the national character approach.
According to him, there are two major problems involved in the application of philosophical approach to the study of comparative education.
The problems are: (a) Difference in emphasis as a result of which it may be difficult to use the same criterion (national ideology) for the comparison.
(b) There are many countries without clear cut national ideologies.
(c) From the above, it could be deduced that with philosophical approach, hypotheses could be formulated, be tested and could also be empirically validated for better explanation of educational practices of various countries.
29  3.4.13 The Comparative Approach In this approach, the reader must not be made to do the comparison of various educational practices by himself, rather, the comparison and conclusion have to be done by the investigator himself.
Data on the educational practices to be compared must have been gathered and reviewed.
In addition, hypotheses should have also been formulated to assist in the gathering of data.
Then, the educational practices of the country under study will be put side by side with the educational practices of another country slated for comparison.
The next stage after Juxtaposition is the comparison of the educational practices of the countries that have been put side by side.
It is at stage of comparison that the hypotheses that had been formulated earlier on will be rejected or accepted.
4.0 Conclusion The knowledge of different approaches to the study of comparative education will help the learners in better understanding the discipline.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about different approaches to the study of comparative education.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Mention two approaches to the study of comparative education and discuss one of them.
7.0 References Awolola, A.
(1986) Readings in Comparative Education, Ibadan, Stevelola, Education Publishers.
Bereday, G.F. (1958).
Some Methods of Teaching Comparative Education, Comparative Education Review.
Brickman 1966 cited by Alabi, I.O.
et al (1998).
Comparative Education.
A Handbook for Teachers, Oyo, Odumat Press and 30  Publishers.
Halls (1965) cited by Alabi I.O.
et al (1998).
Comparative Education.
A Handbook for Teachers, Oyo, Odumat Press and Publishers.
Kosemani, J.M.
(1995): Comparative Education, Emergent National System Port-Harcourt, Abe Publishers.
31  Unit 5: Determinants of National Education System 1.0 Introduction Every system of education is determined by some factors.
Such factors include; language, geography, economy, history, religion, politics, social, racial and trade unions among others.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify and discuss the factors that determine the education system of any country.
32  3.0 The Content 3.5.1 Language Factor Language is one of the things that can make man to be different from the lower animals.
There is no tribe in the world that does not have its own original language which may be different from other tribes.
Naturally, children learn better and faster when their local language is used to teach them.
At the national level, each country also has national language or languages.
By implication, citizens of such a country will be expected to learn their national languages not only for official purpose but also for effective communication.
In Nigeria for instance, three Nigerian languages have been formally recognized.
They are: Yoruba, Igbo and Hausa languages.
At the secondary school level, a child is expected to take another language in addition to his own local language.
At the primary school level, teachers are allowed to use the local language of the pupils to teach them.
3.5.2 The Geographical Factor One may begin to wonder as to how or why geography is relevant in the development of a country's educational system.
Apart from the fact that the climate of a country affects the school buildings as well as the equipment, what can be easily done in one climatic area may not be so in another place.
Perhaps, this is one of the reasons why open air schools are rarely possible in the Northern part of Nigeria.
There is no doubt about it, the constant change in the Nigerian school calendar year can be attributed to climatic reason.
It should be remembered that the school calendar was changed from January - December, and later, changed to September - July.
The reason for these changes in the school academic year could be that there is always heavy rain in Nigeria between July and August, and to avoid disaster, the pupils are sent on long holidays so that they can stay at home with their parents.
In addition, the months of July and August are the periods for the preparation of the hamattan farming and since the pupils will be with their parents this time, they will be in the position to assist them on their farms.
The weather may also influence the school dressings, the school food, as well as the school time table.
33  3.5.3 The Economic Factor The state of country's economy determines the national education system of that country.
At the beginning of every year, a budget is always prepared and presented by the federal government as it happens in Nigeria.
In the budget, certain percentage of the total budget is always allocated to each of the social amenities to be provided by the government.
It should be noted that when the economy of a country is in a good shape, a better percentage of the budget will go to education.
But when the economy is poor, this may affect the percentage of the budget that will go to education.
Also, all formulated educational policies need substantial amount of money for their implementation.
This can only be possible when the country's economy is Cooperative.
This means that when the country's economy is not good, the formulated educational policies may not be fully implemented, if it is implemented at all.
In addition if the economy of the country is heavily concentrated in a particular location of such a country, there is possibility that people may begin to migrate from their place where economy is not concentrated to an economically concentrated area.
This is one of the reasons responsible for the migration of Nigerians from rural areas to the urban centres as a result of which schools in the urban areas are not only greater in number than the rural areas, but such schools in the urban centers are always over populated and enjoy more qualified teachers than the rural schools.
3.5.4 The Historical Factor As a matter of fact, history, which is the record of past events, has a lot to do with the educational development of a country or nation.
Apart from the traditional system of education which is as old as its locality or society, western formal education which is the focus of our study here is always borrowed from one place or the other.
Education in most if not all the African countries can have its origin traced to the Colonial Master of each of these African countries.
For instance, it is often said that the southerners in Nigeria are much more advanced educationally than the Northerners.
The reason for this can be traced to the historical development of formal education in the Northern Nigeria.
34  By the time Western Education was brought to Nigeria, the Northerners were already used to Islamic Education and they found it difficult to change.
On the other hand, the Southerners who were not seriously used to Islamic education easily embraced the Western Education that was brought to Nigeria.
However, a critical look at the system of education in Nigeria before and after independence shows an adaptation of British educational system.
Because of the failure of the inherited educational system from the Nigerian colonial masters to meet theNigerian aspirations and needs, a new system of education was put in place.
The historical development of education in Nigeria goes for other countries not only in Africa but in many countries of the world.
For instance, the socialist character of education in the old Russia as well as China was as a result of their history.
Also, the secularization of education in China and Russia was due to the oppressive feudal regimes (Law relating to the systems by which people held land, and protection in return for giving work or military help).
After the Persian war, Athens had to change its cosmopolitan society (consisting of people from many different parts of the world).
Finally, it is obvious that the centralized system in France is as a result of their historical background.
3.5.5 The Religious Factor The importance of religion in the development of a country's educational system or policies cannot be overemphasized.
For instance, the earliest schools in Nigeria were founded, administered and financed by the Christian missions.
Later, Moslems established schools for their children and the children of the converts.
Such schools include: Baptist Schools, Islamic Schools, Hammadiya School, C.A.C.
Schools, Methodist Schools, Catholic Schools among others.
In the same vein, the northerners who were already used to Islamic education, reluctantly embraced western Education when it was introduced into Nigeria.
Up till today, perhaps, Western Formal Education is not as popular as Islamic education as a result of which there is an education gap between the North and the South.
The contribution of religion to the development of Nigerian educational system was well acknowledged by the Federal Government not only at 35  the Primary and Secondary Education levels but also at tertiary education level.
In fact, the two prominent religions are being offered in most of the public schools in Nigeria and teachers are always recruited by the government for the teaching of the two religions regardless of whether such schools belong to the Moslems or Christians.
The two religions are always put into consideration whenever political appointment is to be given e.g.
President, Vice President, Ministers, Governors, Deputy-Governors, Commissioners etc.
3.5.6 The Political Factor The type of leadership, his interest, his agenda for the citizens of the country, the type of administration he wants to run, the programmes of his party through which he becomes the leader among other things to a great extent determine the national system of a country's education.
It is not an over - statement to say that the educational system of any society is a reflection of its political ideology.
For instance, the socialism ideology in the U.S.S.R. contributed to the introduction of free and compulsory education in the country.
Tanzania which is an African country had its national education system influenced by her political ideology socialism.
It was this political ideology that gave way for introduction of the new, education ideology popularly known as education for self-reliance.
Since a greater percentage of the Tanzanians are farmers and live in the rural areas and for every Tanzanian to be self reliant in line with the new educational policy, everybody is being exposed not only to farming but also to the life in the rural areas.
This makes the new educational system in the country to truly represent the social, economic, cultural as the political reality of the country.
Till 2006, Nigeria as a country has been able to produce only three civilian presidents since 1960 when it got her independence.
They are Nnamdi Azikiwe (ceremonial) the first Civilian President till 1966, Alhaji Sheu Shagari, 1979 - 1983 and Chief Olusegun Obasanjo who became the third Civilian President on May 29,1999 and May 2003.
Scince 1960 Nigeria was most of the years under the military rule.
This means that the country has been under the military rule with Decrees more than the constitution.
The implication of this is that instability in the political system is bound to bring about educational 36  instability as well.
For instance in Nigeria, there was a time when the payment of Primary School Teachers' salaries was being done by the Federal Government and later it was transferred to the local governments.
As a result of delay in payment, primary school teachers in some local government areas went on strike for several months.
There was a time in Nigeria again when all Private Secondary Schools were taken over by the government.
Later, another government gave approval for the establishment of private secondary schools.
Even some schools were also returned to their owners.
The school calendar is always changed from time to time in Nigeria.
The new system of education popularly known as 6-3-3-4 education system was initiated by the Gowon regime but the launching of the new system of secondary education was done by Alhaji Sheu Shagari in 1982 in Lagos.
Up till 2006 the system has not been fully implemented.
All these educational problems are the manifestation of political instability.
3.5.7 The Social Factor In every society, there is social stratification.
This means that naturally, people in any society do not belong to only one group or class.
In most cases, grouping is always dependent on race, economy, level of education, one's profession or the profession of one's parents, the location of one's residence, one's family background among others.
It is not uncommon to see people of the same grouping or class or their children moving together and doing things together.
Such children are likely to enjoy better and have rapid education than the children whose parents are not educated or whose parents are farmers or traders who have little or no maens for the education of their children.
Because of the inability of the children from a poor background to learn at the same rate with the children from a better schools for the children who are better educationally to enable them to go at their own pace while an opportunity will also be given to the slow learners.
Also, in Nigeria today, because the Northerners are mostly nomads by profession, it became compulsory for the government not only to introduce Nomadic Education but also to establish nomadic schools for the children of these 37  cattle rearrers.
In terms of employment, profession, education, the children of the rich and elite are better placed.
In most cases, because of the social stratification, the schools being attended by the children of the rich, elites are far better than the schools being attended by the children of the poor.
3.5.8 The Ethnic or Racial Factor This simply means a group of people from the same geographical location see themselves as one and begin to discriminate against others who are not from their geographical location.
This is very common in Nigeria.
There are many schools in Nigeria where such schools are being dominated by the people within the schools location.
In order to overcome this problem of ethnicity or racial, the federal government introduced National youth Service Corps Scheme, Federal Government Colleges, Unity Schools, Quota System for anything Federal so that every State of the Federation will be taken care of.
In the South Africa, the Africans who were the sons of the land were heavily discriminated against by the whites.
The schools being attended by the children of the whites were superior to the schools being attended by the children of the blacks.
Also, the Negroes in the United States of America despite the fact that they are Americans culturally, religiously, linguistically yet, the Americans discriminated against them because they are regarded as people who are inferior in every respect.
Because of this view about the Negroes, separate schools were designed for the Americans as well as the Negroes and this was constitutionally supported by the government.
In everything, they are discriminated against and they receive things that are inferior when compared with the Americans.
In the same vein, the French policy even in Africa was aimed at transforming the Africans into Black Frenchmen.
The reason behind this was that the African culture was seen as being inferior to that of the French people.
38  3.5.9 The Academic or Professional Associations There are academic associations which directly influence the development of national educational systems such academic associations include: (a) Association of the University Lecturers (b) Association of the Polytechnic Lecturers (c) Association of Lecturers in the Colleges of Education (d) Association of both Primary and Secondary School Teachers.
In Nigeria for instance, we have (a) Academic Staff Union of Universities (b) Academic Staff Union of Polytechnics (c) Academic Staff Union of Colleges of Education as well as (d) Nigerian Union of Teachers (NUT).
We also have the association of principals of Secondary Schools, the Association of Graduate Teachers, the association of National Certificate of Education (N.C.E.)
teachers and the association of Grade II teachers all within the Nigeria Union of Teachers.
In addition, some subjects have an association each, such associations include: (a) Science Teachers Association (STAN) (b) Mathematics Teachers Association of Nigeria (c) Social Studies Teachers Association of Nigeria.
(d) Nigerian Association for Comparative Education among others They assist in the writing of textbooks on their subjects.
They also assist in the improvement, seminars, workshops as well as conferences for the teachers of their subjects.
4.0 Conclusion The unit above discusses some of the factors that can determine the education system of any country.
5.0 Summary In the last unit, you have learnt about the following factors: (a) Language (b) Geographical (c) Economic (d) Historical (e) Religious (f) 39  Politics (g) Social (h) Ethnic or racial and (i) trade unions and professional associations.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Mention and discuss any two factors that can determine the education system of any nation.
7.0 References Lawal B.O.
(2004) Comparative Education, Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig Ltd. 40  Unit 6 factors that can sustain the teaching and learning of comparative education 1.0 Introduction There are certain factors that can sustain the teaching and learning of comparative education as a discipline.
Also, there are certain qualities to be possessed by anybody who is teaching comparative education.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to identify and discuss factors that can sustain the teaching and learning of comparative education as well as the qualities to be possessed by the teachers of Comparative Education.
3.0 The Content 3.6.1 The Future of Comparative Education For comparative education to have its status enhanced, the following suggestions have to be taken into consideration.
(a) It should be possible to establish through Comparative Education, educational theories that will give predictive power.
(b) The research techniques being used by the Sociologist, Economics, Psychologists and Philosophers among others should be integrated into the approaches to the study of comparative education even though their data may not necessarily be the same thing for the purpose of building up a theory.
(c) Highly qualified and experienced people from different geographical areas should be involved in the study of Comparative Education.
(d) Education Comparativists should extend their cooperation to the philosophers, sociologists, historians, economics, natural scientists, statisticians, linguistics as well as political scientists even though they work in different fields, their contributions differently when integrated together build up the body of Comparative Education information.
41  (e) Efforts should be made to classify educational courses at various levels as well as define the important terminologies in Comparative Education.
(f) A comparative education research should be carried out before conclusion and recommendations on educational policies.
(g) Efforts should be made to encourage applied research in the study of Comparative Education.
(h) In comparative education research, philanthropists, national governments as well as international agencies should assist financially and finally: (i) The people involved in the formulation of educational policies should work hand in hand with the educational comparativists for a better and workable educational formulation.
3.6.2 The Qualities of a Good Educational Comparativist As in any other discipline, there are certain qualities expected of anybody that wants to venture into the study of foreign educational theories and practice.
Such qualities include the following: (a) Objectivity (b) Readiness to visit foreign places (c) Interest in reading education books widely and fastly (d) Good qualification in the subject.
3.6.3 Objectivity The first quality of a good education comparativist is objectivity.
This means that the person researching into other people's education theories and practices will not be biased against them regardless of their population, race, size, and complexion.
It is what is found on the ground about their education theories and practices that will be reported and nothing more.
3.6.4 Visiting other Countries Anybody willing to engage in the study of foreign educational theories and practices should not always stay at home relying on information gathered from books alone.
He should go beyond this by visiting the place whose educational theories and practices he is 42  studying.
If this is done, the objective report of the study will be enhanced as he will be in the position to know which of the information already gathered is correct about the educational theories and practices of the place being studied.
He must not be an arm-chair researcher.
3.6.5 Having Interest Also, a very good education comparativist should have special interest in reading books on forcing education systems.
Not only within his society but outside his country.
He must not limit his reading to only the books on his country's educational systems.
3.6.6 Having Good Qualification Good qualification in Comparative Education or related subject is very important for anybody who wants to engage in the teaching of Comparative Education.
Having a good qualification will not only enhance the quality of such a teacher but will also enhance his personality.
4.0 Conclusion In the unit above, you have learnt the following: (a) The future of Comparative Education (b) Qualities expected of a good education comparativist.
5.0 Summary The unit six discusses the factors that can sustain the teaching and learning of comparative education, as well as the qualities which any teacher of comparative education is expected to possess.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Mention and discuss any two qualities expected of a teacher of comparative education.
7.0 Reference Lawal (2004) Comparative Education.
Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig.
Ltd. 43  MODULE 2 Unit 1: Japanese Education System 1.0 Introduction Exposing the students to education theory and practices of other countries will enhance their knowledge about education practices of such countries.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the education practices of Japan.
3.0 The Content 3.1.1 Background Japan has a total land area of 378, 000 square kilometers.
By 1990, Japan had a population of 124 million.
At all levels of education, Japanese language is not only the official language but also the medium of instruction.
The modern education in Japan can be traced to 1872.
Before this time, Japanese education was concerned with religion as well as ethics (traditional education).
Initially, the Japanese education followed the American education system.
What can be regarded as the primary objectives of Japanese education are stated below: (a) The development of broad mindedness, a health body and creativity in individuals, (b) The rearing of the spirit of freedom, self reliance and public awareness, and (c) Educating the Japanese individual to live in the global human society.
As a democratic state, educational opportunities are made available to all citizens of Japan.
However, the Japanese education system generally include: (a) the formal school system (b) the less formal system of education for the purpose of administration, schools at all levels are divided into (a) State (b) Local (c) Public and (d) Private.
There is no difference in all the categories of schools in Japan except in the areas of administration and finance.
The first nine years of Japanese education is free and compulsory.
44  3.1.2 Pre-School Education in Japan (3-5 Years) Elementary education in Japan normally takes place in the kindergarten schools.
The primary objective of pre-school education in Japan is to give all round development to the Japanese children.
The curriculum for this level of education include: Health, Social Studies, Nature study, Language, Music, Art, Arithmetic, Writing, Reading, Songs, Tales and Physical Education.
3.1.3 Japanese Elementary Education (6 Years) Elementary Education in Japan was organized on four years duration initially.
In the year 1886, this level of education was made free and compulsory.
Also in 1908, the compulsory elementary education was raised to six years from the original four years.
According to the 1972 Education Reform, education in Japan aims at the following: (a) To help people to acquire the abilities for building a satisfactory and spontaneous life.
(b) To adapt to social reality and the creative solution of difficulties.
From the above general aims, the following specific objectives are derived: (a) The development of basic abilities in the young people side by side with a set of specified vocational skills, (b) The preparation of students to cope flexibly with rapid progress in science and technology, (c) The preparation of the students for social life.
The Japanese elementary schools are designed for children aged 6- 12 years.
About 97% of the Japanese children attend public elementary schools while only about 3% go to private elementary schools.
The curriculum for this level of education include, Japanese language, social studies, Arithmetic, Science, Music, Art and Craft, home Education, Physical Education, Moral Education, (in public schools) Religious Education (in Private Schools).
45  3.1.4 Secondary Education in Japan This level of education is divided into two cycles, namely: (a) Lower or Junior Secondary: This cycle of Secondary Education is free and compulsory like elementary education.
It lasts for 3 years and designed for children ages 12 to 15 years.
About 97% of Japanese secondary schools age attend public lower school while about 3% go to the private Junior Secondary School.
The primary objective of this level of education is to give all round development to the Japanese children and to give continuity to the Japanese elementary education.
The curriculum for this level of education include: Japanese Language, Social Studies, Mathematics, General Science, Vocational and home Education, Foreign Language, Vocational Subjects, Agriculture, Industry, Commerce and Fisheries.
3.1.5 Upper Secondary Schools It should be noted that Upper Secondary School as well as pre- school education are not free and compulsory for the Japanese children.
The primary objective of this cycle of secondary education is to give general and specialized education to the students.
The students wishing to enter an upper secondary school will have to write an entrance examination.
In addition to paying school fees, students also have to buy textbooks recommended by the Ministry of Education.
Basically, there are two types of upper secondary school in Japan.
They are: (a) 3 years full time upper secondary schools and (b) 4 years part-time and correspondence upper school.
This cycle of secondary education is terminal as its graduates can decide to work with it or seek an admission with it into a tertiary institution.
Upper secondary education curriculum include: Japanese Language, Social Studies, Ethics, Civics, Political Science, Economics, Mathematics, Physical Education, Fine Arts, Music, Handicrafts and geography and Finally, Home Education for girls.
3.1.6 Teacher Education in Japan Teachers for kindergarten schools are always trained in the teacher training Institutions while the secondary school teachers are also trained 46  in the Universities.
In the same vein, teachers for the Japanese higher institutions are equally trained in the Universities.
It should be noted that before a person can be appointed to teach in any public tertiary institution, such a person is expected to have a minimum of Masters degree in the area where he wants to teach.
3.1.7 Adult Education Adult education in Japan is regarded as social education.
This kind of education is always organized by the Ministry of Education for the Japanese citizens who are not in the formal school.
Towards this education, the Ministry of Education always provides correspondence courses.
Such correspondence courses are in vocational, technical, agricultural, fishery as well as forestry subjects.
The ministry efforts are always complemented with radio and television programmes particularly in the area of general education.
Nongovernmental bodies also assist in Japanese adult education.
3.1.8 Special Education Right from the year 1973, an official recognition was accorded the education of special children in Japan.
Like other levels of education, special education has its own objectives.
Its objectives include the following: (a) To identify and give appropriate educational programmes to the affected children, (b) To establish national centres for research and training, (c) For the integration, whenever possible of the handicapped with normal children and (d) To render other possible assistance to the handicapped children.
3.1.9 Tertiary Education In Japan, there are three categories of tertiary institution.
They are: (a) University (b) Junior College and (c) College of technology.
In the University, degrees are awarded and students spend between 4-6 years depending on their course of study.
At the Junior College, degrees are not awarded unlike in the 47  Universities.
As stated above, colleges of technology are another form of tertiary institution in Japan.
In this institution, educational technology and engineering education are provided.
This kind of education is primarily designed for the graduates of junior or lower secondary education.
It has duration of five years.
3.1.10 Financing Education All public schools in Japan are highly centralized.
Generally, schools are administered in the following order: (a) The Ministry of Education at the top (b) The Prefectural Education Boards (c) The Municipal Education Boards at the grassroots level or local level.
At the national level, the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture always assists in the preparation of education budget, formulation of educational laws, and maintenance of educational standard.
The Ministry of Education, Science and Culture is also saddled with the responsibility of giving an approval for the establishment of higher institutions and also to supervise various tertiary institutions in the whole of Japan.
4.0 Conclusion The unit above discusses the Japanese education 5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about different levels of Japanese education, financing and administration of Japanese education.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify the major types of education in Japan.
7.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
in Lawal B.O.
Salami W.O.
and Farayola, J.A.
(2001) Comparative Education.
Ibadan, Olu-Akin Publishers.
48  Unit 2 - The System of Education in Brazil 1.0 Introduction Discussing the system of education in Brazil will enhance the students' understanding of education and practices of foreign countries.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the education practices of Brazil.
3.0 Conclusion The unit above discusses the education theory and practice of Brazil.
3.2.1 Background Brazil which is the largest country in the whole of South America was formally a federation of states but later divided into many municipalities as well as local districts.
It should be noted that more than 80% of the Brazilian population are Catholics and this to some extent prevents the blacks from being discriminated against.
Like most democratic states, primary education in Brazil is not only free but also compulsory.
This factor, among others, makes it possible for over 70 percent of the Brazilian population to be literates.
The government also pays attention to other forms of education such as adult as well as Non- formal education with the aid of radio and television.
3.2.2 Pre-Primary Education Unlike some African countries, this level of education is for children ages 2 to 6 years.
Pre-Primary schools are being handled by the private individuals.
At this level of education, children have to pay school fees.
3.2.3 Primary Education Primary education in Brazil is for children aged 7 to 14 years.
As stated earlier, this level of education is not only free but also compulsory in Brazil.
With the 1971 Basic Education Law in the country, pupils in primary schools are to spend 8 years.
This level of education is divided 49  into two stages and each stage lasts for four years.
During the first stage, the pupils will be exposed to general studies while in the last stage (5-8 years) pupils will be exposed to vocational studies.
3.2.4 Secondary Education This level of education in Brazil is designed for Brazilians aged 15 years.
This level of education is purely academic.
On the other hand, students who are interested in vocational education will be admitted into vocational schools where such subjects are being offered.
Secondary school students in Brazil can run their secondary education on either full time or part time basis.
Students may spend three years on the programme and part time students on the other hand may also spend four years.
Since majority of Brazilians are Catholics, as it may be expected, majority of the private secondary schools belong to the Catholics.
3.2.5 Higher Education Higher education in Brazil was in the past a way through which the educated and rich Brazilians used to integrate their children into their parents highly stratified society.
In the Brazil, political activities have been a permanent feature of university life.
In Brazil, there are both private and public universities.
In most cases, best Brazilians in academics and perhaps in character have access to public universities while on the other hand, poor academically students, if not admitted by the public universities, may go to the private universities.
In the Brazilian universities, both academic as well as professional subjects are being offered.
The 1931 university legislation empowered the Brazilians approved universities to teach and also to award degree to qualified students.
However, there was another legislation in 1968.
The number of university graduates produced rose from almost zero in 1960s to about 40,000 in 1986.
In the same vein, the percentage of university teachers with doctoral degree rose from 6.6% in 1974 to 12.7% in 1987 while teachers with master's degree rose from 9.7% to 21.2% within the same period.
50  3.2.6 Teacher Education Primary school teachers in Brazil are expected to be professionally trained before they could be allowed to teach.
It should be noted that in a few cases, untrained teachers might be allowed to teach particularly where there are inadequate qualified primary school teachers.
Secondary school teachers must not only be trained but also, they are expected to receive their professional training in the university.
However, like in some other places, secondary school teachers could also receive their professional training in the Teachers' Colleges.
University teachers in addition to having a second university degree in most cases should also develop interest in research work.
They are encouraged to develop themselves while still on the job.
3.2.7 Educational Administration In 1988, a new constitution was put in place by the Brazilian government.
With this constitution, all public schools are to be tuition free.
Generally, many educational decrees or educational laws were put in place by the government in order to enhance the educational administration in Brazil.
The formulation of the country's educational policy is the responsibility of the Federal Council of Education in collaboration with Ministry of Education.
The Ministry of Education is also expected to supervise schools, to provide necessary assistance to federal universities.
3.2.8 Finance of Education The government funds the public schools at all levels while the private schools at all levels are also funded by their owners.
Basically, bulk of the money spent on education in the country comes from various taxes including the compulsory private contributions.
Higher institutions in Brazil at times receive aids from foreign individuals and organizations.
Higher institutions are also encouraged by the government to generate fund internally to complement the money they receive from the government.
Unit above discusses the education theory and practice of Brazil.
4.0 Summary 51  In the last unit, you have been exposed to the different levels of education in Brazil as well as her education administration and financing of education.
5.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Mention the major types of education in Brazil.
6.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
in Lawal, B.O., Salami, W.O.
and Farayola, J.A.
(2001).
Comparative Education.
Ibadan, Olu-Akin Publishers.
52  Unit 3: Education in England 1.0 Introduction Exposing the learners to education theory and practice in England will afford them the opportunity of comparing the practices of education in Nigeria with that of England.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to compare and contrast the practices of Education in Nigeria with that of England.
3.0 The Content 3.3.1 Background Education in English at the initial stage, was provided by voluntary agencies including the churches.
However, such schools founded by the voluntary agencies were financially aided by the government.
With the rapid growth in population as well as the expansion in the Industrial Sector and the enactment of education Act of 1870, schools' boards were established to assist the Voluntary Schools, later, the parliamentary Acts Elementary Education made elementary education compulsory and free.
The beginning of a national education system in Britain can be traced to the HADOW REPORT of 1926.
It was this report that brought about the reorganization of the elementary education.
In the same vein, the SPENS report of 1938 also assisted the reorganization of the elementary education and the recommendation of technical secondary education.
In the development of education in Great Britain, the Catholic played significant roles as quite a number of the Voluntary Schools were founded by them.
However, the education Act of 1902 gave the following three levels of education.
3.3.2 (a) The Elementary School This school is designed for the children aged 5-14 years, in order to ensure that majority of the children attend elementary school, 53  elementary education in England was not only tuition free but it is also compulsory for all the children who are within the age of 5 and 14 years.
3.3.3 (b) Secondary School This school was designed for children who have already completed the elementary education.
It is designed for children whose parents are rich enough to pay the school fees.
Unlike elementary education, it is not compulsory at all.
Secondary education after graduation offers the products clerical jobs among others.
3.3.4 (c) Preparatory and Public Schools These schools were very expensive and were meant for children of the upper class (the Aristocrats).
These preparatory and public schools gave birth to the establishment of both the University of Oxford and the Cambridge University.
Types of Schools in England The following types of schools are in existence in England.
3.3.5 (a) Nursery Education A nursery school is school designed for children aged 3-5 years.
Nursery school also serves as a temporary home for the children whose parents are working.
Nursery education can be dated back to 1850, through the efforts of Friedrich Frobel as well as Maria Montessori.
It should be noted that day-nurseries where the children of working parents are kept are not the same thing as nursery school.
The reason is that, real nursery education is for the children aged 3-5 years and it is also part of the school system.
It is tuition free.
The Hadow Report of 1933 and Plowden report of 1967 greatly enhanced the development and improvement of nursery education in England.
3.3.6 Primary Education The Balfour-Morant Act of 1904 gave the following as the objectives of primary education in England.]
(a) Recognising the child from 7-11 is a total being whose character, intelligence as well as physical abilities are moulded and 54  trained.
(b) Arousing in the pupils a lively interest in man's ideals, achievements, literature, history as well as language.
(c) Developing an awareness in the pupils limitation; and (d) Demonstrating to the pupils how to acquire knowledge as well as learning for themselves.
Primary school in England could be divided into: (a) Elementary and (b) Higher elementary schools.
(c) According to statistics, about 93 percent of the children within the age of twelve years were in the elementary school.
The Fisher education, Act of 1918 made primary education compulsory for children up to the age of fourteen years and it also recommended the re-organization of primary education.
Simply, primary education in England can be described as the education of young children below the age of eleven years.
For the purpose of administration, all the public primary schools were being administered by the local education Authorities.
It was also the responsibility of the Local Education Authorities to control all forms of secular education in the privately owned (Voluntary) primary schools.
Also in England, there are some primary schools called Direct Grant School.
Parents pay school fees in these schools.
Primary school head is always given contract appointment.
Inspectors only visit schools on request.
Primary school subjects include: History, Geography, Nature study, Crafts, Arts and Physical Education, French, Religious Education.
Also, the extra school activities include: Gynamastic, Swimming, music among others.
The 1944 Act increased the compulsory education in England to 15 years.
It also recommended that the number of pupils in each class should be reduced to make it more manageable.
The plowing report of 1967 had recommended a change in the age at which school pupils may transfer from eleven to twelve's years.
It was also recommended that the junior schools were recommended for pupils 55  aged 8-12 years or 9-13 years to enable the Local Authorities have a better reorganization of the secondary schools.
3.3.7 Secondary Education Secondary school in England maybe day or boarding school which offers to each of its scholars, up to and beyond the age of 16, a general, education, physical, mental and moral, given through a complete graded course of instruction of wider scope and more advanced degree than that in elementary schools.
About four types of secondary education can be identified in England.
They are: (a) Secondary Modern Schools (b) Secondary Grammar Schools (c) Technical High School and (d) Comprehensive School (a) Secondary Modern Schools are designed for students who are not academically inclined after their Primary Education.
Secondary Modern Schools cater for secondary education for academically weak students up to the age of fifteen (15) years.
(b) Secondary Grammar Schools are designed for the students who are academically inclined after their primary education.
These schools in addition to giving sound formal education to the students, also serve as the Custodian of English Tradition.
(c) Technical High Schools are provided for students who have an intension of working in the industry later in life.
In other words, these schools are established to cater for the needs of commerce and industry.
The products of this school are admitted into the faculties of engineering for engineering courses in the British Universities.
(d) Comprehensive Schools: These schools are established to cater for children aged 11-18 years.
The students in these schools offer the same subjects up to their second year.
At the end of their third year, the students will be expected to choose three subjects apart from English language and Mathematics which 56  they will like to study in their last two years.
In the school, the students will have opportunity of learning one vocation or the other.
As from the third year, the students will be exposed to one vocation or the other which he may want to do later in life.
To assist the students, career officers are always provided by the school for the purpose of counseling the students on their future vocation.
57  3.3.8 Technical or Further Education in England These are the institutions provided for young persons for the purpose of assisting them to develop their various aptitudes and also to train them to become responsible adults in life.
Such schools among others include physical, practical as well as vocational training.
An increased interest in the development of British Industry after the World war II for the training of skilled manpower in the area of technology greatly contributed to the development of further or technical education in England.
At the end of the course, the students could be presented for the examination of the city and guilds of London Institute or any other related professional examinations.
For children under the age of sixteen years, tuition is free while those who are above the age of 16 years and are working have to pay fees.
Technical colleges or further education are run on both part time and full time basis.
3.3.9 Teacher Education in England Teacher education is the professional training designed for teachers of all categories starting from the nursery school to the university.
Perhaps, the first teachers' College for the training of secondary school teachers was the college of preceptors which was founded in the year 1846.
With effect from 1904, the local education authorities were allowed to establish their Teachers Colleges.
As from 1921, the British Universities include Teacher education programme in their curricula.
For the degree in education, students would spend three years and the fourth year would be for their teaching practice after which a university diploma or certificate in education would be awarded.
In 1943, the Board of education recommended that more Teacher's colleges should be founded so as to be able to solve the problem of inadequate qualified teachers.
The Me Nair report of 1944 among others, recommended that universities as well as Teacher Training Colleges should work hand in hand for the general improvement of teacher education.
However, before the education Act of 1944, the primary school teachers were of four categories: 58  (a) Certificated (b) Uncertificated (c) Supplementary and (d) Specialist teachers.
In case of secondary schools, the teachers are expected to specialize in a particular subject.
While the teachers for the old elementary schools were trained in the two-year colleges after their secondary education, the secondary school teachers were trained in a one-year teachers' diploma course at the university departments after graduating either from the faculty of Arts or Science.
On the other hand, the teachers of independent public schools were degree holders.
3.3.10 Adult Education in England Adult education in England can be described as education designed for people who have left school, adequate facilities for leisure- time occupation in organized cultural training and recreative activities for persons who are above compulsory school age and can benefit from such educational programmes.
The beginning of Adult education in both England and Wales could be traced to the activities of British Philanthropists who initiated the idea by first of all establishing Sunday schools for the Literacy Education of both the children as well as the adults.
Many children and adults profited from this kind of education.
The success recorded from this kind of education led to the establishment of London Mechanics Institution for the training of Mechanics in 1823.
Within a very short time, similar institutions were cited in both England and Wales.
The formation of the workers' educational Association which was affiliated to the Oxford University also contributed to the development of Adult Education in England.
The association used to organize tutorial classes for its members in England.
With effect from 1907, the Board of Education in England started to assist the university tutorial classes for general enhancement of Adult education.
Also, for the promotion of Adult education, an Adult education Committee was set up in 1921.
Primarily, the committee was to assist in the co-ordination of all the Adult education Voluntary 59  Agencies.
To crown it all, an open University was founded between 1960 and 1970 to provide better education for both the Adults as well as the workers.
With the open University education, workers in particular, were able to improve their working condition even though such Open University education was not tuition free.
3.3.11 University Education in England Higher institutions in both England and Wales include: the Universities, colleges of education as well as the polytechnics.
The most popular universities are the Oxford University founded in 1185 and Cambridge University in 1230.
The two oldest universities were founded by the Church of England.
In order to break the monopoly of both the Oxford University and the University of Cambridge, London University was established in 1828.
School fees are being charged by the universities with which the universities are being financed in addition to financial aid from the public.
Each university is autonomous in respect of admission, examination and award of degrees among others.
3.3.12 Administration of Education in England The Education Minister is always appointed by the prime Minister.
The Minister has Permanent Secretaries to help him in carrying out his official duties.
The Minister is the controller as well as the Director of Education Board.
He has the power to organize the schools at any time.
The Local Education Authorities are elected bodies for the purpose of controlling schools under them.
They also have voluntary schools under them.
They employed teachers and pay their salaries as well.
Each school has the power to select the textbooks for the use of its pupils.
However, unlike primary and secondary schools, higher institutions are not under control of the Ministry of Education.
3.3.13 Financing of Education Money is always voted for the Ministry of Education from the national revenue by the parliament.
The Minister of Education will also disburse part of the money inform of grants to local Education 60  Authorities.
4.0 Conclusion The unit above discusses the education theory and practice of England.
5.0 Summary In the last unit, you have been exposed to different types of education in England as well as her education administration and financing.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify the major types of education in England.
7.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
(2004) Comparative Education.
Osogbo Swift Publishers Nig.
Ltd. 61  Unit 4: Education in the United States of America 1.0 Introduction Discussing education in America will give the students the opportunity to compare and contrast the system of education in America and Nigeria.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the system of education in America.
3.0 The Content 3.4.1 Background Each State in America has the power to establish its own system of education.
The local districts under the States also have the power to establish schools boards and to found schools as well.
The power of the States to set up schools does not in any way, prevent the church from establishing schools in any of the states.
The Education Levels in America include: (a) Nursery Education (b) Elementary or Primary Education (c) Secondary Education (d) Teacher Education and (e) University and Adult Education.
3.4.2 (a) Nursery Education At the beginning, nursery education was part of primary school between 1868 and 1873.
By 1888, nursery education had spread to many places in America.
The Lanham education Act of 1940 also enhanced the development of nursery education in America by giving subventions from the federal government to nursery education.
Later, individuals who had interest in the education of children started to part-take in the running of nursery schools.
Also, the churches were participating in the running of nursery school.
62  3.4.3 The Primary Education Primary Education in America is the education given to the children which has the duration of six years.
The purpose of American primary education includes: (a) turning out well-adjusted citizens (b) helping the children to be active participants in the building of their own lives and also to assist them in understanding the roles expected of them in establishing a better American society.
The primary school subjects include: Mathematics, Science, Geography, History, Social Studies, English language, English literature, French, German and Spanish.
However, religious subjects are not included in the school curriculum as Americans have freedom of worship.
In the primary schools, the promotion of the pupils is always based on continuous assessment and not on any promotion examination.
It is the duty of the Local Schools Board to provide some of the school materials.
A public primary school is headed by the principal who is the administrative head of the school.
While the primary school teachers are expected to have a university degree, the principals are in addition expected to have masters degree of educational administration and supervision.
The failure of the Federal Government to include Religious Instructions in the school curriculum was one of the reasons that forced the Catholic to establish their own schools where religious instruction was included in the school curriculum.
By implication, there are both private and public primary schools in America.
3.4.4 Secondary Schools in America Secondary education in America is the type of education given to the adolescents on the basis of three years in the Junior Secondary School and three years in the Senior Secondary School.
This can be referred to as 3 - 3 secondary education system.
The aims and objectives of American Secondary Education include: (a) Creating a strong egalitarian society where everybody will have 63  equal opportunity.
(b) Preparing students for survival in the future (c) Preparing the students for their colleges and universities.
Some States in America provide free secondary education and free textbooks for their citizens particularly up to the age of sixteen years.
The products of primary schools are always admitted into the secondary schools.
There are both public as well as private secondary schools in America.
The Ordinance Act 1785 which made it mandatory for each township to set its sixteenth section for the use of education as well as the North West Ordinance of 1887 greatly enhanced the development of education in America.
However, the problem of sub-standardized secondary schools and willingness to provide secondary education for many American children led to the introduction of Junior High School.
In the Junior High School, the students are expected to spend three years after their primary education that is between the age of 12-15 years.
After successfully completing the Junior Secondary Education, the students will start their Senior High School Education which is meant for the students, who are academically inclined.
The public senior high schools are tuition free.
Provision of learning materials for schools and the general financing of schools are responsibilities of the local schools district.
In America, private high schools or secondary schools are also allowed by the constitution.
However, unlike the public high schools, tuition is not free and the teaching of religious education is allowed.
It is on record that America has started operating 6-3-3-4 education system, yet, the old system of 8-4 years is still in operation (eight years of primary education and four years of secondary education).
3.4.5 Teacher Education in the United States of America Teacher education in America like in other places refer to the professional training being given to the would-be teachers.
The aims and objectives of American Teacher Education include: 64  (a) Preparing teachers for the needs and aspirations of American as a democratic nation.
(b) Preparing teachers who will later assist in the training of American children for the purpose of promoting their culture.
The establishment of Jefferson College in Washington among others in the 1800s marks the beginning of teacher education in America.
The preparation of primary school teachers is always done by the normal schools.
These normal schools are recognized by the State Boards of Education for the training of primary school teachers.
The subjects being offered in thee training institutions include: Administration, psychology, philosophy, History of education.
On the other hand, the secondary school teachers are expected to be university degree holders after a period of four years either in a college or in the university.
In most cases, teachers' appointment is always on contract basis and it is renewable yearly, provided the concerned teacher is still interested in working in his school.
At the same time, the school district board of education has the constitutional power to terminate the contract appointment of any of its teachers.
3.4.6 The American University Education In America, higher education is provided in the colleges of education, higher technical institutes and universities.
In 1862, the American Government passed the Morrill Act which made it compulsory for the Americans to make land available to the American Federal Government for the development of Universities and higher institutions of learning.
There are two major categories of higher education in America, they are: (a) The state universities and colleges which are maintained by the state and (b) Independent universities and colleges which are run by various churches and private individuals.
In these private colleges and universities, high school fees are changed.
A degree programme lasts for four years.
65  3.4.7 Adult Education in America The beginning of Adult education can be traced to the establishment of Lyceum in Massachusetts in 1826.
Also, the Smith Lever Act of 1914 as well as the Adult education Association of the United States in 1951 greatly contributed to the development of Adult Education in America.
Adult education in American is run by private individuals such as lawyers, physicians, architects, teachers and musicians for the purpose of self culture, community instruction as well as the mutual discussion of common public interest.
In 1906, the university extension was started and this has been extended to most of the universities in America.
3.4.8 Technical Education There have been some technical institutions as early as the middle of 19th century.
But there was no serious attempt to promote technical education until when the Mosco technical school was able to perform creditably well at the international exhibitions in the 1970s.
Thereafter, more technical institutions began to spring up in America.
Also, the Morill Act of 1862 assisted in the development of technical education, private individuals started founding both commercial as well as business colleges.
The Smith-Hughes Act among other things recommended that a Federal Board of vocational education should be set up.
It was on the basis of this that the Federal Board of vocational education was established in which a substantial amount of money was set aside by the federal government for the general promotion of vocational and technical education throughout America.
3.4.9 Administration of Education in America Education in America is decentralized.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of each estate as well as the private individuals to take care of their schools.
In 1867, the National Officer of Education was set up and it is being headed by the Education Commissioner who is an appointee of the president of America.
The federal government always assists the state governments in the funding of technical and vocational 66  education.
The state universities are financially aided by the Federal Government.
At the State level, there is a state department of education under the headship of Education Director who is elected by the people within the state for a period of two to four years.
Locally, each local government has a local board of education, usually headed by a Superintendent of schools in the district.
His duties include: appointing teachers and other personnel who will be working with him.
He also works on the finance of schools founded by the local government.
3.4.10 Finance of Education in America In the whole of America, less than 60 per cent of the total cost of both public primary and secondary schools comes from the taxes levied by the local schools boards.
Also, the state government always sets aside about 40 per cent of its annual budget for the running of the public schools.
The bulk of this money is generated from the state taxes as well as the taxes paid by the state workers.
In the private schools, starting from the primary school up to the university, the students pay school fees in addition to the taxes being paid by the parents.
Also, some well to-do individuals in America always assist the private schools financially.
4.0 Conclusion The unit above discusses the practices of education in America.
The discussion also touches the education administration and finance.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been exposed to different types of education in America as well as the financing and administration of education in America.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Mention all the types of education that are available in America.
67  7.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
(2004).
Comparative Education, Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig Ltd. Unit 5: Education in France 1.0 Introduction The treatment of education in France will afford the learners the opportunity to compare and contrast the practices of education in both Nigeria and France.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the system of education in France.
3.0 The Content 3.5.1 Background For quite a long time, French education was under the control of the church.
This made it possible for the church not only to integrate Christianity into the school curriculum but also to indoctrinate the school children.
Napoleon could be regarded as an educational revolutionist in France.
His contributions to the development of education in France cannot be overemphasized.
For instance, in 1802, schools of Arts and Trades were founded by him.
Apart from the fact that he contributed to the development of the two schools of Engineering as well as the Mining founded before 1802, he was also, the founder of the University of France.
68  In France, there are two types of education, they are: (a) The state schools as well as (b) Private or independent schools founded by the private individuals or groups or religious bodies.
The two types of education are not only centralized but are also similar in both methods and structure.
However, the secularization laws (laws preventing the church or religious bodies from controlling the schools) of 1882 and that of 1904 assisted the public or state schools to be independent of the church.
The same laws also made the catholic schools not only to be voluntary but also independent of the state.
While the Catholic schools were established by individual teachers as well as groups of parents under the control of the church on the other hand, the state schools belong to the government and such schools are being attended by well over 70% of the compulsory age groups in France.
Tuition was free in the state schools, whereas it is not free at all in the private or Catholic schools.
The education law of 1850 allowed the private individuals to open secondary schools.
The education law of 1875 allowed for the establishment of private higher institutions, that of 1886 gave legal backing for the founding of private primary schools and the education law of 1919 gave legal backing for the establishment of private technical institutions.
The compulsory education designed for children aged 6 and 13 years by the education law of 1882 was extended to 14 years by the education law of 1936.
This was increased to 16 years by the education decree of 1959.
3.5.3 Education Administration Education administration in France is centrally done.
France as a whole is divided into regions and each region is blessed with some departments known as academic.
A Rector is the head of each academic who is always appointed by the president.
The Rector is responsible to the Education Minister and he has powers over institutions under his control including the supervision of private schools.
Rector is supported by the inspectors of academy.
In addition, each district ha a primary Inspector who is responsible to the Inspector of Academy.
For pre- 69  school institutions, there are special sub-inspectors majority of whom are women.
Also, for general supervision of teaching, there are special inspectors of national education who are not only specialists in different subjects but also supervise their different subjects in the whole country.
Each level of Education such as primary, secondary, technical and higher institutions is being controlled by a directorate of such a Level of education particularly in the areas of supervision of teaching, staff among others.
3.5.4 Financing of Education In the area of educational finance as it affects secondary, technical as well as higher education, the state is responsible for the lion share of the expenditure while the remaining comes from school fees paid by the students and private sources.
Also, members of the universities academic staff who are also civil servants receive their salaries from the budget of the Ministry of National Education.
For primary education, about 30 per cent of its expenses is catered for by the local authorities.
The teachers' salaries are paid by the state and they are all regarded as civil servants.
Also, both the communes as well as the municipalities are jointly responsible for the school buildings, electricity, teachers accommodation, the teaching equipment among others.
The private schools on the other hand, charge school fees which they use for the maintenance of their schools.
The Rectors of universities appointed by the Education Ministers still remain the rectors of the academics.
The professors of the university are always appointed by the Education Minister and such appointment is based on the recommendation of the faculties.
3.5.5 Types of Education However, the new education plan in France divides higher education into three (3) different stages.
The stages are: (a) The first education cycle (18 - 20) which is designed for learned professions and of technical, normal schools training teachers as well as technicians of intermediate grades.
(b) The second education cycle (aged 20 - 22) is for the purpose of preparing students for the first degrees.
70  (c) The third or the last education cycle includes the Grandes Ecoles d' Application.
This category of education cycle prepares the students not only for aggregation but also for the research work.
3.5.6 Teacher Education In the area of teacher training, the primary school teachers received their professional training in Ecoles Normales after passing the examination for the Brevet Elementaire at the age of 16 years.
In this training Institution, they will spend three (3) years after which they will be awarded the Brevet Superieure.
With this award, the trainees will be given a temporary teaching appointment as primary school teachers.
After the probationary period, if the temporary appointees are found to be appointable, their temporary appointment will be confirmed and they will subsequently become permanent.
On the other hand, the secondary school teachers are expected to pass the Baccalaureate and are also expected to have professional training from the universities (the teaching licence).
This will give them the opportunity to be given a temporary appointment to teach their subject of specialization.
For any temporary appointee who wants his appointment to be confirmed or to become a permanent one, needs to have an additional qualification of aggregation among other things.
It should be noted that this aggregation is made highly competitive by the state so that the number of the successful candidates will tally with the available vacancies in the secondary schools.
Also, the two categories of teachers have different conditions of service as well as different professional training.
Since they have different conditions of service and different licence, it is not possible for them to interchange.
By implication, teachers serving in a private school cannot transfer their service to a state school.
This is not good enough for teaching profession.
4.0 Conclusion This unit discusses the background, levels of education, education administration as well as financing of education in France.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been exposed to the system of education in France.
71  6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify the major types of education in France.
7.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
(2004).
Comparative Education, Osogbo, Swift Publishers, Nig.
Ltd. Unit 6: The System of Education in Jamaica 1.0 Introduction Exposing students to the theory and practices of education in Jamaica will enhance their knowledge about comparative education.
2.0 Objective At the end of the unit, you should be able to discuss the system of education in Jamaica.
3.0 The Content 3.6.1 Background Jamaica, the third largest of the Caribbean Island is situated 144 kilometre south of Cuba as well as 600 kilometres south of Florida.
It became a British colony in 1655.
Well over 90 per cent of its population is of African origin while the rest came from East Indians, Chinese Syrians, Lebanese as well as whites.
The 1982 census put the Jamaica's population as 2,190,357.
Like other British colonies, English is its official language.
It, however, got her independent in 1962.
3.6.2 Introduction of Formal Education The earliest schools in Jamaica were mostly controlled by trustees who were elected by the voters of a parish or by Anglican Clergymen.
However, the establishment of Negro Education Grant brought the education administration under the various Christian Missions through the committee that were set up by their missionary headquarters in England.
It is the responsibility of each religious society to supervise its schools, to provide textbooks and also to recommend appropriate 72  teaching methods.
The negro Education Grant was stopped in 1845 as a result of which the colonial legislatures were saddled with the responsibility of providing education for the people in the country.
This change in the provision of education led the legislatures to give preference to industrial education.
By 1850, perhaps the first Government Normal School of Industry was founded.
The office of superintendent of schools as well as education department was set up after Jamaica had become a Crown colony in 1866.
It was this department that saw to the efficiency of education through supervision and collection of school fees.
Based on the recommendation made by the Royal Commission of 1885, an education board was set up in 1892 with the representatives of the religious organizations as members of the board as well as Education Superintendent as the Ex-officio chairman.
Managers were the local administrators of school since majority of such managers were the proprietors of schools.
In order to involve the Jamaica's local people in the educational administration, fourteen parish school boards were founded in the year 1914.
The members appointment was done by the governor on the basis of the recommendations made by the schools' managers as well as another local government body.
Also, twenty-one district school boards were appointed based on the recommendation made by the parish school boards.
However, after the reorganization of the school board as a result of the recommendations made by the legislative committee of 1926, the following were to see to the improvement of education department.
(a) Director of Education (b) Deputy Director of Education (c) 3 Chief Inspectors of Education (d) Inspectors of Education and (e) Assistant Inspectors of Education 3.6.3 Stages of Education The system of education in Jamaica was a resemblance of the traditional British education system.
The education curriculum was 73  made to be relevant to the needs and aspirations of the Jamaicans particularly at the primary education level.
After independence, the British external examinations were replaced with the Jamaican regional external examinations.
Structurally, the Jamaican education Levels include (a) primary (b) secondary and (c) Tertiary level of education.
Formal education in Jamaica is always provided by both the state as well as the private individuals particularly the religious organizations.
Primary education in Jamaica is designed for children aged 6-11 years and it lasts for six years.
Majority of the Jamaican children attend the state or public schools where tuition is free.
Like the primary schools, there are state secondary schools as well as private secondary schools.
In the early years of Jamaican education history, secondary education was not recognized as a continuation of primary education, because secondary education was believed to be superior.
3.6.4 Administration No wonder then why secondary schools were under the supervision of the Jamaican schools commission while both the primary education as will as teacher training were put under the Supervision of the Board of Education and the department of education.
However, based on the Kansel commission in 1943, a central education authority was set up in the year 1950 to perform the duties assigned to the school commission as well as the Board of Education.
Also, in 1956, the central Education Authority was dissolved and a statutory body of education advisory council was set up.
The council was primarily to advise the Education Minister on Education issues.
With effect from 1965, the management as well as the supervision of education had been put under the control of the Education Ministry.
Secondary education in Jamaica generally consists of two cycles.
The first cycle designed for children aged 12-14 years comprised of grades 7 -9 while the second cycle lasts for only two years with grades 10 - 11.
In a few cases, some secondary schools have grade 13 which can be regarded as the sixth form.
3.6.5 Tertiary Education 74  Unlike both the primary and secondary education, the provision of tertiary education in Jamaica is almost the responsibility of the state.
At this level of education, there are universities offering degrees, diplomas, professional certificates as well as other forms of tertiary institutions in Jamaica.
3.6.6 Financing of Education To be able to adequately finance education in Jamaica, the government allocates a substantial part of its annual budget to education.
Also, the little money realized from the tuition fee assists in the funding of education.
It should be noted that primary education which is designed for the children aged 6-15 years is free particularly in all the public primary schools.
4.0 Conclusion The unit above discusses the system of education in Jamaica.
This includes: background, levels of education, financing of education as well as education administration.
5.0 Summary In the unit above, you have been exposed to the theory and practices of education in Jamaica.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Itemize the major types of education available in Jamaica.
7.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
(2004).
Comparative Education.
Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig.
Ltd. 75  Unit 7: Teacher Education in Nigeria and Tanzania 1.0 Introduction The treatment of teacher education in Nigeria and Tanzania will put the students in a good position to compare and contrast the teacher education in the two countries.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to compare and contrast the Teacher Education in Nigeria with that of Tanzania.
3.0 The Content 3.7.1 Teacher Education at the Primary School Level The history of teacher training institutions in Nigeria can be dated back to 1859 when the first teacher training college was founded in Abeokuta by the Church Missionary Society (Fafunwa, 1974).
The college was moved to Lagos in 1867 and later transferred to Oyo in 1896 where it became St. Andrews College, Oyo.
Other Christian missions such as the Baptist, the Wesleyan Methodist and the Presbyterian Church of Scotland among others.
The students for the early teacher training institutions were taken from standard VI for a two year professional programme.
Such pupils were expected to have been pupil teachers for about two years, they must have passed the pupil teacher examination and they must have also acted as assistant teachers.
The elementary training institutions for the lower primary school teachers lasted for a period of two years, leading to the award of Grade III teachers certificate while the higher elementary training institutions which also lasted for a duration of two years leading to the award of Grade II Teachers' certificate.
However, both the Teacher Grade III and Grade II colleges have been phased out in many states of Nigeria as the Nigeria certificate in education has become the minimum teaching qualification in all primary schools.
In other words, only the colleges of education produce the lowest cadre of teachers for the Nigerian primary schools.
Tanganyika which became independent on 9th December, 1960 76  within the British common wealth of nations became a Republic in 1961 with a former school teacher, Julius Nyerere as the first Executive president of the country.
However, in 1964, Zanzibar as well as Tanganyika became one under a new name, Tanzania.
In Tanzania, by the year 1945, there were about one thousand and one hundred teacher trainees.
These teacher trainees were for only the primary schools.
3.7.2 Education Curriculum The curriculum of primary school teachers' institution include among others, national service with an emphasis on military training and nation building, Ujama political education, school organization, educational psychology, adult education, youth leadership, academic subjects as well as teaching methodology.
3.7.3 Introduction of UPE In the country, the introduction of Universal primary education policy led to an increase in the pupils enrolment in the primary schools.
The increase in the enrolment made Tanzania government to reduce the training period by one year.
In addition, the government organized workshops and seminars for her teachers in the primary schools in order to improve the Tanzanian primary education standard.
All teacher training institutes in Tanzania contribute to their own up keep.
Each College has a farm which provides the food eaten by the school community.
To some extent, the welfare of the teacher trainees depends on the farm output.
3.7.4 Teacher Education at the Secondary school Level In Nigeria, the Christian Missions did not pay much attention to the training of secondary school teachers.
They were mostly concerned with the training of primary school teachers.
Any other education apart from primary was superfluous as they only needed interpreters and a few Nigerians who could serve them.
However, the establishment of the Yaba Higher College in 1932 brought about the introduction of the diploma in education programme which took care of secondary school teachers.
77  Also, the university college, Ibadan, which was founded in 1948, introduced the diploma programme in education in 1957/58 academic year.
The University in addition to its efforts on teacher training started a one year associationship course for Nigerian Grade II Teachers in 1961 immediately after dependence.
The University of Nigeria, Nsukka, also in September, 1961, introduced a degree programme in education with about fifty students.
The first set of education students at Nsukka, however, graduated in June, 1964.
The University of Ibadan introduced degree in education in 1963, Ahmadu Bello University in 1967.
Until 2006 there are over 40 universities in Nigeria.
Perhaps out of all these universities, it is only in the Universities of Agriculture and Technology that degrees in education are not being offered.
Holders of SSCE or its equivalent spend four years while holders of GCE A' Level or Nigerian Certificate in education (NCE) or its equivalent spend three years for the first degree.
Also, Masters degree in education and Doctorate degree in education are now available in almost all the conventional universities.
After independence, Advanced Teachers Colleges were founded initially by the Federal Government but later, state started establishing their own Grade I colleges.
Such colleges are now (a) Federal government colleges of Education and (b) State colleges of Education.
A few ones are also owned by private individuals.
Duration in these Colleges ranges between three to four years depending on the qualification with which a candidate is admitted.
The candidate with five GCE or equivalent passes spend only three years.
The programme leads to the award of the Nigerian Certificate in Education.
3.7.5 Teacher Education in Tanzania In Tanzania, teacher education for secondary school teachers could be divided into three groups: (a) The university of Dare Salaam which was established in 1970 and the University of Agriculture, Sokoine which is also a degree awarding institution offer programmes that can lead to 78  the award of undergraduate degree, master's degrees, doctoral degree as well as certificates and diplomas.
(b) The non degree-offering institutions: Such institutions offer diplomas and advanced diplomas.
Courses being offered include teacher education.
(c) The institutions which specialize in other areas at the certificate level.
It should be noted that the University of Dares Salaam has a department of education particularly for the training of secondary school teachers.
Also, the Diploma teachers who spend six years in the secondary school and one year in the teachers college teach academic and technical subjects in Tanzanian secondary schools.
The teacher trainees in the Tanzanian teacher training institutions have a farm each which provides the food eaten by the teacher trainee themselves.
This is to make the students to have interest and love for anything farming.
3.7.6 Teacher Education for Teachers in the Higher Institutions Higher Education according to the National Policy on Education (1981) covers the post secondary section of the National Education System which is given in Universities, polytechnics and Colleges of Technology including such courses as are given by the Colleges of Education, the Advanced Teacher Training Colleges, Correspondence Colleges and such institution as may be allied to them.
3.7.7 In Nigeria, teacher education for higher education teachers to some extent depends largely on the Universities.
However, the highest qualification of the Nigerian Higher Education teachers depends on the type of higher education in which one is working.
The teachers working in the Nigerian Universities are being trained in the Nigerian Universities or elsewhere.
Before a teacher can be employed to teach in the university, he must have at least a Masters degree in the relevant discipline.
Also, teachers for polytechnics, colleges of Technology are being 79  trained in the Universities or Polytechnics.
A first degree holder or its equivalent could be appointed.
However, like universities, masters and doctorate degree holders are preferred in the colleges of education.
Moreover, a professional certificate in education is a must for all lecturers in the colleges of education particularly for the few ones among them who did not study education.
3.7.8 In Tanzania, higher institutions include: the university of Dares Salaam, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Diplomas and Advanced Diploma awarding institutions, three technical institutes, Teachers education infilites and colleges of science Teacher education for each tertiary institution largely depends on the certificate being awarded by such institutions.
The teachers for the non-degree programmes are always trained in the two universities.
First degree holders can teach in any of the non degree awarding institutions.
Master degree holders can also teach in such institutions.
However, the degree obtained by such teachers must be related to their field.
3.7.9 For the university teachers in Tanzanian degree awarding institutions, the would-be-lecturers are always recruited after the first class and in a few cases upper class degrees.
The lecturers in this category who are recruited by the university are always given scholarships to study overseas for their masters degree as well as their doctoral degree programme.
With masters degree, such lecturers will be appointed Assistant lecturers and they will be upgraded to lecturers after they must have obtained their Ph.D. Before University Lecturer can move to the next rank, such a lecturer must have served for a minimum of three years.
He must also certify the promotion conditions which include: acceptable level of teaching as well as publication.
Members of both academic and non academic staff have their different professional bodies which cater for their welfare.
80  The Tanzanian government also encourages special education by sending the teachers who are interested in that kind of education abroad for training.
It should be noted that an education Board has been set up by the Tanzanian government particularly to find a way through which the money being spent on higher education by the government will be reduced.
4.0 Conclusion The unit above exposes the learners to Teacher Education in both Nigeria and Tanzania.
5.0 Summary In the unit, you have learnt about: (a) Teacher education at the primary school level.
(b) Teacher education at the secondary school level.
(c) Teacher education at the tertiary level.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify the major groups of Teacher Education in Tanzania.
7.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
(2004) Comparative Education.
Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig Ltd. 81  Unit 8: Education in Afghanistan 1.0 Introduction The treatment of education in Iraq will enhance the learners' understanding of education in the foreign nations.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the theory and practices of education in Afghanistan.
3.0 The Content 3.8.1 Background Afghanistan is lying in Central Asia.
Asia being the largest continent, the country is bounded on the North by the U.S.S.R (Western Turkistan), on the extreme North East by China (Eastern Turkistan) on the East and South by Pakistan and on the West by Iran.
It has an estimated areas of 251,773 sqm 652,090 sq.km.
Its extreme length from East to West is 770 miles while it?
greatest width from North to South is over 500 miles.
Pushto is the mother language.
Next to Pushto is Persian which is spoken by a considerable number of people.
There are also 18 other dialects spoken by various groups and Urdu is also spoken and understood in the bazaars of Kabul and Kandhar.
The capital is Kabul and the country is divided into 24 provinces each under a governor.
Two main historical periods are the pre-Islamic and the Islamic which have influenced the development of Afghanistan's educational system and deep influence on Afghan thinking, as well as their cultural patterns.
The pre-Islamic period lasted from ancient times up to the seventh century A.D. During this period, education curriculum was centered on Vedas, (an Aryan religious book) the earliest Hindu sacred writings and later on Buddha teaching.
The primary aim of education during this period was to provide moral enlightenment for citizen.
Grammar and astronomy were also given some attention.
Education was for boys and men only and took place at the courts of the royal palaces.
During the Islamic period, the Arabs reached Afghanistan and Islam became the predominant religion.
The mosque became the center for education and the mullas (religious leaders) were the teachers.
Instruction centered on Muhammad's teachings, as found in the Koran and included 82  Islamic history and literature as well as grammar, logic and philosophy.
Islamic education reached its peak in Afghanistan during the eleventh century.
At this time, geography and mathematics were included in the curriculum.
In 1904, the first modern school was established in Kabul over the objections of the Islamic clerics (mullas) and it was named after his founder, Habibulah Khan who ruled the country between 1901 and 1919, Habibiyyah School.
Habibiyyah School was at first patterned after the Aligarh Muslim University, India and it offered both religious and secular subjects.
Habibullah also founded Teacher Training Colleges, Military Academy and School for Army Officers.
The first vocational schools and a girl school were opened and a number of primary schools for boys were started in rural and urban areas.
During this time, Habibiyyah School became a high school patterned after the French Lycee School.
Three more schools were established in 1923.
This event laid the groundwork for co-education, which was just beginning to Troot in the 1960's.
The French educational pattern was introduced to Afghanistan in 1920's through contact with Turkey.
Students were sent abroad to study in Franco, Germany, Italy and Turkey.
The Afghan graduates from these foreign universities were recruited to staff Afghan High Schools.
After 1929, students were sent to study in the United States and Japan, and after World War II, teachers from England and America were recruited to teach in Afghanistan.
The United States is predominant sources of foreign educational assistance to Afghanistan.
In 1954, Teachers College of Columbia University accepted as contract from the U.S. Agency for International Development to assist the government of Afghanistan in improving education through assistance to teacher education.
3.8.2 Educational Structure of Afghanistan The education system in Afghanistan is divided into four general sections: primary, secondary, vocational and post secondary.
Secondary schools exist in Kabul and in provincial capital.
Technical commercial and medical schools also exist for higher education.
83  3.8.3 Primary Education Primary education is compulsory and it is for a period of 6 years in mother language, which is Pershian and Pushto.
Pershain in the first three session (1 - 3) and Pushto in the second three session (Classes 4 - 6).
The pupils are also taught Arabic in order to read Quran since 99% population are Muslims and the main religion is Islam.
Schools are not co-educational, separate schools for girls were established.
Primary education takes place either in village schools or in primary schools.
The village school (grade I through 3) usually has only one teacher for its three grades.
This teacher is always the village religious leader and the village mosque serves as the school.
In the primary school (Grades I through 6) there is one teacher for each of first three grades.
In grades 4,5, and 6, there is a special teacher for each subject.
Primary teachers in the major cities are usually graduates of the teacher training colleges (Grade 12).
Outside the major cities, primary school teachers are most often graduates of the middle schools or the emergency teacher training colleges and a small percentage of primary school.
The age of primary school pupils ranges from seven to 19 years.
By 1966, there were 1,000 primary schools with 450,000 pupils in Afghan primary schools.
The curriculum of primary schools in grades 1,2, and 3 includes: the Koran, theology reading of the mother tongue (either pushto or Dari), hand writing, arithmetic, natural science and hygiene, drawing and handicraft and physical education.
The curriculum in grades 4, 5 and 6 also includes a second language (Dari or Persia) history and geography in addition to the subjects taught in the first three grades.
Teaching in primary schools is based on memorization as well as rote learning.
3.8.4 Secondary Education Under secondary education, there is a unit called the middle school and another one called the Lycee.
The middle school (grades 7, 8 & 9) prepares students for admission to the Lycee or for vocational training.
The students who successfully pass primary school examination are qualified for admission into secondary schools which are either: vocational schools in Kabul which train youth or can also gain admission into Technical 84  school.
The middle school teachers should have been trained in the Higher Teacher College at Kabul (grades 13 and 14).
The Lycee is the equivalent of an American High School with grades 10,11 and 12.
Its main purpose among others is to prepare students for the university education.
By 1966, there are 150,000 in a few hundred secondary schools in Afghanistan.
The curriculum for middle schools includes: The Koran, theology, Pushto, Dari, Arabic, Foreign language German, French, Algebra, geometry, chemistry, physics, biology, history, geography, economics, drawing and physical education.
The main emphasis is on mathematics, science, history, geography and languages.
Also, the curriculum for Lycee includes: the Koran, theology, pushto, Dari, foreign language, algebra, trigonometry, calculus, geometry, geography and logic.
The main emphasis is on mathematics, natural sciences, social science and languages.
Like in primary schools, teaching method is memorization and rote leaning.
3.8.5 Vocational Education in Afghanistan After completing education in the middle school, students who are interested and qualified may go to the vocational schools in Kabul which train youths in agriculture, commerce, theology, teaching, secretariat studies, Arts and Crafts.
In the agricultural Lycee, students are specially trained to develop agricultural production for the country.
Vocational training is also provided in mechanical and crafts schools, which begin after primary education and continues through grade 10.
These schools train students for mechanical, technical and craft occupations.
In the Islamic school, grade 10 through 12, students concentrate on Islamic religion.
They are prepared to help in the interpretation of the law in the judicial department of the government, teach religion in the schools, serve as officials in the mosques or go on to further religious study at the University.
In the same vein, the special schools for training teachers (grades 10 to 12) offer a three-year programme (two years of general studies and one year of professional studies).
Due to the increasing demand for primary 85  teachers, and emergency teacher training colleges are paid small monthly allowance and provided free tuition, room, board, clothing and books.
The technical school "the Afghan Institute of Technology" (grades 10 through 13) is designed to train technicians.
The technical school involves the mechanics and mathematics.
By 1966, there were 42 vocational schools with 13,201 students in Afghanistan.
3.8.6 Post Secondary Education in Afghanistan There is the institute of industrial management to further commercial training, which provides a 3 year programme for students after the completion of grade 12 of the commercial Lycee.
The institute trains students for managerial positions in industry, banks and public administration.
Kabul university was established in 1946 while its first faculty, was that of medicine.
The university is composed of the following faculties: Islamic Law/ Letters, Law and Political Sciences, Economics, Sciences, Medicine, Pharmacy, Education (closely associated with the Institute of Education), Agriculture and Engineering.
The Polytechnic Institute is also part of the University.
There is co-education in all the faculties except engineering and Islamic law.
In 1963, a college of Medicine was formally established in Jalalabab.
A six-year course beyond grade 12 is required for the M.D.
degree M.B.B.S).
Another post secondary institution, the academy of Teacher Training was also established in 1964, the colleges serves as a demonstration school for teacher education trainees who are university graduates with one year teaching and guiding the DMA students.
These teacher education students learn how to direct and supervise the DMA students preparing to become teachers.
3.8.7 Adult Education This is established by the Ministry of Education and it is designed for workers, so it takes place after daily's work.
3.8.8 Administrative Organization Under Article 34 of the Afghan constitution adopted in 1964, it is government's responsibility to prepare and implement a universal 86  education programme.
All matters dealing with education are under the jurisdiction of Royal Afghan Ministry of Education.
The Minister of Education who is also a member of the Prime Minister's cabinet, is the chief administrative officer, and he is blessed with two deputy ministers.
In addition, the presidents of the various departments are under the deputy ministers.
Afghanistan is divided politically into provinces and each province has an educational director who is equally responsible to the central ministry and who happens to be the chief administrative officer for all provincial education matters.
The president of University of Kabul is directly responsible to the Education Minister.
4.0 Conclusion The unit above has exposed the learners to the system of education in Afghanistan.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt the following: (a) History of Afghanistan (b) The structure of education in Afghanistan (c) Administration of education in Afghanistan.
(d) Vocational Education in Afghanistan.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify the major structure of education in Afghanistan.
7.0 Reference Lawal, B.O.
(2004) Comparative Education.
Osogbo, Swift Publishers Nig Ltd. 87
