NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE : EDU 233 COURSE TITLE:GENERAL TEACHING METHODSEDU 233 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Course Team Dr. (Mrs.) M. E. Aina (Developer/Editor) - NOUN Dr. (Mrs.) S. A. Olutade (Writer) - NOUN Dr. Osuji, U.S.A. (Programme Leader) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiEDU 233 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dares Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2006 Reprinted 2009 ISBN: 978-058-386-6 All Rights Reserved iiiEDU 233 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ……………………………………………………... 1 What You Will Learn in this Course ……………….………….… 2 Course Aims …………………………………………………….. 2 Course Objectives………………………………………………… 3 Working through this Course……………….………………….….
3 Course Materials……………………….……………………….… 4 Study Units…………………………..…………………………… 4 Presentation Schedule…………………………………………….. 5 Assessment………………….…………………………………….. 5 Presentation Schedule …………………………………………..… 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………………… 5 Final Examination and Grading ………………………………….. 6 Summary……………………….………………………………….. 6 ivIntroduction It is paramount you know that teaching is an intentional activity which aims at bringing about learning or impartation of knowledge into the learners.
So also you as a teacher must intentionally be well acquainted with the various ways by which you can transfer knowledge, skills and ideas to your students.
You must have the required professional knowledge and skills.
You must also possess the mastery of the subject matter, since the students depend much on the teacher for acquiring new knowledge.
No teacher can impart the knowledge that he has not acquired, therefore you must prepare adequately well in advance.
You are trained in the art of teaching because of the child.
The principles and methods of teaching should be guided by the experience of the child, the environment and the innovative approach to reaching where students have control over their learning contrary to the traditional approach to students learning.
So you must have the practice, theory, child study and study various branches of knowledge like methods, principles and general study for the benefit of the child.
You are only teaching when a child is learning The disciplines that make up the General methods of Teaching are many and they include: - The Teacher and the child - Lesson Plan Preparation - Various types of Teaching Method - The Art of Classroom Management - Question and Questioning Techniques - Test and Examinations - Marking and Assignments - Method of Study and the use of Audio-Visual Aids All that this course entails are meant to prepare you for the important task of teaching.
Every aspect of the course must be well grasped by you and you must go an extra mile to become what it takes to be a very good professional teacher.
This course consists of 14 units of teaching.
It includes a course guide (CG) which explains to you what the course is all about.
The Course Guide (CG) gives you advise on the suggested time you may spend on each unit of the course so that you can complete the course successfully in a good time.
It also provides some guide to Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) details of which is made available in the Assignment file.EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS What You Will Learn in this Course This course General Methods of Teaching intends to make you have an indept knowledge of what goes on in a typical formal classroom setting.
The general method of teaching serves as the preparatory ground for the actual task of teaching and learning processes.
It is hoped that this aim will be achieved.
The teacher and the child gives you insight into the roles and attitudes of the professional teacher, how children learn and type of learners.
This aspect will also give you a focus on the aims of teaching.
Lesson plan preparation incorporates and exposes you to formal preparatory activity for teaching such as the syllabus, scheme of work, lesson notes and the problems of time-table.
From Teaching Methods you will learn about the various methods of teaching such as the lecture, discussion, demonstration, inductive and deductive and the open education method of teaching etc.
The act of classroom management centres on the qualities you as a teacher must possess and the bad habits to avoid; it also deals with the problem of discipline in the classroom.
Question and questioning techniques portrays the students natural curiosity and enquiry tendencies, others are aims of questioning, teachers questions, pupils questions and the guidelines for questioning generally.
Test and examination gives you the picture of evaluation, the purpose of testing, what to test, how and when to test, the characteristic of a good test and types of test.
It also includes the purpose of marking, of assignment and awarding of marks.
Methods of study exposes you to the different ways of acquiring study skills such as the use of textbooks, art of note-making, organization of work, revision and review of work.
So also preparation for examination, the importance and use of audio-visual aids in teaching are discussed in details.
Course Aims The aims of the course are summarized as follows: iiEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS The course aims at making you understand the general methods of teaching that is all the different aspects that make up for efficient and effective teaching and learning processes.
It is hoped that these will be achieved by introducing you to: (i) The teacher and the child (ii) Lesson Plan preparation (iii) The various teaching methods (iv) The art of classroom management (v) Question and questioning techniques (vi) Test and examination (Evaluation) (vii) Marking and Assignments (viii) Study skills (ix) Audio-visual Aids.
Course Objectives To achieve the set aims each unit has specific objectives, which are stated at the beginning of each unit.
Please read them carefully before you start going through the course.
The objectives will be useful to you if you make reference to them in the course of your studying each unit, so that you can do progress evaluation for yourself.
At the end of each unit, read over the objectives again to ensure that all the objectives are achieved.
At the end of this course, you should be able to: (i) State the professional relationship between the teacher and the child (ii) Explain the stages in lesson plan preparation (iii) List the various methods of teaching and where each is applicable (iv) State how best you can control your classroom without much disciplinary problem (v) Enumerate types of question, the characteristics and guidelines for questioning (vi) State types of tests and purpose of evaluation (vii) Explain the purpose of marking, of assignments and of assigning marks and grades (viii) State the different ways by which study habits can be improved and how one can prepare for examination (ix) List types of audio-visual aids and their significance in teaching.
Working through this course iiiEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS To complete this course, you are required to study each unit very well, read set books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains self assessment exercises at different intervals in the course.
You are required to submit the assignments for evaluation purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take you about sixteen (16) weeks to complete.
Listed below are the components of the course, what you have to do and suggestions as to how you should allocate your time to each unit in order that you may complete the course successfully and on time.
Course Material Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References Study Unit The study units in this course are as follow Module 1 Unit 1 The Teacher and the Child Unit 2 Understanding Learners Unit 3 Formal Preparatory Activities of the Teacher Unit 4 Use of Audio-Visual Aids Module 2 Unit 1 Lesson Plan Unit 2 General Teaching Method I Unit 3 General Teaching Method II Module 3 Unit 1 Questions and Questioning Techniques Unit 2 Questions and Answers in the Classroom Unit 3 Testing and Examination (Evaluation) ivEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Unit 4 Marking and Assignment Module 4 Unit 1 The Art of Classroom Management Unit 2 Dealing with the Problems of Discipline in the Classroom Unit 3 Methods of Study The first two units discuss the teacher as the Gardener and the student as the plant that needs tending.
Mention is also made of the assistance that can be rendered to different types of learners.
Units three and four centers on stages of lesson plan preparation with special focus on the syllabus, scheme of works, lesson notes and problems of time table.
Units four and five gives you the picture of the various types of teaching methods, their advantages and disadvantages.
Unit seven and eight exposes to classroom control and the disciplinary problems in the class.
Unit nine and ten concentrate on questioning techniques, students natural curiosity towards learning, aims of questioning and questioning in the classroom.
Unit 11 and 12 deal with evaluation of students performance, purpose of examination and awarding of marks.
Unit 13 concentrates mainly on study skills and approaches while unit 14 exposes you to types and uses of audio-visual aids.
Assessment There are many assignments in this course.
Every unit has a minimum of three and a maximum of five students self assessment exercises.
Presentation Schedule The presentations schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
Please guide against lagging behind in your work.
Assessment There are three aspects of assessments.
First are self-assessment exercises, second is the tutor-marked assignment and the third is a vEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS written examination.
You are please advised to be sincere in attending to the exercises.
You will be required to apply information, knowledge and skills that you have acquired during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in your schedule of presentation.
Your assessment tests will carry 50% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final examination, which will carry 50% of your total marks.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are 14 tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) in this course.
All the assignments count for 30% towards your total course work.
Assignment questions for this course are contained in the assignment file.
After completing each assignment send it together with tutor marked assignment to your tutor.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination concludes the assessment for the course.
It constitutes 70% of your total marks for the course.
You will be informed of the time for the final examination Summary The following are the major highlights of what you will learn in this course.
(i) The professional teacher and the child as the focus of teaching and learning processes (ii) Identification of different types of learner and the help that are available for them in the teaching profession (iii) Formal preparatory activities for teaching that entail the syllabus, scheme of work and lesson notes.
(iv) The various types of teaching method with their advantages and disadvantages (v) Ways by which a teacher can have good class control with little or no disciplinary problem viEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS (vi) Explanation of the various questioning techniques.
(vii) The difference between teacher centered and student centered approach to learning (viii) Types of test and functions of examination (ix) Purposes of marking assignments, awarding of marks and grades (x) Different approaches to having good study skills (xi) Types of audio visual aids and their uses.
viiEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS MAIN COURSE Course Code EDU 233 Course Title General Teaching Methods Course Team Dr. (Mrs.) M. E. Aina (Developer/Editor) - NOUN Dr. (Mrs.) S. A. Olutade (Writer) - NOUN Dr. Osuji, U.S.A. (Programme Leader) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA viiiEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dares Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2006 Reprinted 2009 ISBN: 978-058-386-6 All Rights Reserved ixEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………………… 1 Unit 1 The Teacher and the Child………….……………… 1 Unit 2 Understanding Learners………………….…..…….. 9 Unit 3 Formal Preparatory Activities of the Teacher….…... 17 Unit 4 Use of Audio-Visual Aids………………………….. 24 Module 2 ……………………………………………………….
31 Unit 1 Lesson Plan……………..…………………………… 31 Unit 2 General Teaching Method I.………………………… 41 Unit 3 General Teaching Method II ………..……………… 52 Module 3 ……………………………………………………….. 61 Unit 1 Questions and Questioning Techniques ………..…… 61 Unit 2 Questions and Answers in the Classroom…………….
67 Unit 3 Testing and Examination (Evaluation)...…………..… 77 Unit 4 Marking and Assignment………………………..…… 84 Module 4 ……………………………………………………….
91 Unit 1 The Art of Classroom Management...………….…… 91 Unit 2 Dealing with the Problems of Discipline in The Classroom……………..………………………… 102 Unit 3 Methods of Study………………………………….… 109 xEDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS MODULE 1 Unit 1 The Teacher and the Child Unit 2 Understanding Learners Unit 3 Formal Preparatory Activities of the Teacher Unit 4 Use of Audio-Visual Aids UNIT 1 THE TEACHER AND THE CHILD CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The teacher and the Child 3.2 The Duties of a Professional Teacher 3.3 Factors Responsible for Teacher s’ Poor Image (Low Status) 3.4 How Children Learn 3.5 Factors Affecting Learning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to give you an insight into the responsibilities of the teacher in education that is child–centred.
It will also expose you to the roles of a professional teacher and factors responsible for teacher’s poor image (low status).
By the end of this unit, you will be able to state how children learn and factors affecting learning generally.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define who a teacher is and explain what he does • explain how education is child-centred • define and explain the concept of teaching • state and explain the responsibilities of a teachers’ • state seven factors responsible for teacher poor image • explain how children learn and factors affecting learning.
1EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Teacher and the Child Before the advent of Islamic and Western Education in Nigeria, every adult member of the society served as a teacher and initiated the young ones to the culture norms, ethics and beliefs of the society.
In actual fact, if a father was a good blacksmith, the son would automatically become one, and if a mother was a good cook, the daughter would become one.
In Nigeria today, a teacher is a person who has undergone approved professional training in education at a College of Education or Faculty of Education in a University.
Gone are the days when Grade II and Grade III Teachers’ Colleges were in existence.
As an innovative approach, we have open education which is synonymous to distance education, correspondence education and the Open University.
Graduates of these institutions are capable of imparting knowledge, right attitudes and skills to learners.
The Teacher’s Registration Council handbook (2002) as cited in Molagun and Taiwo (2004) defines teaching as a systematic process of transmitting knowledge, attitudes and skills in accordance with professional principles.
The child is like a young plant which needs proper growth, nurturing, shaping and pruning, while the teacher, is like a gardener who understands the plants, some require bending, some straightening and others pruning.
For successful teaching/learning processes, the teacher is required to understand thoroughly the child and the subject matter which must be considered and chosen according to the child’s state and standard.
Since the child is the subject of education, the teacher should be able to guide him successfully to become an achiever in life.
The teacher is trained in both the theory and practice of education.
He is very important through his influence, his character and his example.
The child is his responsibility.
He must be patient and be fond of the child.
The teacher needs perseverance, high ideals and a desire to give time, energy, thought and cares to his work.
He must have the power of imparting knowledge and should master the knowledge to impart.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
How would you relate a child to the teacher in a classroom setting?
2.
In a paragraph describe how a teacher contributes to the success of the learning outcome.
2EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2 The Duties of a Professional Teacher The duties of a teacher are the assigned responsibilities that a teacher must perform at one time or the other.
In teaching and learning processes, they perform numerous roles.
The teacher as a technician should know how to apply various principles of teaching leading to a change in behaviour of the students, i.e.
a teacher must know how to motivate or encourage the student to learn.
A teacher must create a conducive atmosphere in the class and have good human relationships with the students and his colleagues.
Such cordial relationships will help students to work with little or no supervision by themselves.
This also will enhance the students’ right attitudes towards the teaching profession.
The teacher serves as a model, a person to be emulated.
Therefore, he must be a good example for others around him.
In fact his motto must be “leadership by example”.
The teacher as a dispenser of knowledge must be well enriched, a resource person who can help students acquire the knowledge they seek.
Salami (1999) and Ibrahim (2005) differently took in-depth look at the duties of a teacher, some of which are enumerated below: - The teacher must be capable of promoting the moral, social and cultural heritage of the community which he serves.
- The teacher must be prepared to learn all the time.
He should have the ability to carry out research, he should be computer literate and have knowledge on how to get, information from the internet.
- For the educational objectives to be attained, a teacher must have positive influence on the student and should inspire the students under his care to learn.
- He must be competent and have professional qualification.
He must be sensitive to changes in his field and be capable of innovation.
- The teacher must be able to communicate effectively and be able to give a clear, simple and logical lesson.
- He must be capable of meeting emotional, physical, intellectual and social needs of the student.
He must help the student to have a good and cordial interpersonal relationships.
3EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS - He should be capable of helping students to develop attitudes, morals, and norms that promote the unity and solidarity of the nation.
- The teacher should be able to help the students develop critical thinking and scientific attitudes to life.
- The teacher must be able to cater for the students’ individual differences in learning and wage war against mediocrity.
- A teacher should be able to evaluate his own performance and also the performance of his students.
- Teachers in the early era were respected because they were diligent and morally upright.
Teachers were the encyclopedia of the societies to which they belonged.
All the events and happenings of their time were recorded by them.
To crown it all, they were strong disciplinarians.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
From the duties of a professional teacher that has been stated, outline five that make you feel comfortable to be a teacher.
2.
Do you feel all teachers are professional teachers?
3.3 Factors Responsible for Teachers’ Poor Image (Low Status) Having discussed the duties of professional teachers, one will tend to ask the question as to whether majority of our teachers are professional or they take to teaching as a formal occupation for livelihood.
Many factors are responsible for the low status of teachers.
Molagun and Taiwo (2004) made an outline of these factors: • There is a lack of recognition of teachers by the various governments unlike other professions such as medicine and law.
• Several teachers are not professionally trained.
• Some teachers perform very poorly.
• Many use teaching as a stepping stone to other jobs.
• The level of professional training and intensity of professional preparation cannot be compared with what operates in other professions like medicine, law, engineering etc.
4EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • There is lack of self-esteem and dignity of labour on the part of many teachers.
• The effects of teachers’ efforts are not felt immediately like doctors who treat patients and they get healed or lawyers that handle cases a win.
To crown it all, poor academic performance of students is on the increase at all levels.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Outline five factors responsible for teachers poor image 3.4 How Children Learn Having discussed the duties of a teacher at length, it will be interesting for us to know how a child learns.
According to Adeyemo (1985), education should be child-centred and if any good teacher wants to teach a child anything, he must bear in mind that he has a three way traffic before him • he should know himself • he should know the subject matter well and above all • he should know the child he is going to teach.
Children learn more readily when there is something they see, feel, taste, touch and/or smell (i.e.)
when teaching appeals to their senses.
Children learn when they can handle concrete objects rather than abstract ideals.
This is why it is very important that you make use of teaching aids, illustrations and blackboard summaries while teaching.
Children learn, when you punctuate all oral lessons with short periods of activities.
For example children can write notes, draw or even write answers to questions between lessons.
If children pay attention in class, they are alert, they listen, watch, think and ask questions that may agitate their minds, this shows that they are learning.
Of great importance is the fact that repetition aids learning, thus teachers should make it a point of duty to ask students from time to time to know what they have gained so far during the process of teaching.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 State four (4) examples of how a child learns.
5EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.5 Factors Affecting Learning From the discussion on how children learn, you know when a child is actually learning.
But now you will be exposed to the factors affecting learning generally.
For children to learn, the teacher must endeavor to link the new body of knowledge to their previous experience.
For example in mathematics, the knowledge of addition will aid that of multiplication.
Readiness or the level of preparedness of a child will aid learning.
No matter how well you handle a subject matter a child that is not ready or has not mature will not learn; e.g.
a six months old child cannot walk.
Children with high interest, motivation, aptitude, intellectual capacity and high level of assimilation will learn but a child with low interest will not learn.
A child or children with physical defects like visual or hearing impairment may be hindered.
Also mental retardation can hinder learning.
Fatigue of the eye or muscles can hinder learning.
Also when anxiety is in excess a learner might not assimilate well.
There are environmental factors that marr a child’s learning e.g.
a child from a happy home will readily learn.
Also, a homely and conducive school climate will enhance the child’s learning.
And if the community where the school is sited is loving and peaceful the child will learn.
On the whole, good teaching prevents disciplinary problems and enhances learning, whereas poor teaching encourages disciplinary problems and discourages learning.
A teacher is teaching while the children are learning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
What are the three (3) factors responsible for how children learn.
2.
State three factors that enhance learning.
4.0 CONCLUSION In teaching, the concern of any good teacher is how to make students learn.
In the process of teaching and learning, the teacher, the student and the subject matter are involved.
Duties of professional teachers are so all encompassing that those who merely earn a living by teaching will find it difficult to cope.
6EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major highlights of what you must have learnt in this unit.
• The teacher is a Gardner, who has to undergo an approved professional training for successful teaching, and the child is his responsibility.
• The child is like a young plant that needs proper nurturing for growth.
• The professional responsibilities of the teacher are the duties the teacher must perform to enhance the teaching profession.
• A teacher must know himself, know the subject matter and know the child.
• Children learn when teaching appeals to all their senses, when they handle concrete objects and when lessons are punctuated with periods of activities.
• On the whole, good teaching will bring about good learning.
• There are many factors affecting learning such as previous experience, intellectual capacity, interest, reading physical defects and environmental factor like the home, school and community.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who is a teacher?
2.
Outline ten professional duties of a teacher.
3.
State four (4) situations when children are learning?
4.
What are five (5) factors affecting learning?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 7EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Adeyemo, P. O.
(1985).
Principle and Education and Practice of Education.
Ado Ekiti: Omolayo Standard Press and Bookshops Co.
(Nig.)
Ltd. Kayode M. A., Akande, F, F., Abdulrasaq A. O.
(2004).
Human Learning.
Ilorin: Integrity Publications.
Molagun H. M. and Taiwo B. M. (2004).
Introduction to Sociology of Education.
Ilorin, Kwara State: Nathadex Publishers.
Salami A.
A.
(1999).
Introduction to Teacher Education and the Teaching Profession in Nigeria.
Ilorin.
Kwara State: Ben James Publications.
8EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 2 UNDERSTANDING LEARNERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Learners 3.2 Slow Learners 3.2.1.
Characteristics of Slow Learners 3.2.2 Possible causes of Slow Learners 3.3 Gifted and Talented Learners 3.3.1 Characteristics of Talented Learners 3.4 Normal learners 3.4.1 Characters of Normal Learners 3.5 Physically Handicapped learners 3.6 Characteristics of the Physically Handicapped Learners 3.6.1 Implications of the Types of Learners to the Teacher 3.6.2 Identification of Various Types of Learners 3.3.3 Help that Teachers Could Render 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit one, you have been exposed to the understanding of the teacher and the child with a view that education is child-centred.
This unit is designed to make you understand the different types of learners, their characteristics and the implications to the teacher.
By the end of this unit you would have had an overall view of the different types of learners, how they can be identified and ways by which they can be further helped by the teacher.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • differentiate among the three main categories of learners • explain the characteristics of each category of learners • identify possible causes of slow learning • state those classified as physically handicapped learners • explain the implication of the different learners to the teacher 9EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • explain how you can identify the different types of learner • outline the various ways by which teachers can further help the different categories of learners.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Learners Since students are centers of teaching/learning processes, teachers must be able to identify the different types of learners in order to be able to help them.
According to Rasaq A. O.
(2003), understanding the different types of learners will be of immense value in assisting the teachers in preparing suitable materials to cater for the varying learning needs.
There are mainly three categories of learners and they are: • Slow Learners (Backward Learners) • Gifted and Talented Learners (Fast Learners) • ]Normal Learners (Average Learners) The slow learners and the gifted learners are highly problematic whereas the normal learners need to be stimulated and encouraged to make maximum use of their potential and to develop their individual talents.
The fourth group of learners are those that are physically disabled.
These disabilities have nothing to do with their intellectual capacity to learn.
They are characterized by different types of physical deformities like deafness, blindness and lameness.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List the three categories of Learners.
2.
Define each category of Learner in a sentence.
3.2 Slow Learners Slow learners are the category of students who lag behind in virtually all that they do, and especially in their school work.
They exhibit numerous learning difficulties that seem to defy all learning methodologies and procedures.
This category of learners is made up of mentally retarded and the learning disabled (LD).
3.2.1 The Characteristics of Slow Learners 10EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • The slow learners have a short attention span, that is, they cannot concentrate for long.
• They have short memory and they don’t remember easily what they have been taught.
• The slow learners are always bored and generally have no interest in learning.
• They have poor communication skills.
They are poor in both oral and written languages.
• They have poor eye-hand coordination.
They cannot see properly nor even copy correctly.
• Their numeric ability is very low and they are very poor in calculation.
• They have poor social interaction and cannot get along with others easily.
In fact they exhibit aggressive behaviour most of the time.
• They score low in all types of tests and assessment.
3.2.2 Causes of Slow Learners Out of the numerous causes of slow learners based on research findings (Rasaq A. O.
2003) the following stand out: (i) Health Problems A child’s mother might have had measles, venereal diseases etc that might have caused mental retardation in the child.
Also the mother might be malnourished during pregnancy.
The child’s health might also be affected after birth.
(ii) Psychological Problems Mothers who experience intense and excessive anxiety, worry, stress and the like may give birth to disturbed children, since the mother’s state of health affects the child.
(iii) Genetic Problem 11EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS If slowness or dullness run in the lineage, inherited characteristics from parents may influence the general intellectual development of the child.
(iv) Home Based Problems Broken homes and extreme poverty on the part of the parents may affect the child.
(v) School Based Problems - Poor methods of teaching - Poor teacher-pupil relationships for example when a child constantly experiences hostility from the teacher.
- Poor learning environment is not conducive to learning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What are the possible causes of slow learners?
2.
Identify five characteristics of slow learners 3.3 Gifted and Talented Learners The gifted and talented learners are those whose intellectual abilities are exceptionally and constantly outstanding.
3.3.1 The Characteristics of Gifted and Talented Learners • They rank high in academic achievement and cover a wide ground within a limited period of time.
• They are fast thinking, highly creative and imaginative with very high constructive abilities.
• They have very good cordial relationships.
They make friends easily.
• They have outstanding leadership qualities and can work well under pressure.
• They are mostly invariably good in all subjects i.e.
science, languages, arts and even sporting activities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 12EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Outline four characteristics of a gifted child.
3.4 Normal Learners Majority of learners can be classified as normal learners.
That is to say that majority of learners are of average abilities.
Characteristics of Normal Learners • They manifest average ability • They have their own learning problems like lateness to school, truancy, wrong peer group etc • They manifest giftedness when faced with challenges.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What are three (3) characteristics of a normal learner?
3.5 The Physically Handicapped Learners This category of learners has physical deformities like blindness, deafness, lameness and paralysis.
They need special provision to assist their learning, like schools for the Handicapped nationwide.
Some special equipment may be necessary to facilitate their learning and movement such as wheel chairs, brail books, tape recorders etc.
3.5.1 The Characteristics of the Physically Handicapped Learners • They have physical deformities that people can see • They have sound intellectual powers • Some of them may be gifted/talented • They generally have feelings of inadequacy • They generally have feeling of low-self concept.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Describe features of typical physically handicapped learners.
3.6 Implications of the Types of Learners 13EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Having been exposed to the different types of learners, teachers must be able to recognize them in the sense that they need special attention.
This will aid their learning and offset their disabilities.
3.6.1 Identification of Various Types of Learners Physical test and non-test instruments such as: - Interviews - case studies - special dialogues with parents - teachers’ daily observation in and outside class will assist in identification of types of learners.
According to Herbert J. Klausmeier (1961) the gifted and the talented are identified through the use of standardized intelligence tests, which are also referred to as Scholastic Aptitude Tests.
3.6.2 Help that Teacher can Render • Good teaching should be structured in relation to students abilities, interests and needs.
• The teacher must be familiar with what he is required to teach and guidance to be provided.
• The teacher must help learners to make sense of their world and encourage creative and divergent thinking abilities of the learners with the resources available.
• Teaching must build upon previous experience of the learner.
• Teachers must encourage them to learn using teaching effectively.
• The teacher must create conducive environment for learning to take place.
• Teaching methods to be used for the slow learners include role- play, demonstration and individualized instruction.
• Teachers should hold special classes to help slow learners catch up with others.
• A systematic and patient teaching of concepts using concrete items for slow learners.
14EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • Special incentives and reinforcement should be given to them like acknowledging the little efforts they make i.e.
the slow learners.
• Effective study habits must be taught and be instilled into them.
• Creative exercises should be provided to give the gifted and talented an opportunity to maximize his potential.
• Work load designed for three years may be condensed into two years for the gifted and talented.
• Keep the gifted and talented occupied by giving them leadership roles to play.
On the whole, teachers, counselors and psychologists must help all learners especially the slow and the physically handicapped learners.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 1.
Explain four (4) ways by which learner types can be identified.
2.
Explain five (5) ways the teachers can further assist slow learners.
4.0 CONCLUSION In education, learners can be classified into different categories.
The group one belongs to is not one’s making.
However, to whichever group one belongs, help can be found in the teaching profession.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major highlights of what we have examined in this unit: • There are mainly three categories of learners; the slow, the talented and the average learners.
• The fourth category of learners is the physically handicapped who can be gifted, normal or slow learners.
• The Characteristics of each category of learners have been identified.
• Possible causes of slow learners have been identified.
15EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • The different ways by which the categories of learners can be identified have been explained.
• The assistance teacher can render have been discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly explain the three (3) different categories of learners.
2.
Identify five (5) the possible causes of slow learners.
3.
What are ten (10) implications of the different types of learners to the teacher.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Klaumeier H. J.
(1961).
Learning and Human Abilities.
Educational Psychology.
New York: Harper and Brothers.
Rasaq A. O.
(2003).
Human Learning: Transfer of Learning: Factors Affecting Learning.
Ilorin, Kwara State: Integrity Publications.
16EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 3 FORMAL PREPARATORY ACTIVITIES OF TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Aims of Teaching 3.2 The Syllabus 3.2.1 Rules Governing a Good Syllabus 3.3 The Scheme of Work 3.3.1 Sample of Scheme of Work 3.3.2 The Advantages of Using a Scheme of Work 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units we have examined the teacher and the child, the different types of learners and the implications to the teaching profession.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the aims of teaching.
Also you will gain insights into the usefulness of the syllabus and the scheme of work.
By the end of this unit, you will have an overall view of the formal preparatory activities for teaching.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain and define the concept of teaching • state ten (10) aims of teaching • explain the usefulness of the syllabus • prepare a good scheme of work.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Aims of Teaching The main aims of teaching are to induce students to learn.
• Teaching is to inform and explain to your students any new knowledge they are expected to know in your subject area.
17EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • Teaching aims at stimulating, directing and guiding students.
• Teaching aims at identifying learning problems.
• Teaching involves sharing experiences between the teacher and the learner.
• Teaching brings about a desirable change in the behaviour of the learner.
• Teaching makes the teacher to be interested in the development of his pupil.
• One aim of teaching is to bring the students together for better interaction.
In the process of teaching, students mix freely together and understand one another’s behaviour.
• Another aim of teaching is to have good interaction with the people in the community where the school is cited.
• Teaching is a deliberate and planned activity which is goal- oriented, meaningful and functional.
• Teaching helps to identify what to learn through the use of syllabus and the scheme of work drawn.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Briefly state eight (8) aims of teaching.
3.2 The Syllabus A syllabus is a broad outline of the work planned to be done in the course of a year with each class in each subject.
This course work may either be constructed by the school or imposed by some external examining bodies.
In Nigeria, the syllabus in use in all Secondary Schools is usually made available by: • WAEC – West African Examination Council • NECO – National Examination Council Syllabus is usually presented as a list of topics to be covered within a given period.
18EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2.1 Rules Governing A Good Syllabus • Aim – Work Planned should have an aim • Relevant – Work planned should be relevant to the needs of the students and the society which they serve • Work Load – It should contain a manageable amount of work, not over-loaded.
• Time -Work load should be capable of being completed within the time allotted • Suitability - Work planned should be suitable for the age group and the stage of development for which the syllabus is intended.
• Previous Knowledge – It should take into account students’ previous knowledge or skills • Correlation – it should be integrated or linked with other subjects in the school curriculum.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Define and explain the word “syllabus”?
2.
Outline five (5) rules governing a good syllabus.
3.3 The Scheme of Work The scheme of work is the breaking down of topics in the syllabus into series of lessons.
Scheme of work in any subject is a clear and orderly statement of the work the teacher proposes to do in a given period.
The work is for a year and it is divided into weeks and/or terms.
Weekly scheme serves as a good guide to the teacher Scheme of work should contain the following: • Term and Week • Topic of Study • Class Activities • Teaching Aids • Correlation with other subjects (related subjects) 19EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Sample of Scheme of Work TERM TOPIC CLASS TEACHING CORRELA- WEEK ACTIVITIES AIDS TION WITH OTHER SUBJECTS T3/W2 Revision Of Last Term’s Work T3/W1 Money Teachers should Coins and Related to (a) Supply of provide for Currency Banking and demand illustration coins, for money paper currency and (b) Value of cheques, as well as money and specimens of items the price that could serve as level.
community money T3/W3 Financial Students may go Cheque Book, Related to Institutions: on an excursion to Pass Books Commerce Types: Traditional the Central Bank Financial and Commercial Institution, Bank Central Bank, Commercial Bank, Mortgage Bank, Merchant Bank, Development Banks, Insurance Companies etc.
T3/W4 Development and Teacher to explain Central Bank Related to functions of peculiar problems and other Commerce financial of each type of institution institutions, financial publications Money and institutions e.g.
bullion, Capital Market.
quarterly review and annual reviews/report TW/W5 Inflation: Care should be Newspaper Related to Meaning and types taken to emphasize article and commerce of inflation and that the clippings causes conventional explanation of inflation may not explain all cases of inflation particularly in the third world countries T3/W6 Effect and control Presentation of the Time series on Related to of inflation in material should prices Commerce Nigeria.
also be related to the day-to-day transactions of the students 20EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS T3/W7 Agriculture: Student should be Display of Related to Problems of encouraged to Agricultural Forestry Agriculture in participate actively commodities West Africa in farm work in Agricultural school and at home policies in West African with special reference to Nigeria T3/W8 Marketing of Marketing board Pie chats to Related to Agricultural official or local show the Forestry commodities.
produce buyer contributions Prospects of should be invited of agriculture Agriculture in to give a talk on to the economy West African produce marketing over the year T3/W9 Industrialization: Teachers should Resources map Related to Meaning of arrange excursions of Nigeria Forestry industrialization.
to local factories, showing Types of construction industrial industries:- companies and activities manufacturing, sites and mining construction, sites where mining.
possible.
T3/W10 Location of (a) Students Industries: should be Localization of assigned home Industry: Factors work to affecting the identify the location and major materials localization of used in industries manufacture of given product.
(b) Class should discuss the roles of managers, technicians and general labour in industrial production T3/W11 REVISION OF THE YEAR’S WORK T3/W12 EXAMINATION AND WRITING OF REPORTS 3.3.1 The Advantages of Using a Scheme of Work • A scheme of Work makes a careful and logical arrangement of work to be done.
• It encourages course work to be covered within a stipulated period of time.
21EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • In case of emergency, it allows for a substitute teacher to stand in for the regular/substantive teacher without much problem.
• It is a good instrument to evaluate the coverage of the syllabus.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Explain four (4) advantages of using a Scheme of Work.
2.
Draw up a format of a good scheme of work.
4.0 CONCLUSION Aims of teaching reveal the purposes or intentions that teaching is meant to accomplish.
To be able to achieve the aims of teaching one must have a good knowledge of what the syllabus and the scheme of work entail.
If the subject matter to be taught is not carefully drawn out in the syllabus and well spread out in the scheme of work, the aims of teaching may be defeated.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the following are the major highlights of what we have learnt.
• The aim of teaching which is to introduce students to learning by imparting information, knowledge and skills to the students.
• A syllabus is an outline of a course work to be done in a year.
• Rules governing the preparation of a good syllabus were outlined and examined.
• The Scheme of Work breaks down topics in the syllabus into lessons on termly and weekly basis.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Summarize the aims of teaching in five sentences.
2.
Explain the relationship between a syllabus and a scheme of work.
3.
Outline the three (3) advantages of a Scheme of Work.
22EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Adeyemo, P. O.
(1985).
Principle of Education and Practice of Education.
Ado Ekiti: Omolayo Standard Press and Bookshop C.
(Nig.)
Limited.
Bankole, A. F. and Kehinde, M. O.
(2002).
A Textbook on Methods of Teaching Business Subjects.
Ilorin, Kwara State: Nathadex Publishers.
23EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 4 USE OF AUDIO-VISUAL AIDS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Audio-Visual Aids 3.1.1 Pictures 3.1.2 Illustrations 3.1.3 Blackboard 3.1.4 Television 3.1.5 Cinema 3.1.6 Tape Recorder 3.1.7 Photographs 3.1.8 Methods 3.2 The Essential Characteristics of Good Visual Aids 3.3 How the Audio Visual Aids can be effectively used 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Audio-Visual aids or instructional materials are different forms of information carriers which are used to record, store, preserve, transmit or retrieve information for the purpose of teaching and learning.
They also transmit information in such a fashion that will modify the attitude, habits and practices of students.
In a general way audio-visual aids facilitate learning.
We will examine how some of these aids are used to enhance learning in the classroom.
In so doing, it must be emphasized that audio-visual aids are supplements and should not replace teaching by the subject teacher.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define audio-visual aids • list the various types of audio-visual aids • list the characteristics of good audio-visual aids • explain how audio visual can be used effectively • point out the specific situations some audio-visual aids can be used.
24EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Audio-Visual Aids 3.1.1 Pictures These can help to sugest or help to explain things which are omitted when teaching a lesson.
They direct children’s attention to the point you want to impress upon them, by guiding their observation with questions and suggestions you will train them to acquire the habit of looking for things that matter in pictures.
Pictures give general impression of a lesson.
We should use varieties of pictures to give the desired impression when we teach a lesson.
3.1.2 Illustrations The term illustration is commonly applied to the wise use of teaching aids, pictures and drawings to the employment of examples and comparisons, to elucidate either an argument or to enliven an argument.
But to the teacher it means more than the above for it includes geological specimens, chemical and physical apparatus, blackboard drawings, anything which appeals to the sense or the imagination of the learner; throwing light upon a piece of description or reasoning.
Illustrations should therefore lead from known to unknown, simple to complex and definite to indefinite.
Illustrations are of three kinds.
• Material Illustrations – These include actual objects, specimens, models or apparatus of various kinds.
These are appropriately employed among junior pupils of a school.
• Pictorial Illustrations – These consists of pictures, diagrams, cardboards, sketches of objects or models of things unobtainable.
The teacher should endeavour to employ them step by step as the lesson proceeds.
Drawings or diagrams and sketches on the blackboard in the presence of the children have more lasting impression than those prepared before hand.
The use of colours, coloured chalks, shading etc makes impression on the children.
• The following should be noted in using pictorial illustrations - They must be large and bold - They must be accurate but not elaborate - They must be self illustrating as much as possible - They must be hidden until they are required.
25EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • Verbal Illustrations – These are used exclusively in the absence of both material and pictorial illustrations.
Such is the case in some processes in Arithmetic e.g.
interest, stock and shares etc in oral and written composition,.
Literature, Grammar and civics.
Here the use of examples, compositions, contrasts, analogy and so on is most appropriate.
The teacher must be careful to see that he does not abuse the use of any of these illustrations among the junior pupils.
Material illustrations are very important.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List different kinds of illustrations and their appropriate usage.
3.1.3 Blackboard The basic visual aid used in most schools is the blackboard and the chalk.
It can be used with advantage in the teaching of subjects like Geography, Biology and the first stage of language teaching.
Children learn more quickly and surely by fitting words and pictures together.
3.1.4 Television Most programmes will be of practical character with a view to presenting such educational materials as are not normally available in the classroom.
The programmes include series of current affairs and science in daily life.
In films, projectors, films slides, the object is usually seen and this makes subject matters real and understandable.
3.1.5 Cinema Many studies have been made by the use of cinema, much useful information is presented and the lives of great people are often shown, which gives a good teaching on all subjects where subject matters are shown e.g.
History – biographies of great people.
Rural Science – germination of seeds and parts of a flower.
Geography – the causes of day and night which is very difficult to learn is made easy because pupils will see the objects moving.
3.1.6 Tape Recorder The tape recorders and the materials are particularly good for teaching English Language e.g.
speech training.
The tape recorders have grown rapidly in popularity as aid to learning.
However, the cost of these equipments has temporarily prohibited their widespread use in the rural and small schools.
26EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Its chief value would appear to be the aid, which it gives in the improvement of oral English.
In some classrooms, pupils are benefiting from the reproduction of their speech, class dramatization and musical reproduction.
3.1.7 Photographs These should be mounted for the sake of permanency and catalographs or classified for the sake of convenience.
Smaller pictures and photographs may be projected on a screen or passed round the classroom.
Lager pictures and photographs may be displayed to advantage at the front of the classroom.
Pictures and photograph have the greatest value for what they are designed to illustrate if used at the time when explanations or comments are being made on them.
3.18 Charts Charts represent desirable permanent equipment for teaching purposes.
To achieve the best results, they should be in a natural colour, large enough and sufficiently clear to be seen easily from all parts of the classroom.
Good charts may be constructed rapidly by using either of the following methods:- • Tracking a magnified image.
• Using a photograph to magnify a diagram map or sketch, filling filmstrips and slides.
Films, filmstrips and slides should be closely integrated with standard lesson procedure and not used merely as embroidery or entertainment.
For a successful use the teacher should be thoroughly familiar with the filmstrips or slides and should indicate to the class the specific areas to be observed.
The relevance of these features to the lesson or lessons should be pointed out.
It is customary to show films without interruption and the showing with discussion.
With the answering of questions asked prior to the showing or with the types or recapitulation since filmstrips or slides represent forms of “still pictures frequently, they requires preference by teachers for their flexibility and adaptability.
27EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2 The Essential characteristics of good visual aids are:- • The pictures, maps and charts should be attractive and with suitable colour.
• Writing must be large enough and clear enough to be easily read from the back of the class.
• It must be neat (Pencil lines on board will help).
• It is logically arranged, in short, clear steps (a model for exercise book e.g.
Mathematics and Geography).
• The Charts and posters should be accurate in spacing and planning.
• The figures and the letters should be well formed.
• Objects and pictures should be big enough for children to see from their sitting places.
• There should be a great deal of pictures or materials to go round the children if possible.
• Apparatus must be accurately prepared and be ready before the lesson.
• Let all pupils first see any materials or apparatus before individuals or age group can see it.
• All pictures on the television must be clear and the radio should have a clear sound.
• When preparing apparatus, the correct, accurate language and spelling must be considered.
3.3 How the Audio Visual Aids Can Be Effectively Used The following are some suggestions for effective use of audio visual material • They should be relevant to the curriculum.
• They should be previewed or tried out in advance before use in the class.
28EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • They should be taught, not merely shown.
They should be useful not as mere decorations.
• Provision should be made for definite follow-ups.
• Records should be kept of the results obtained, evaluation should be made.
• Too many teaching aids should not be used at a time.
• The types of materials used should be within the knowledge and experience of children.
• They should be used in the classrooms or laboratory.
Some schools have geography room, history room etc.
• They should be available when and where needed.
• All teaching aids should be tactically and technically correct.
• No one type or materials is best for all living situations.
Each has a specific role in order to provide maximum effects.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Visual Aid cannot teach by themselves, they need the teachers teaching indicating how and when to use them; and the benefits derived from their use.
Explain.
4.0 CONCLUSION For effective learning to take place the teacher ought to use audio-visual aids.
There are a wide range of these aids ranging from illustrations on the blackboard to the more complex ones such as computers which was not treated in this unit.
They all have their relevance depending on the situation.
The important thing is that the teacher chooses the right aid and prepare well before the commencement of the class.
5.0 SUMMARY Audio-visual aids, enhance learning and teaching.
We have many types with different uses.
Essentially they are information carriers.
Therefore the teacher must ensure that students get the right information.
Thus the teacher must master the use of these aids or get somebody who can operate them (the 29EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS more complex ones).
Knowledge gathered from elsewhere (classroom management) must be applied so that the objectives that were set can be met.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention and explain any three characteristics of: 1.
Verbal Illustrations 2.
Material illustrations 4.
Discuss any four principles the teacher should bear in mind in the use of these illustrations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Agun I.
(1980).
Education Media Management.
I. Agun and Imogie (Eds).
Ibadan: Fundamentals of Educational Technology Y Books.
Association for Education Communication and Technology (AECT) (1977).
The definition of Educational Technology Washington DC Author.
Kemp J. E. & Smaillie D.C. (1989).
Planning Producing and Using Instructional Media (Sixty Ed).
New York: Harper and Row Publishers.
MODULE 2 30EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Unit 1 Lesson Plan Unit 2 General Teaching Method I Unit 3 General Teaching Method II UNIT 1 LESSON PLAN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Lesson Plan 3.2 Elements of a Good Lesson Plan 3.2.1 Topics of the Lesson 3.2.2 Objectives of the Lesson 3.2.3 Teaching Aids and other instructional Materials 3.2.4 Organization of the Class 3.2.5 Presentation of a Lesson 3.3 Divisions of a Lesson 3.3.1 Introduction 3.3.2 Development 3.3.3 Conclusion 3.3.4 Summary and Evaluation 3.3.5 The Conditions to be fulfilled before Preparing a Lesson Plan 3.3.6 Sample of Lesson Plan Format 3.4 Time Table 3.4.1 The Value of Time Table 3.4.2 Factors to be considered in Drawing up a Time Table 3.4.3 The Problems of Time Table 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION From work done in the previous unit, you can explain what a syllabus is you also learnt that the scheme of work is drawn out of the syllabus.
In this unit you will be exposed to the preparation of a lesson plan.
The lesson plan is the next stage in the preparatory activities preceding teaching.
Details of the procedure of the lesson are itemized.
For 31EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS effective teaching and learning to take place in the class setting there must be preparation on the part of the teacher.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what a lesson plan stands for • state the elements of a good lesson plan • outline and explain the divisions of a lesson • explain the factors to consider in drawing up a timetable • state the problems of a timetable.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Lesson Plan A lesson plan is the preparatory notes on the subjects to be taught on daily basis.
It is the layout of how the teacher intends to handle a lesson from the beginning to the end.
A lesson plan is the instrument with which a good teacher can effectively perform his daily classroom teaching.
A good teacher is expected to plan his lesson on daily basis stating the steps or procedures to follow to achieve the stated objectives.
3.2 Elements of a Good Lesson Plan There are many opinions about the different ways of setting down notes, and all have certain advantages and disadvantages.
Again you would not need to write notes in the same way for a History lesson as for a lesson in Mathematics.
• However it is clear, that every lesson should have a beginning, a middle and an end.
Lesson notes are necessary because they limit teachers to particular bounds in their delivery.
• Lesson notes make teachers select the facts they teach.
• Lesson notes are details of the work to be done in one lesson.
• They are also meant to guide the teacher’s methods of delivery and activities in the lesson.
32EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2.1 Basic Information about the Class before the commencement of the Lesson • The size of the class: that is the number of students in the class.
This will help the teacher to determine the teaching method to use and the teaching materials to make available.
• Ability of the class: This is to know whether the class is streamed according to students abilities.
If on the other hand, the students are mixed the teacher will be able to plan for differences in abilities.
• Characteristics of the class: Find out whether it is a noisy class or quiet class.
If it is a noisy class, you need to make the lesson more interesting; you are more alert; and should monitor the students properly to prevent those who will not pay attention while you are teaching.
• Topic of the lesson: This is a statement stating what the lesson is all about.
For example a topic like “factors affecting production” in a subject like Economics.
3.2.2 Objectives of the Lesson • A good lesson plan will have specific aims and objectives to be achieved.
• The objectives must be simple.
• The objectives must be capable of being achieved within the stated period.
3.2.3 Teaching Aids and Other Instructional Materials Before the take-off of the lesson all the needed teaching aids and instructional materials must be adequately provided.
• The teaching aids will enhance teaching and learning in the classroom.
• Such materials should be used appropriately and effectively when teaching.
33EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2.4 Organization of the Class • The classroom must be properly organized for effective teaching.
• Know how to group the class.
• Be able to identify trouble areas in the class.
• The arrangement of the students before the lesson starts.
• Identify trouble makers and pay particular attention to them.
3.2.5 Presentation of Lesson Notes The lesson must be carefully planned in such a way that the presentation of it will allow for good coverage of the topic, teachers’ activity, students’ activity and good conclusions.
Ringing of the bell should not end the lesson abruptly.
To allow for good time, the teacher should not prepare too much and the teaching materials should be within reach.
One should avoid too much time on trivial issues during the lesson.
Teacher’s activities during the lesson may take the form of questions or practical demonstration.
While student’s activity deal with student’s involvement i.e.
answer to teacher’s question exercises to work.
3.3 Division of a Lesson Most lessons are made of four parts which are the • Introduction • Development • Conclusion • Summary and evaluation.
Time of these parts may vary from lesson to lesson but every part must have its own fair share of time.
3.3.1 Introduction A good lesson should begin with good introduction, which is interesting and could arouse students’ interest and attention.
A good lesson should have the following qualities.
• Should present the problem to be answered during the lesson.
• Should be able to tell what the lesson is about.
• Should make use of teaching aids like pictures and diagram.
• Should be able to have questions that can be used to revise the work covered in the previous lesson.
34EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS There are different ways of introducing lesson thus every lesson should not be introduced in the same way.
3.3.2 Development Development is the main body of the lesson.
This is a period of exposition, when the teacher teaches new materials and this could come in different stages or steps.
3.3.3 Conclusion This is towards the end of the lesson.
This should be made within a reasonable time and should have enough room for evaluation.
Conclusion can take the following forms • Brief revision of what has been covered in the lesson.
• Students reporting on what they have gained.
• Linking the conclusion with the next topic.
• Giving homework, which could serve as a logical outcome of the lesson.
3.3.4 Summary and Evaluation This is a brief review of the whole lesson where the teacher goes over the lesson again informing the students the ground covered.
After all the steps have been properly covered the teacher gives the students assignments on area covered.
When an assignment is given, date of submission must be indicated.
Areas not clear in the lesson will be made clearer while attempting the assignment.
Assignments must be marked, recorded and scripts returned to the students to enable them correct their mistakes.
This is the last stage of the lesson.
It deals with finding out the extent to which the teacher has succeeded in imparting the knowledge.
This is the stage where the success of the lesson is determined.
The teacher will know if the objective of the lesson has been achieved or not.
Evaluation involves asking questions from the students based on the topic treated.
Students also will know whether they have followed or not.
If the students respond to questions very well it means the teacher has succeeded but if otherwise he has failed.
A teacher who fails to evaluate his lesson is not a good teacher.
35EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.3.5 Conditions to be fulfilled Before Preparing a Lesson Plan Preparation of a lesson plan is not an easy task, but when appropriate materials are put in place, the task becomes very simple.
• You should consult the current scheme of work for the topic.
• You should think out the objectives of the lesson.
• You should consult reference books and textbooks.
• You should organize and assemble materials needed for the lesson in logical sequence.
• You should decide on the teaching aids to use.
• You should think of the most suitable methods of teaching to use.
• You should think of the subject matter and questions required at each stage of the lesson.
• You should ensure accuracy and adequacy of facts.
• You should think of provision for individual differences in learning.
• With all the above, you have a very clear mental picture of the lesson plan 3.3.6 Sample of Lesson Plan Format (1) Name of teacher ………………………………………………… (2) Subject …………………………………………………………… (3) Class ……………………………………………………………… (4) Topic …………………………………………………………… (5) Duration ………………………………………………………… (6) Date ……………………………………………………………….
(7) Objectives (i)…………………………………………………… 36EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS (ii) …………………………………………………... (8) Previous Knowledge …………………………………………… (9) Method of Teaching …………………………………………… (10) Presentation ……………………………………………………… Time Teacher’s Students Activities Activities Introduction (5 Minutes) Development of lesson in steps (25 minutes) Conclusion - Summary (5 minutes) - Evaluation (5 minutes) The timing of the lesson depends on the time allotted to each period per school.
• In distribution of lessons, subjects like Mathematics should come up in the morning while Fine Art and Music can be taken in the afternoon.
• Before the time-table is put into use, it must be approved by the appropriate authority concerned e. g. Principal or the Vice Principal or the Examination Committee.
3.4 The School Time Table The time table indicates what each teacher and each student is to do at a given period.
The school ensures that each subject receives its due share of attention according to the importance of the subject.
Adequate time should be given to every subject.
3.4.1 The Value of the Time Table Adeyemo (1985) outlined the significance of the school time table.
A few of them are listed below: • It regulates teaching adequately by paying attention to all subjects.
• It prevents waste of time of both the teacher and the students as everybody knows what to have at what time.
37EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • It ensures enough periods are allotted to each subject, while English and Mathematics take more periods than other subjects.
• It prevents monotony as subjects are inter mingled.
• It helps to form the habit of order and regular work.
• It helps to arrest the interest and attention of the students as they are occupied.
• It gives information to visitors and government officials of the where about of each teacher at a given time.
• The time table helps the smooth running of the school system.
• It helps the teachers and the students to prepare for their lessons.
• It directs the attention of the teachers and students to their own subjects.
3.4.2 Factors to consider in Drawing Up a Time-Table • Subjects to be taught.
Ensure that all subjects receive their proper attention by giving each of them proportion according to its importance.
• The length of each day must be considered; i.e.
opening and closing time (8.00 a.m. – 2.00 p.m.) • Members of staff must be considered and their disciplines.
• The duration of the lesson must be considered.
In the Primary schools 25-30 minutes, at the secondary level 30-40 minutes.
This is so because, interest and attention cannot be maintained for too long at the primary level.
• The sequence of the lesson is important.
Ensure that two difficult subjects do not follow each other (e.g.
Physics and Chemistry) nor two oral subjects succeed one another.
This is to avoid fatigue and boredom.
38EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.4.3 The Problem of the Time-Table Making the school time-table entails a lot of problems.
Thus a time table should be drawn by experienced teachers under close supervision of the vice-Principal Academics and all heads of departments must duly have an input.
However the following are some of the problems of time- table.
• Schools are not adequately staffed in certain subject areas.
Where this in the case, the few staff in some departments are over loaded especially in subjects like English Language and Mathematics.
• Transfer of teachers without replacement while the school is in session constitutes a lot of problems.
Students being left untaught can degenerate to weakening the discipline of the school.
• Where there are clashes on the time table teachers and students miss some lessons.
• Not all the students may be interested in a time table drawn up to include Agriculture for boys and Home Economics for girls.
The affected only take notes from their friends.
• Where the school library is not spacious enough to accommodate students during their free periods, some roam about the school premises.
• The students attendance of morning lessons is always very poor, some come late to school because of long distance.
This might lead to the change of the time opening from 8.00 a.m. to 8.30 a.m. this will shift the time of every subject forward by 30 minutes.
• The preference of most teachers is always for the morning lessons and it is not possible for all to be fixed up in the morning.
4.0 CONCLUSION The lesson plan is a layout of how the teacher intends to handle a lesson from the beginning to the end.
A well prepared lesson, if followed systematically will lead to effective teaching and will produce good learning.
You should prepare your lesson in an orderly manner, such that it will be easy for the students to follow the lesson as well as take down notes.
39EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS The time table is drawn up to help the smooth running of the school work as it indicates what each teacher and each class is to do.
The teacher must follow it to enhance effectiveness of the school system.
5.0 SUMMARY The Following are the major highlights of what we have learnt in this unit: • Lesson plan serves as the preparatory notes of subjects to be taught on daily basis.
• Elements of good lesson plan such as the topic, objectives, teaching aids, organization of the class and presentation of the lesson were stated.
• The lesson plan has four main divisions which are the introduction, development, conclusion, summary and evaluation.
• Conditions to be fulfilled before preparing lesson plan were listed.
• The value of the time table and factors to consider in drawing up a time table were explained.
• The problems of the time table were enumerated.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Produce a sample of Lesson Plan format for Senior Secondary School class.
2.
What are the value of a school time-table?
3.
Explain the factors to put into consideration in drawing up a school time table.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTH READINGS Adeyemo P. O.
(1985).
Principle of Education and Practice of Education.
Ltd.
Ado Ekiti: Omolayo Standard Press and Bookshops Co.
(Nig.).
Bankole, A. G. and Kehinde M. O.
(2002).
A Textbook on Methods of Teaching Business Subjects.
Ilorin, Kwara: State.Nathadex Publishers.
40EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 2 GENERAL TEACHING METHOD I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Teaching Methods 3.2 Various types of Teaching Methods 3.2.1 The Lecture or the Chalk and Talk Method 3.2.2 Advantages of the Lecture Method 3.2.3 Disadvantages of Lecture Method 3.3 The Discussion method 3.3.1 Advantages of the Discussion Method 3.3.2 Disadvantages of the Discussion Method 3.3.3 Some Guidelines of the Discussion Method 3.4 The Demonstration Method 3.4.1 Advantages of the Demonstration Method 3.4.2 Disadvantages of the Demonstration Method 3.5 Discovery Method 3.5.1 Advantages of the Discovery Method 3.5.2 Disadvantages of the Discovery Method 3.6 The Project/Assignment Method 3.6.1 Advantages of the Project Method 3.6.2 Disadvantages of the Project Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will get to know about teaching methods.
Methods are ways of doing things.
In any human endeavor where results are expected, there must be ways of attaining the goals.
The various educational goals (or curriculum objectives) have resulted in the adoption of various methods in dissemination of knowledge in class settings.
For effective teaching-learning of any subject, a variety of methods need to be brought to play.
This is essential because no method in itself is completely adequate or comprehensive.
In this unit, you will be exposed to five methods of teaching, as well as the advantages and disadvantages of each.
41EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what is meant by a teaching method • list the various methods of teaching • define lecture method and state the advantages and disadvantages • state what discussion method is and outline the merits and demerits • explain demonstration method of teaching and list the advantages and the disadvantages • explain project method of teaching and outline the advantages and disadvantages • state when and where each method is applicable.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teaching Methods Teaching method is very important in the impartation of knowledge in teaching-learning processes and the type adopted determines to a great extent what the student assimilate.
In actual fact if the appropriate method is adopted, knowledge acquired can be accelerated.
People opined that no educational system can rise above the quality of its teacher, nor can a nation rise above the quality of her educational system.
It is your duty as a teacher to ensure that appropriate teaching method or a combination of two or more methods is used in order to achieve the stated aims and objectives.
3.2 The Various Methods of Teaching • Lecture or the chalk and talk method • Discussion method • Demonstration method • Discovery method • Assignment/project method • Field trips method (Excursion) • Individualized instructional method • Laboratory method • Inductive and deductive method • Open education method 42EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2.1 the Lecture Method You are probably familiar with this teacher-dominated approach to teaching, hence it is termed a didactic method.
It involves verbal presentation of ideas, concepts, generalization and facts.
The objective of this method is just to stuff the students with information.
You do most of the work by talking while students are just passive or slightly involved by taking down notes and asking few or no questions.
In the Universities and other institutions of higher learning, the lecture method is the acceptable means of imparting information.
At the secondary school level, the students have not been trained to follow chains of reasoning.
Therefore lecture method should not be used in its pure forms:- 3.2.2 Advantages of the Lecture Method • It is cheap to operate as no special apparatus is needed • It makes fewer demands on the teacher’s time for planning and preparing and is therefore an attractive and easy method of teaching.
• It is an efficient means of giving a vast amount of knowledge in a limited amount of time.
• Large classes of students can be handled by the teacher.
• It serves to channel the thinking of all students in a given direction.
3.2.3 Disadvantages of the Lecture Method • Students are passive listeners and do not participate in the development of the lesson.
• The desired learning outcomes may not be accomplished.
• The method is inadequate for teaching certain types of concepts e.g.
attitudes and feelings which are not learned through pure telling.
• Students’ progress cannot be evaluated during the lesson since they are passive.
43EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • It cannot meet the different needs of the students as regards individual differences.
• It rarely affords students the opportunity to practice communication skills.
• It’s largely denied of exploratory aspects of learning.
Students may show a tendency to accept the teacher as the “final authority”.
Consequently they accept his biases and prejudices at face value.
• It encourages rote learning or cramming.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Briefly state the definition of teaching methods.
2.
Explain lecture method of teaching.
3.
Outline the advantages and disadvantages of lecture method.
3.3 The Discussion Method Discussion method is based on the philosophy that knowledge arises within the students and not from any external source.
The students take over the subject from various points of view and the teacher serves as a moderator.
3.3.1 Advantages of the Discussion Method • Students maintain a high degree of mental alertness to develop clear thinking.
• Interest is maintained and a feeling of confidence as students learn to express themselves freely.
• Students learn through discussion method owing to active participation and involvement in the lesson.
• Discussion method provides good practice for problem-solving.
• It provides the teacher with information about the students which can aid in a better understanding of the students.
• Teaching by discussion leads to positive attitudinal change because a student may find his or her own values and beliefs challenged by the views of fellow students.
44EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.3.2 Disadvantages of the Discussion Method • A lot of time would be wasted before the students arrive at satisfactory answers.
• Discussion method cannot be used so often as it does not allow for easy coverage of the syllabus.
• In most cases, most students do not participate in the lesson because they do not know or know little about the topic of the lesson.
They may even be shy or fearful.
• Students who have no background of the topic being discussed may become bored or disinterested in the lesson.
• Since the attention span of the students (young ones) is very short, they cannot maintain high level of attention.
3.3.3 Some Guidelines to the Discussion Method • The topic to be discussed and the teacher’s questions should meet the level of the students.
• The topics for discussion should be within students’ background.
• The teacher (you) should not allow some students to dominate the topic under discussion.
• You should treat all remarks as being serious and reject the irrelevant comments that do not fit into the discussion.
You should, however, do this gracefully.
• You should avoid vague questions.
• You should summarize frequently in order to guide your students towards understanding the main concepts and principles of the topics under discussion.
• At the end of the lesson ensure that any one who leads the discussion has the ability to break down the whole topic into smaller units.
45EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Explain discussion method of teaching.
2.
List the advantages and disadvantages of discussion method of teaching.
3.
Outline the guidelines of discussion method of teaching properly or expertly, since the teacher is supposedly more competent than most students.
3.4 The Demonstration Method In demonstration method, you the teacher will do a display or exhibition while the students watch.
It typically involves showing students the correct use of science apparatus, illustrating a technique (for example, using chloroform to anaesthetize toads or guinea pigs) performing an “experiment” which is either dangerous, risky, difficult or expensive for individual students use.
Demonstration method can be used in the drilling of shorthand outlines, manipulation of various office equipment could be demonstrated by the teacher during office practice lesson.
Sometimes demonstrations can be performed by students either individually or in groups.
Also in trades like sewing, weaving, barbing, pot making and the like demonstration method is best adopted using the teaching learning processes.
3.4.1 Advantages of the Demonstration Method • It is an inexpensive method since only the demonstrator needs materials.
• It shows how something is accomplished properly or expertly, since the teacher is supposedly more competent than most students.
• Demonstration method is especially beneficial in the areas of skills and attitudes.
• The proficiency displayed reduces the length of trial and error time.
• It can reduce hazards e.g.
breakage and accidents before students embark on individual or group work with materials involved.
• A good demonstration method holds the learners attention thus facilitating learning by giving students the opportunity to see and hear what is actually happening.
46EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.4.2 Disadvantages of the Demonstration Method • The assumption made that all the students see and hear equally well does not necessarily follow.
Visibility of details of what is being demonstrated is not assured in large classrooms or in circumstances where extremely small objects are used.
• Where the demonstration is restricted to the teacher alone, students will be denied the opportunity to acquire manipulative skills in handling of the materials and apparatus SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Explain demonstration method of teaching.
2.
State the advantages and disadvantages of demonstration method of teaching.
3.5 Discovery Method Discovery method is a teaching strategy which enables students to find the answers themselves.
It is a learner centred approach hence it is called a heuristic method.
It is of two types, notably, the guided discovery and the unguided discovery.
In the guided discovery, the teacher (you) guides the students to discover for themselves solutions to given problems by providing them with general principles, but not the solution to the scientific problem.
The unguided discovery type involves the students discovering for themselves both the general principles and solution to a scientific problem.
It is sometimes called the pure discovery.
3.5.1 Advantages of the Discovery Method Discovery method, whether it is the directed type or undirected, makes the student an active participant rather than a mere passive recipient.
• Since the method poses a challenge for the student to discover the information or knowledge for himself, retention of any information or knowledge so discovered will be increased.
• The training acquired in finding out things for oneself independently can be applied to new learning and problem solving.
• The joy in discovering something provides the students with intrinsic motivation.
47EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • Discovery method brings home to pupils their notions of the nature of scientific evidence, students learnt that answers to questions can often be obtained from investigations they can carry out for themselves.
• Discovery method helps students develop manipulative skills and attitudes which constitute one of the fundamental objectives of science teaching.
• Since discovery operates at the highest levels of the cognitive domain, it encourages analytical and synthetic thought as well as intuitive thinking.
3.5.2 Disadvantages of the Discovery Method • Discovery method is time consuming and progress is comparatively slow.
Apparatus have to be set up and result(s) of the investigation awaited.
• The method leaves open the possibility of not discovering anything.
Students may end up discovering things other than what was intended to be discovered.
This could be highly demoralizing to them particularly if great effort has been expended.
• The method is expensive considering the equipment and materials needed.
• Discovery method is only good for a small class where effective teacher supervision is possible.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Define discovery method of teaching.
2.
List the advantages and disadvantages of discovery method of teaching.
3.6 The Project Method The Project Method of teaching centers on an assignment of interest undertaken by an individual student or a group or a whole class.
In this method, the students are guided when necessary.
48EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.6.1 Advantages of the Project Method • Since emphasis is on doing by the student, opportunity is provided to develop his initiative as well as greater understanding of how to learn.
• Motivation to work is high since it is based on the natural interests of students.
It thus offers opportunity for creative ability particularly for specially talented students.
• It gives students specific areas to work on sometimes with acquisition of some new skills and attitudes.
• Group project afford opportunity for developing leadership and organizing abilities.
3.6.2 Disadvantages of the Project Method • Projects are very time-consuming and what is ultimately learned may not justify the expense, efforts and time put in to complete the project.
• Students often get sidetracked particularly if they lack good grasp of facts necessary in carrying out the projects.
• It may be difficult to determine the extent to which the individual has participated.
• It is difficult to choose a project that will interest all the students in the class at one time.
• It favours the independent students, those without independent study skills may suffer.
• Some students may not participate in the project work at all.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
State the definition of project method of teaching.
2.
Enumerate the advantages and disadvantages of project method of teaching.
49EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing you would have noted that every teaching method has its advantages and disadvantages.
You should also note that each of these methods has a part to play in the promotion of effective transmission of knowledge by teachers and assimilation of the same by students.
You the teacher must take time to reflect on your own time in the Secondary School and which method left any meaningful impact on your life.
You should spend time helping the students to feel the impact of teaching and learning and not just merely go through the motions of “teaching”, completing the syllabus or doing your duty.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major highlights of what we have examined in this unit.
• The meaning of teaching methods.
• The following five teaching methods with their advantages and disadvantages.
• Lecture method.
• Discussion method.
• Demonstration method.
• Discovery method.
• Project /Assignment method.
• Some guidelines to Discussion method.
• 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly explain what you understand by lecture method of teaching and where this method is commonly used.
2.
Differentiate between guided and unguided discovery methods of teachings.
3.
Line the guideline on discussion method.
50EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullahi A, (1982).
Science Teaching in Nigeria.
Ilorin Kwara State: Atoto Press Ltd. Kim, C.E.
and Kellough, D.R.
(1978).
A Resource Guide for Secondary School Teaching Planning for Competence.
New York: Macmillan.
Mayer, A. M. (1978).
Biology Teachers’ Handbook Biological Sciences Curriculum Student (BSCS).
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Shipley N. M. et al (1972).
A Synthesis of Teaching Methods New York: McGraw ill Pierson.
51EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 3 GENERAL TEACHING METHOD II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Teaching Methods II 3.2 Types of Teaching Methods 3.2.1 The Field Trip 3.2.2 Advantages of the Field Trip 3.2.3 Disadvantages of the Field Trip 3.3 The Individualized Instructional Method 3.3.1 Advantages of the Individualized Instructional Method 3.4 The Laboratory Method 3.4.1 Advantages of the Laboratory Method 3.4.2.
Disadvantages of the Laboratory Method 3.5 Inductive and the Deductive Methods 3.5.1 The Inductive Method 3.5.2 Characteristics of the Inductive Method 3.5.3 The Deductive Method 3.5.4 Characteristics of the Deductive method 3.5.5 Comparism between the Inductive and Deductive Methods 3.6 Open Education 3.6.5 Advantages of Open Education 3.6.6 Disadvantages of Open Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of unit 5 which centers on five teaching methods.
A teacher is trained in the art of teaching because of the child.
The principles and methods of teaching should be guided by the experience of the child, the environment and by innovative approach to learning.
In this unit you will be exposed to additional five methods of teaching such as field trip, individualized instruction, laboratory, inductive and deductive and open education.
The advantages and disadvantages of each method will be highlighted too.
52EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the field trip method of teaching and where it can be applied • outline the advantages and disadvantages of field the trip method of teaching • state what the laboratory method of teaching is • compare and contrast inductive and deductive methods of teaching • define open education and give examples • state the merits and demerits of open education with special reference to National Open University of Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teaching Methods II 3.2 Types of Teaching Methods 3.2.1 The Field Trip This method involves taking learners on an excursion outside the classroom for the purpose of making relevant observation for the purpose of obtaining Technological and Vocational Information.
Field trip as a method can be used in teaching Business Studies, Sciences and some art subjects like Yoruba, History, etc.
3.2.2 The Advantages of the Field Trip • It allows the students to engage fully in the activities of the study.
• It sharpens the students observational abilities.
• It helps to add reality to and verify how the area of coverage operates in practice.
• Field trip is useful in developing all senses of the students.
• It provides opportunity for students to identify ways of spending leisure time profitably.
• Things that cannot be brought to the classroom can be observed and studied e. g. ecological succession, oceans, etc.
• Through direct contact with different occupations provided by field trips students learn and develop an appreciation of the “world” of work outside of the school in relation to school work.
53EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • Experience gained during a field trip can motivate students to read about what they have observed, so as to harmonize actual field experiences with information gathered from textbooks.
3.2.3 Disadvantages of the Field Trip • Arranging a good field trip necessitates careful planning.
Not only does it consume a considerable amount of time, but transportation arrangements are often difficult and may be expensive.
• Class supervision may prove difficult since students tend to move round.
• If not properly planned and organized, the field trip becomes a waste of time and resources and takes away from valuable learning activities.
• Even after the most thoughtful preparation and planning, accidents can and do occur in field trips.
• A field trip may create conflicts with other classes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define field trip method of teaching.
2.
Outline the advantages and disadvantages of field trip method of teaching.
3.3 The Individual Instructional Method This method is a programmed instruction in which the learning programmes are presented in carefully structured steps and the steps depend on the individual student and the nature of materials to be learned.
For example the pace of learning depends on individual students.
3.3.1 Advantages of the Individualized Instructional Method • It allows the student to go at his own pace.
• It makes the student to participate.
• It gives the teacher quick knowledge of individual student i.e.
whether the lesson is understood or not, since test is usually given at the end of every lesson.
54EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • It can be used effectively to make up for lack of background by particular member of the class.
• It reduces a student’s anxiety as he depends on himself.
3.3.2 Disadvantages of the Individualized Instructional Method • It is time consuming.
• It is highly demanding of equipments and materials.
• It requires very little or no interaction among the students.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 3.4 The Laboratory Method This is an activity method designed to be carried out by an individual student or a group of students for the purpose of making personal observations from experiments in which students can get conclusions by themselves.
3.4.1 Advantages of the Laboratory Method • Learning through this method extends and reinforces theoretical learning through reality.
• Laboratory method offers students the opportunity to develop scientific attitudes such as objectivity, critical thinking, carefulness, open mindedness etc.
• Because the method implies learning by doing students tend to be more interested because of active involvement.
• Students become familiar with how scientific knowledge is acquired by performing experiments, recording observations and results, summarizing data and drawing conclusions.
• Through laboratory method, the student learns how to handle apparatus and other instruments, thereby developing manipulative skills.
• Laboratory method promotes problem solving and self reliance.
• Getting involved in laboratory activities can also enable students to learn much about the inter-relationship between science and technology.
55EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.4.2 Disadvantages of the Laboratory method • It can be expensive if separate equipment and materials have to be provided.
• It is time-consuming because of the careful planning and preparation required.
• Acquisition of skills which results from exposure to the laboratory method, is of questionable value as objectives for some of the students who will have little use of them later.
• It is an inefficient practice of teaching where ordinary telling method or simple demonstration is perfectly adequate.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Define laboratory method of teaching.
Where it is normally applied?
2.
Enumerate the advantages and the disadvantages of laboratory method of teaching.
3.5 Inductive and the Deductive Methods 3.5.1 The Inductive Method The inductive method of teaching begins with particular examples and from the examination of the examples, definition are established.
The teacher tries to draw out from the student the already acquired knowledge.
This is done through questioning.
Also the teacher tries to relate the knowledge gained is one subject area to another through description of similaries.
3.5.3 Characteristics of the Inductive Method • It proceeds from the known to the unknown.
• It proceeds from the particular to the general.
• It proceeds from the concrete to the abstract.
• It is an analytic method or process.
• It is a method of discovery.
3.5.3 The Deductive Method In deductive method a statement or a rule or formula is given.
From this rule or formula, the teacher begins to work back to a particular case.
For 56EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS example a formula in mathematics.
That is the whole is given and the students are made to see the parts that build it up.
3.5.4 Characteristics of the Deductive Method • It starts from the general rule and proceeds to the particular.
• It is a dogmatic assertion like Christian creed.
• It is a method of instruction whereby the general rule is at first vague to the pupils, but it becomes clearer after the teacher has skillfully and fully expressed it.
• It proceeds from indefinite to definite.
3.6.7 Comparism between the Inductive and Deductive Methods INDUCTIVE DEDUCTIVE i.
It proceeds from the particular to a It proceeds from general law or definition general laws or definitions to particular cases ii.
It leads the students to a new knowledge It does not necessarily lead to new knowledge Iii It is a method of discovery It is a method of explanation and verification iv.
It is a method of mental training or It is the method of education telling or instructing v. It is slow and sure because the It is quicker but no knowledge has to be obtained form always reliable, the direct examination of particular cases leaner utilizes the but it is thoroughly graspped knowledge which others have obtained before him, but he may not be able to apply it to new cases Vi It fosters self-reliance on the pupils and It does not foster self- thus enables them to use what they have reliance learnt previously to establish new facts Vii It is a safe method It is not a safe method SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 List ten (10) characteristic of inductive and deductive methods of teaching.
57EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.6 Open Education Open Education is that system of education which attempts to make education accessible to all in a flexible mode such that learner • learn at their own pace and in a place convenient for them • use specially prepared self-learning materials • may also make use of electronic media like radio, television, audio-visual materials, telephones, computers, etc.
This educational system opens door of educational opportunity to all and sundry, regardless of age, sec, race etc; in particular.
The target groups and learners in an open educational system.
One such example is the National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Choices available to an Open system learner include: • Choice of where to learn – whether at home, in the library, place of work or some other place without restriction of the formal school system.
• The choice of when to learn – as there is no imposed time for learners or time frame for completion as obtained in the formal school system.
3.6.1 Advantages of Open Education • Less time is wasted.
The time and the expenses of traveling to and from classroom or training centers are eliminated.
• Open education ensures that the learners avoid unnecessary information.
• Since it is an individualized instruction, it affords learners the opportunity to learn at their own pace.
• It leads to reduction in cost of accommodation.
• Trainers and lecturers have much more time to devote to other things.
• It makes education available to more people who would never have pursued formal education.
58EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • Through open education, time off from job or duty may be reduced.
• Less pressure is exerted on school facilities.
(classroom, hostels, toilets etc).
• It ensures that there is no forum for students riot as learners are not together.
3.6.2 Disadvantages of Open Education • Students miss out on the help they could have had from fellow students in a group study.
• It is difficult to evaluate learners as compared with the conventional school system.
• Where means of communication are not well developed, provision of two-way communication between learners and the open institution may be difficult.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 State the benefit you are deriving from the type of learning you are undergoing with Open National University of Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is no end to the various ways by which human beings learn.
More methods of teaching are yet to be unfolded.
Teacher-dominated and students dominated approaches to teaching are two ends of the spectrum from which a balance must be struck in order to be able to evaluate teaching and learning processes.
Efforts should be made to choose adequate and appropriate methods in line with the curriculum objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught the following: • The definition of field trip method of teaching.
• The subject areas that the method could be applied.
• The advantages and disadvantages of field trip method of teaching.
• The meaning of individualized method of teaching and the advantages and disadvantages.
59EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • The significance of laboratory method of teaching; its the advantages and disadvantages.
• The characteristics of the inductive and deductive methods of teaching.
• The open education method of teaching, its advantages and disadvantages 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. line the various types of teaching methods 2.
Compare and contrast between inductive and deductive methods of teaching.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullahi, A.
(1982).
Science Teaching in Nigeria.
Ilorin, Kwara State: Atoto Press Ltd. Adeyemo P. O.
(1985).
Principle of Education and Practice of Education.
Ado Ekiti: Omolayo Standard Press and Bookshops Co.
(Nig.)
Ltd. 60EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS MODULE 3 Unit 1 Questions and Questioning Techniques Unit 2 Questions and Answers in the Classroom Unit 3 Testing and Examination (Evaluation) Unit 4 Marking and Assignment UNIT 1 QUESTIONS AND QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Questioning Techniques 3.2 The Next Key is to ACTUALLY LISTEN to your Tutee’s Responses 3.3 Questions and Listening 3.4 Tutee Summaries 3.5 Other Types of Questions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As teachers, we use many different strategies to help students learn.
One of the most common strategies is teacher exposition.
This is a teacher – centred approach because knowledge is presented to students in a more or less final form.
Often these lessons (or parts of lessons) are supported by chalkboard summaries diagrams and the textbook.
In exposition lessons, the task of students is to understand and remember the information.
Enquiry learning is a more student – centred approach.
Enquiry learning involves students in the active and careful analysis of a situation or problem – in the light of different sorts of information available to them.
In enquiry learning, students use their own thinking skills to make their on generalization or conclusions – and thus are actively involved in generating “knowledge” in forms that are meaningful to them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the two types of strategies teachers use to help student learn?
61EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • differentiate between teacher centered and student centered approach to learning • enumerate and explain the various questioning techniques • explain why the first questions you ask are important • explain why you should give students time to answer • explain why you should allow students to help each other • explain how to tailor the question to your aims • explain why students should be spurred to give a summary of what has been covered • explain why you should ask open ended questions • explain why the teacher should actually listen to the students response.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Questioning Techniques The way you use questions with your students can have a big effect on your lesson.
Here are some tips to help you get the most out of your questions.
1.
The first questions you ask are very important.
Get students attention and arouse interest from the start of the lesson.
- Start with a question on the board to focus them, arouse curiosity or give them a puzzle to solve.
For example: what is a couch potato?
(a) A type of vegetable?
(b) A piece of furniture?
(c) A type of person?
Note: A couch potato is someone who watches Television or video for long hours.
- Prepare the question you need to ask to elicit the vocabulary or language in which to practice.
Working it through in your mind before hand helps you teach more effectively – plan thoroughly.
Do your questions get the answers you need?
Check them again before the lesson 62EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.
Give Students time to answer 3.
In our keenness to get on with eliciting information or checking comprehension we do not always allow students enough time to reply.
Remember that the answer is on the tip of your tongue but not on theirs.
First they must process your question.
Studies show that giving students “thinking-time has the following result:” - Students were more willing to volunteer answers.
- “I don’t know” responses decreased.
- Students accuracy improved and the length of their replies too.
- The teacher became more effective questioners.
- Don’t be afraid of silence-wait at least 3 seconds for them to think and formulate a response 4.
Allow students to help each other - If a student cannot answer your question do not wait in silence and humiliate them.
- Rephrase your question or ask them a further question to lead them towards the information you need.
- Encourage others to suggest answer.
- Allow answers to be whispered to help – make this rule clear at the start of the activity.
- Do not settle for one correct response.
Get suggestions from students involving the whole class.
5.
Tailor the question to your aims 6.
Select the questions carefully and use them wisely.
- If you would like students to discuss a topic or an issue it is best to use open-ended questions.
Like what?
How?
Direct questions like.
Do you like going to the market?
This will not generate much language.
It is only a Yes or No response.
- “Be wary of asking too many questions in a discussion.
• “What made you think that?” • “What is the opposite of this question?
• “You are correct.
The answer to this question is false.
What would be needed to make it right?
?” - Rephrase questions - Try repeating your question in a slightly different manner 63EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS - Reword your original question into smaller parts.
- Change the infection in your voice when repeating the original question 3.2 The Next Key is to ACTUALLY LISTEN to Your Tutees Response This sounds easy, but it is harder than you may think.
Listening is an acquired skill.
In normal conversation, we don’t really listen to others.
We hear what they say but don’t listen carefully enough to “read between the lines” in order to be an effective tutor, you have to slow down and concentrate on what your tutee is saying.
Is he/she grasping the concept?
Can he/she explain it easily or does it take some effort?
Is his/her body language saying anything?
In order to get the answers to these and other questions you must listen carefully and observe purposefully.
The question can be passed over to others.
Encourage as many contributions as possible “what do you think …?
Segun.
Do you agree with Ngozi?
Hesitate before answering your own questions or you will dominate and risk inhibiting student talk.
3.3 Questions and Listening It is just as important (if not more important) for the tutor to guide the tutee in doing most of the explaining.
This will reinforce learning of the tutee and help the tutee identify problem area.
.
(a) Ask Open-ended questions - By passing questions that require more than a Yes/No response you encourage the tutee to start thinking.
• “Where do you think we should start?” • “What are the steps involved in working this problem?” • “What is the definition”?
(b) Ask probing questions - Probing questions follow up on a students contribution - “What will happen if what you said is true” 3.4 Tutee Summaries Along with listening it is very important to spur your students into giving a summary of what has been covered.
If steps are involved in finding the solution, make sure that all the steps are included (in the 64EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS right order) by your Tutee or student when summarizing.
Try to encourage more than a parroting of the steps.
Sometimes, having the tutee say the steps in his/her words will decrease the tendency to parrot response.
If concepts are involved have the tutee paraphrase the ideas in his/her own words.
The simple summary will help you determine if you will move on to another topic or need to stay with the present one.
If the summary is difficult for students, stay where you are until he/she can repeat with ease.
Use the questioning techniques to guide the tutee to the correct answer if he/she has gotten some of the steps out of order.
3.5 Other Types of Questions 1.
The Brain storm questions 2.
The focal question 4.0 CONCLUSION How a teacher makes use of questions in the classroom makes a lot of difference in the result he gets.
With the aid of questions the teacher can stimulate the students to work harder.
The students also develop confidence in themselves if this aspect of teaching is handled well by the teacher.
5.0 SUMMARY Questioning techniques are numerous and must be mastered by the teacher.
In this unit we have covered opening questions and how to proceed from stage to stage in the lesson.
The need for the teacher to actually listen to his students in order to discover what they are trying to communicate is very important.
The teacher should realize, that all the students must be encouraged to fully develop their full potentials.
If questions are not well handled some students may be discouraged and fail to become useful and well rounded members of the society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain fully the value of the following: 1.
The role of opening questions in a lesson.
2.
Why students should be given enough time to answer.
3.
The importance of students’ summaries.
65EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Gough; N (1992).
Blueprints for Greening Schools: Gould League.
Melbourne.
66EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 2 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS IN THE CLASSROOM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Question and Answer 3.2 Aims of Questions 3.2.1 Kinds of Questions 3.3 The Principles which a Teacher Should Observe when Asking Oral Questions 3.4 Characteristics of Good Questions 3.5 Students’ Questions 3.6 Answers 3.6.1 Superflow Answers 3.7 Characteristics of a Good Answer 3.8 The Treatment of Answer 3.8.1 A Wrong Answer 3.8.2 A Partially Correct Answer 3.8.3 No Answer 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you will learn how to use the question and answer method in the classroom.
It is natural for people to be curious.
It is natural for people to ask questions because such may be designed to provoke thought.
It may be used as aid to review.
Questioning may be used to test weaknesses and the subsequent application of remedial measures.
It can also be used to mention strength.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • the socratic or question and answer method • the characteristics of good questions • the various kinds of questions • the principles which a teacher should observe when asking oral questions • how to deal with students’ questions 67EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS • characteristics of good answers • how to treat answers • the different categories that answers fall into.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Question and Answer The question and answer method is sometimes referred to as the Socratic Method because that is where it takes its root.
Socrates the Greek philosopher was involved in the sue of questions to probe his students’ competence and capability to be involved in intellectual discourse.
However, note that Socrates was dealing with mature students (men), who by today’s educational system are postgraduates.
With this at the back of our minds knowing that we are dealing with teenagers and adolescents we shall refer to this method as the question and answer method.
Question and answer method is one of the most common methods used by secondary school teachers.
The pattern typically begins with the teacher asking a question and then recognizing one student who answers.
Next the teacher reacts verbally in some way, to the students’ response and asks a question of another student who then responds.
(see Farell and Farmer, 1980).
As in the case with the lecture method, the teacher may write something on the chalkboard and sometimes the students takes notes.
Thus, the working definition for Question and Answer method is “the teacher asks a question one student answers; the teachers reacts and asks another question which is responded to by a second student and so forth.
Many teachers believe question and answer method is a method that enables the teacher to find out who knows what.
Only one student responds at a time, a sample of only one student out of several students.
Question and answer method is extremely valuable as a way to guide development thinking to stimulate creative problem solving, to initiate discussion and to stimulate and guide recall of requisites needed for the day’s lesson.
The type of question posed, the preamble to the question posed and the variety of ways used to encourage and accept responses are all skills that make the difference between thoughtful and dull sequences.
68EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2 Aims of Questions 1.
Questions find out the past that needs further treatment and practice.
2.
Questions enable the teacher to read his pupils minds, and make the pupil to express what they have understood in the lesson.
3.
Questions make pupils think and find out things which they otherwise might not bother about.
4.
Teachers use questions as a means of making contact with their pupils.
5.
Questions develop understanding of the pupils and encourage them to reason out matters for themselves.
6.
By means of questioning a teacher is able to test the knowledge of a child so that gaps may be filled in and misconceptions righted.
7.
Questions help pupils to build up their ideas in the way the teacher wants.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the relevance of questions and answers in the classroom?
2.
What are the aims of questioning?
3.2.1 Kinds of Questions 1.
Presentation or Teaching Questions – These are questions used when the lesson is in its prime stage, i.e.
when the teacher is actually demonstrating or explaining the processes and he aims to impart the knowledge to his pupils.
They serve to make alert both the teacher and the pupils to the subject matter.
2.
Pause Questions – Are used because they provide a useful break in the lessons to assure a teacher that pupils are attentively following the lessons.
3.
Guide Questions – These are asked to direct the children’s special attention to some important points in the lessons.
Such questions help to secure careful observation, skillful correlation and accuracy.
4.
Summary Questions – These are asked to help to review what has been taught.
Through the answers given to these questions by the children the teacher assesses his own failure and success.
The 69EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS teacher should frame the questions in such a way that logical answers should be raised in the children.
5.
Drill Questions – These should be asked at the beginning or at the end of the lesson and should not take too long a time, say five minutes.
Such questions serve to encourage the children to be alert e.g.
mental sums in Arithmetic.
3.3 The Principles Which a Teacher Should Observe When Asking Oral Questions 1.
Questions must be clear and definite in meaning and wording.
2.
Questions should always deal with essentials.
They should be so put as to help the whole class when at work.
3.
Questions should stimulate real thought, questions suggesting the answers should be avoided e.g.
did Abraham show much faith when he offered his son?
Yes) 4.
Questions should be asked before a pupil is called upon to answer.
Such a procedure keeps all pupils active, thus assisting in the diagnosis of difficulties – discovery of weaknesses.
5.
Questions should be distinctly given and must be audible to the class, but not shouted.
6.
Questions should be carefully prepared before hand and they should be put in a logical order.
7.
Never repeat your questions.
If you do, your pupils will get into the habit of waiting to hear you the second time.
Ask once only so that they may listen all the time.
Questions should not be repeated because a pupil fails to understand it because of inattention, the question may be repeated.
8.
Avoid leading questions – leading questions result sometimes from poor ability to think and to phrase questions.
In Social Studies, such questions are blunders e.g.
Pericles was banished from Athens, was he not?
9.
Avoid questions that will admit different answers e.g.
what do you see in the compound?
A child may see trees, another a sheep, and all will be right.
A question that admits many answers is vague e.g.
what is the most important thing you notice about the object.
70EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 10.
Questions which will involve simultaneous or chorus answers should be avoided; they may be used occasionally to drill in certain facts and to brighten up a class.
11.
Questions in a class should be carried on in a sociable spirit, the teacher is to look at his class and talk to them as friend to friend.
12.
The objects of the questions should be clear and definite.
If the objective is not clear, then the question is vague, general and unfair to the pupils.
It indicates laziness, inexact thinking or no preparation by the teacher.
13.
Do not ask corroborative questions – those ending in “isn’t it”, “Aren’t they” such are really of little value.
Avoid questions which will need “yes” or “No”, they encourage guessing.
14.
Do not use elliptical questions such as “Abuja is the Federal capital of ………….. ?
That leads to little mental effort.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the principles a teacher should follow when asking questions?
3.4 Characteristics of Good Questions It is commonly heard especially among junior teachers such questions as “Don’t you hear what I say?” The teacher being angry unnecessarily, repeats his questions.
The children are threatened; the questioner is annoyed, there is a muddle and no good answer comes from the pupils.
Who is at fault?
It is the teacher’s fault in most cases.
The question may not be clear, inaudible or it may be bad repetition.
To avoid these mistakes therefore the following should be noted: 1.
Clearness – Children should understand questions if correct answers are expected from them.
The words with which the questions are framed should be familiar to the children, and they should be stated clearly.
Good questions are the outcome of good thinking and precise expression.
Precise expression could only be successfully attained if it is cultivated in speech generally.
Hence the importance of speech training in the infant and lower classes.
2.
Definiteness – The question should limited the field for generalization.
As a rule the question requiring “YES” or “NO” should as far as possible avoided, so also is the elliptical form of question such do encourage children to guess work.
71EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.
Interest – Questions should be interesting.
They should provoke enthusiasm and thirst for knowledge.
4.
Fair Distribution – Questions should be fairly distributed.
The teacher should see to it that his questions give encouragement to those of his pupils who are modest or shy or those who are too lazy to think.
Questions may be graded according to the capacity of the different members of the class.
Questions should be asked in rotation.
Every child should feel he could be called upon at any moment and that is why questions should be abruptly directed to the inattentive and the careless.
Sufficient time must be allowed for a thoughtful answer but this does not mean that the teacher should allow time to be wasted by the dull members of the class.
3.5 Students’ Questions It is the characteristic of a good teacher to allow his pupils to ask questions.
Their questions need not be asked privately on only the subjects taught in the school all the time, but also on general matters which help to develop the intelligence of the children.
Usually the distribution of questions should be as wide as possible.
When a teacher is dealing with the whole class, pausing to give time for consideration is desirable before asking a specific pupil to answer.
This permits consideration of the question by the whole class.
When a pupil’s name precedes the questions, the challenge to the remaining members of the class is diminished (Question, pause and name).
3.6 Answers The treatment of answers is as important as the treatment of questions.
The relevance of the answers depends much on the nature of the questions.
The qualities of good questions are the teacher’s sole concern but those of answering depend both upon the teacher’s and the pupils.
Good answers are indication of successful teaching and ability to put questions to their pupils in a suitable manner.
They also show keen interest and attention on the part of the pupils.
They are really tests of intelligence on the part of the teacher as well as his pupils.
An incorrect answer may reveal ignorance in which case it should be rejected outright.
But should incorrectness be due to grammatical mistakes and carelessness, the particular pupils should be led to correct himself and should he fail to do so, other members of the class should be 72EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS asked to help.
The teacher’s own correct answer should be the last resort.
The pupils who make the wrong answer should be made to repeat the correct sentences or statement.
3.6.1 Superfluous Answers Let the child repeat the question and discover for himself the superfluity of the answer.
Though the teacher should not be satisfied but with best answer, yet he should give credit to honest efforts to answer his question.
All good answers should receive some words of commendation from the teacher.
All inattentive and thoughtless answers should be fairly refused without any signs of ridicule because children are very sensitive to ridicule and sarcastic expressions.
Such expressions may dampen the child’s enthusiasm to answer further questions and make him shy to do his best.
.It is wise to insist on asking every answer a complete sentence, although there are some certain questions whose nature simply requires answers in YES or NO forms.
Where the teacher wishes the questions in a complete sentence and the child deviates, let the teacher ask the child to put the answer in a complete sentence.
Characteristics of a Good Answer 1.
It should be absolutely relevant to the question 2.
It should be expressed very clearly in few words 3.
It should be grammatically correct 4.
It should be a good answer 5.
It should not be superfluous 6.
It should show a sense of intelligence.
3.8 The Treatment of Answers The teacher does not only require skills in questioning, he must also be adept in dealing with answers.
Some teachers do not emphasize important features of a lesson topic by failing to make use of answers given.
The pattern of question answering should follow the lines of friendly conversation.
Some teachers demand rigid military standing position when answering questions.
If a child cannot answer correctly, he remains standing until a correct answer is given by a fellow pupil.
Other teachers feel that questions can be answered just as well as when the pupils are sitting.
73EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS In a well managed classroom the following suggestions have merits and are worthy of trial.
1.
With few exceptions pupils should stand when giving answers.
An erect, relaxed poison is most desirable.
If a pupil does not know that answer to a question, he should stand, courteously indicating that he does not know and then resumes his seat.
2.
Many, but not all answers should be given in a complete form.
This is the teacher’s opportunity to stress good enunciation and correct oral expression of junior pupils to express their answers in sentence form.
3.
Simultaneous answering should be discouraged.
It tends to encourage slow or indifferent pupils to hide their inadequacies and to discourage initiative.
4.
It is not always wise for a teacher to accept immediately the first answer given.
It is frequently a good practice to ask a number of pupils for answers before indicating the correct response.
This encourages the habit of evaluating answers.
5.
To repeat answers is a waste of time and energy.
It encourages pupils in faulty habits, speech and inaudible replies.
If repetition for the sake of emphasis is desired, a pupils should be requested to give the answer.
6.
The teacher should always acknowledge an answer but avoid the use of stereotyped phrases indicating approval of correct answers.
Give credit for effort where effort is genuine.
One would not commend a pupil in Grade VI for trying to answer the question “what are 5 and 3?” 7.
A pupil should be permitted to complete his answers without interception except he is extremely verbose (too many words) and out of point.
8.
If the answer to a question is not forthcoming, the teacher, after a brief pause, may either rephrase or explain the point with which it deals.
9.
Wrong answer – Wrong answers may be dealt with in one or two ways: - If the purpose of the question is the recall of factual materials the teacher should ask another pupil to answer.
The first pupil may then be required to repeat the information given in the correct answer.
74EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS - If the question asked calls for a judgment or decision, the teacher, when the incorrect answer is given, may rephrase the question.
By series of questions, the teacher may lead the pupils to give the correct answer.
3.8.1 A Wrong Answer Children who give wrong answers should never be left in any doubt that their answers are wrong.
Sometimes, it is possible without wasting time, to help a pupil to see where his answer is wrong.
The pupil who gives a wrong answer should be made to repeat the correct sentence or statement.
When a wrong answer is given, questions the child further about it, this will reveal where his wrong notion lies and enables you to get to the root of his mistakes.
It is good for the pupil who gives the wrong answer to find out the mistake and correct it, provided that this does not waste the time of the rest of the class.
3.8.2 A Partially Correct Answer What does one do when a pupil gives an answer only partially correct.
Partly correct answers need not be refused, but its incompleteness should be pointed out and the rest of the answers obtained if possible from the same pupil.
Partly correct answers have frequency to be accepted, but the necessary information can be supplied by others.
In most cases, the pupils called first should then be required to give the full answer.
If a child gives an answer that is partly correct, make use of the correct part and ignore the wrong.
Give him some encouragement and make him feel he can give good answers to your questions.
An answer which is only partly right may be used as a starting point and a correct and complete answer gradually builds up from it by further questioning.
3.8.3 No Answer What does one do when a pupil gives a wrong answer to a question.
The teacher should let the child repeat the question and discover for himself the mistakes in the answer; although the teacher should not be satisfied but with the best answer yet, he should give credit to honest efforts to answer his questions.
If a pupil fails to produce an answer or the desired answer, the teacher should go back a few steps to find out where the difficulty lies.
He may find out that an explanation of some part is necessary before the question can be answered.
75EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS When a teacher asks a question which no one in the class tries the answer he must understand at once that he has chosen the wrong question or that he asked the question in a wrong way.
The teacher should think of some other ways of putting what he has in mind to the pupils.
He should prepare very well for the pupils, he should give sufficient time to think about the questions.
The wording of the questions should be direct, precise and expressed in clear language.
4.0 CONCLUSION The use of questions in the classroom is an effective way of teaching.
Like all teaching methods the teachers should be familiar with the characteristics of good question and how to assess the responses by the students what has been covered in this unit.
The pitfalls to be avoided were also highlighted.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit elucidates the questioning and answer method of teaching.
We looked at guidelines which help the teacher ask good questions that will help him ascertain the progress of students.
With the aid of good questioning the teacher can remedy the deficiencies of students and train them how to answer questions properly.
Students are also to be encouraged to ask questions to satisfy their natural curiosity.
The use of questions is indispensable in the classroom.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give reasons why the art of questioning is considered an important skill in teaching.
What principles should guide the teacher in: (a) Preparing and (b) Asking questions 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING P. O. Adeyemo (1985).
Principles of Education and Practice of Education.
Ado-Ekiti: Omolayo Standard Press and Bookshops Co.
(Nig.)
Ltd. Farell M. A.
& Farmer W. (1980).
Systematic Instruction in Mathematics Reading Mass.
Addison-Wesley.
76EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 3 TESTING AND EXAMINATION (EVALUATION) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Testing and Examination (Evaluation) 3.2 Examination 3.2.1 The Function of Examination 3.2.2 Advantages of Examinations 3.2.3 Disadvantages of Essay Question 3.3 The Alternative Type of Examinations 3.4 True-False Test 3.4.1 Guidelines for Setting of True or False Test 3.4.2 Advantage of the True – False Test 3.4.3 Disadvantage of the True-False Test 3.5 Multiple Choice Questions 3.5.1 Advantage of the Multiple Choice Test 3.5.1 Disadvantage of Multiple Choice Test 3.6 The Completion Test 3.7 Hints on Objective Test 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a classroom teacher, you will be faced with numerous day to day decisions that you must make concerning students.
These decisions require that the teacher have knowledge of his students’ aptitudes, achievements and personal development.
Hence the teacher is usually faced with some instructional decisions.
Due to the above the teacher needs to answer some questions through examinations and tests (evaluation).
Some of the questions are: 1.
Is my teaching plan realistic for this particular group of students?
2.
How should pupils be grouped for more effective learning?
3.
What types of learning difficulties are pupils facing?
4.
How should the pupils be graded?
5.
How effective was my teaching.
In this unit we will look at the various methods by which students can be evaluated.
77EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to define or explain the following: • evaluation • functions of examination • the various type of tests • the advantages and disadvantages of different types of tests • reasons why students are evaluated.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Testing And Examination (Evaluation) This is a process through which value judgment or decision is made from a variety of observation and from the background of the evaluation.
The process involves the outline, obtaining and providing useful information which are to be employed in judgment decision alternatives.
Evaluation goes beyond the task of testing or measurement.
It involves quantitative descriptions (measurement) and quantitative descriptions plus value judgment.
Melurens and Leeman (1984) considered evaluation as “the process of delineating, obtaining and providing useful intimation alternatives.
It refers to the agreement between performance and objectives.
3.2 Examination It is generally agreed that examinations are not a true test of knowledge.
There have been cases where clever pupils have failed and the dull one passed.
In the examination room a child may become withdrawn and answer questions badly.
Some develop fever in the examination room.
Others get very excited.
All these make the child unsettled and his work in the examination is thus affected.
3.2.1 The Functions of Examination 1.
To find out what the child knows and the subject matter which he has learned imperfectly etc in order to plan future work, or to allocate the child into a class or group.
2.
It gives information about the individual children that might have escape observation in a class.
78EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.
To assess the efficiency of the teacher who taught him 4.
To provide an incentive whereby the pupils and teachers are stimulated unto working 5.
To make pupils work hard since he has something to think about 6.
To enable the teacher to check upon the result of his work so that he can see where his methods are bad and improve them.
From what his pupils do he can know how best to direct their learning.
3.2.2 Advantages of Examinations 1.
It is helpful to the general work of the school.
2.
Very frequently the preparation and recall required of the pupils who write the examination will serve as an aid to retention 3.
It provides pupils with practice in arranging arguments and facts in the most effective order 4.
It gives the pupils ability to Marshall arguments logically and to arrange facts in their most natural sequence, especially in the traditional type of examination questions called the essay type.
Such questions have advantages and disadvantages.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the functions of Examination?
3.2.3 Disadvantages of Essay Questions 1.
They waste the pupil’s time because not many of them could write essays.
2.
Setting the paper is a skilled job.
If the test is badly constructed it will not being out originality, organizing ability to interpret information or apply principles but measures out only rote knowledge and details.
A well constructed test can bring out these more desirable characteristics.
3.
A good deal of reading is required from its candidate.
4.
Candidates tend to study or learn in details as they will have to reproduce details.
79EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 5.
No account is taken of variety of expression.
If literary style, variety of expression and hard writing are to be examined, a separate paper should be set for this purpose.
6.
The questions of such essay type examination are subjective.
7.
These tests are somewhat artificial in their phrasing.
8.
In two or three hours it is seldom possible to cover more than a small fraction of the total information taught.
This small sample also tends to reduce the reliability.
3.3 The Alternative Type of Examination New type examination – questions are so set that only one word, phrase or sign gives the correct answers.
This is very good because the marking is objective and takes little time.
The whole syllabus can be covered by a paper containing say, 150 questions in one hour.
The pupils spend his time thinking and not writing.
Questions are short and some examiners can score marks by mere guesswork.
3.4 True-False Test A number of statement, some true, some false are given with words “True or False against each.
The student underlines one of the two.
3.4.1 Guidelines for Setting a True or False Test 1.
Provide the students with clear directions and an example of a correctly answered item.
Instruct him not to guess, if he has no idea of the correct answer.
These instructions should appear on the paper.
2.
Do not use fewer than 120 items 3.
Avoid double negatives 4.
Avoid clues to the response e.g.
the use of words such as “always”, “never”, “invariably”.
3.4.2 Advantages of True-False Test 80EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 1.
A test of 100-150 items can be completed in less than an hour.
Hence, there can be an extensive sampling of the information taught.
2.
The test is completely objective and can be quickly scored even by a person who knows nothing of the subjects, provided that he has the key.
3.4.3 Disadvantages of the True-False Test 1.
A considerable amount of time is required for the construction of the test.
2.
Although the test may be used to measure ability in reasoning, in practice the items are usually factual in nature.
The use of the True- False test is not recommended.
3.5 Multiple Choice Questions Example: In the following question, select the correct option by ticking the letter beside the option you choose: Which of the following best represents the meaning of Science of Psychology?
1.
The brain 2.
The mind 3.
The soul 4.
The intellect 5.
Reasoning Another well known type of the multiple choice is the matching test type.
A number of questions and a number of responses are listed in different order, and the questions and responses have to be filled together.
Example: The best conductor of electricity in the list is (1) glass, (2) wood, (3) silver (4) aluminum, (5) Copper.
The candidate writes the number of the correct response in the bracket.
3.5.1 Advantages of the Multiple Choice Test 81EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS (a) It is highly objective (b) It can be quickly scored by any one using a key (c) It can be constructed so as to give extensive sampling 3.5.2 Disadvantages of Multiple Choice Test 1.
The construction of the test requires much time 2.
The test occupies much space 3.
It is better adapted to the measurement of facts than to the measure of the ability to reason.
3.6 The Completion Test A sample item: The ___________________ is a powerful but low grade motivation for learning.
Directions for the construction of a completion test 1.
Clear directions should be provided 2.
If the test is the only examination used, it should contain a minimum of 100 items 3.
The item should be constructed so that a word or a short brief phrase is necessary for each completion 4.
The use of “a” or “an” just before the blank should be avoided 5.
Many blanks should not appear in each item.
In a short item one or two are enough 6.
The blanks should be of the same length 3.7 Hints on Objective Test 1.
Build up a collection of items in your subject.
Write them on filling cards, one on each card.
2.
Do not mingle different types of objective items.
Group similar items and divide your examination into parts A, B, C. 3.
Never give fraction marks for an item.
4.
On an examination paper put the easiest items at the beginning and the hardest at the end.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 82EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Some teachers use examinations as a method of motivating classroom work.
Would you consider this a desirable method of motivation?
Why?
4.0 CONCLUSION The teaching – learning process needs to be regularly evaluated through tests and examinations in order to motivate, determine the efficacy of instructional ability of the teacher and stimulate all concerned to work harder.
5.0 SUMMARY A good knowledge of the various types of the tests and examinations and the appropriate use singly or in combination goes along to help achieve the objective of educating a child.
Even though the use of examinations is not a perfect means of evaluating students no substitute has been found hence the right application by the teacher will go a long way to ensure the set objectives are achieved.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What purposes are served by examination in the school?
Why is it often said that examinations are not reliable tests of a students ability.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aderounmu W. O. and Ibeh A. E. (1984).
Fundamentals of Nigerian Education.
Lagos: Executive Publishers.
Adewumi, J.
A.
& Ogunlade A.
A.
(1991).
Introducing to Educational Measurement and Evaluation.
Ilorin: Genle Press.
83EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 4 MARKING AND ASSIGNMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Grading Practice 3.2 Function of Grading 3.3 General Strategy 3.4 Minimizing Student’s Complaints about Grading of Assignments and Tests 3.5 Effective Use of Grading Tactics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are no hard-and fast rules about the best ways to grade.
In fact, as Erickson and Strommer (1991) point out, how you grade depends a great deal on your values, assumptions, and educational philosophy: if you view introductory course as “weeder” classes – to separate out students who lack potential for future success in the field – you are likely to take a different grading approach than some one who views introductory courses as teaching important skills that all students need to master.
In this unit we will be taking a close look at marking or grading of assignments.
It should be noted that grading and marking are the same, so the two will be used interchangeably in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give the functions of grading • explain how students’ complaint about grading courses can be avoided • explain the various strategies for grading • make effective use of grading tactics • evaluate your grading policies.
84EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Grading Practice It is generally agreed that grades provide information on how well students are learning (Erickson and Strommer; 1991).
But grades also serve other purposes.
3.2 Functions of Grading Scriven (1974) has identified at least six functions of grading.
1.
To describe unambiguously the worth, merit, or value of the work accomplished.
2.
To increase the capacity of students to identify good work, that is to improve their self-evaluation or discrimination skills with respect to work submitted.
3.
To stimulate and encourage good work by students 4.
To communicate the teachers judgment of the student’s progress 5.
To inform the teacher about what students have and haven’t learned.
6.
To select people for rewards or continued education For some students, grades are also a sign of approval or disapproval, they take them very personally.
Because of the importance of grades, teachers need to communicate to students a clear rationale and policy on grading.
If you devise clear guidelines from which to assess performance, you will find the grading process more efficient, and the essential functions – communicating the student’s level of knowledge will be easier.
Further, if you grade carefully and consistently, you can reduce the number of students who complain and ask you to defend a grade.
The suggestions below are designed to help you develop clear and fair grading policies.
3.3 General Strategies Grade on the basis of students mastery of knowledge and skills restrict your evaluations to academic performance.
Eliminate other considerations, such as class behaviour, effort, classroom participation, personality traits or students interest in the course material as the basis of course grade.
If you count these non-academic factors, you obscure 85EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS the primary meaning of the grade, as an indicator of what students have learned.
Avoid grading systems that put students in completion with their classmates and limit the number of high grades.
The normative systems, such as grading on the curve, work against collaborative learning strategies that have been shown to be effective in promoting student learning.
Normative grading produces undesirable consequences for many students such as reduced motivations to learn, debilitating evaluation anxiety, decreased ability to use feedback to improve learning and poor social relationships.
Try not to over emphasize grades.
Explain to your class the meaning of and basis for grades and the procedures you use in grading.
At the beginning of the term, inform students, in writing how much tests, papers, home works and the final exam will count towards their final grade.
Once you have explained your policies avoid stressing Grades or excessive talk about grades, which only increases students anxieties and decreases their motivation to do something for its own sake rather than to obtain an external reward such as a grade (source: Allen and Rueter; 1990 Fuhrmann and Grasha 1983).
Keep students informed of their progress throughout the term.
For each paper, assignment, mid term or project that you grade, give students a sense of what their score means.
Try to give a point total rather than a letter grade.
Letter grades tend to have emotional associations that point total lack.
Do show the range and distribution of point scores and indicate what level of performance is satisfactory.
Such information can motivate students to improve if they are doing poorly or to maintain their performance if they are doing well.
By keeping students informed throughout the term, you also prevent unpleasant surprises at the end prevent unpleasant surprises at the end.
(Source: Lowman, 1984: Shea, 1990).
3.4 Minimizing Students’ Complaints about Grading of Assignment and Tests 1.
Clearly state grading procedures in your course syllabus, and go over this information in class.
Students want to know how their grades will be determined, the weights of various tests and assignments and the model of grading you will be using to calculate their grades: will the class be graded on a curve or by absolute standards?
If you intent to make allowance of extra credit, late assignments, or revision of papers, clearly state your policies.
86EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.
Set policies on late work.
Will you refuse to accept any late work?
Deduct points according to how late the work is submitted?
Handle late work on a case-by-case basis?
Offer a grace period?
3.
Avoid modifying your policies during the term.
Midcourse changes may erode students’ confidence in your fairness, consistency, objectivity and organizational skills.
If you must make a change, give your students a complete explanation.
(Source: Frisbie, Diamond, and Ory, 1979).
4.
Provide enough opportunities for students to show you what they know.
By giving students many opportunities to show you what they know, you will have a more accurate picture of their abilities and will avoid penalizing a student who has an off day at the time of a test.
So in addition to a final exam, give one or more midterms and one or two short papers.
For less attractive subject Strommer and Erickson recommend shorter tests or written assignments and scheduling some form of evaluation every two or three weeks.
5.
Consider allowing students to choose among alternative assignments.
One instructor presents a list of activities with assigned points for each that take into account the assignments’ educational and motivational value, difficulty and probable amount of effort required.
Students are told how many points are needed for an A, a B or a C, and they choose a combination of assignments the meets the grade they desire for that portion of the course.
6.
Stress to students that grade reflect work on a specific task and are not judgments about people.
Remind students that a teacher grades only a piece of paper.
You might also let students know, if appropriate, that research shows that grades bear little or no relationship to measures of adult accomplishment (Eble, 1988, P. 156).
7.
Give encouragement to students who are performing poorly.
If students are having difficulty, do what you can to help them improve on the next assignment.
If they do perform well, take this into account when averaging the early low score with the later higher one (Source: Lowman, 1984).
8.
Keep accurate reports of students’ grades.
Your department may keep copies of final grade reports, but it is important for you to keep a record of all grades assigned throughout the term, in case a student wishes to contest a grade, finish an incomplete, or ask for a letter of recommendation.
87EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.5 Making Effective use of Grading Tactics 1.
Record results numerically rather than as letter grades, whenever possible.
Tests, problem sets, homework and so on are best recorded by their point value to assure greater accuracy when calculating final grade (Source Jacobs and Chase, 1992).
2.
Give students a chance to improve their grades by rewriting their papers.
Many teachers encourage rewriting but do not count the grades on rewritten papers as equivalent to those of papers that have not been rewritten.
3.
If many students do poorly on an assignment schedule another one on the same material a week or so later.
Devote one or more classes to reviewing the troublesome material.
Provide I-class exercise, homework problems or questions, practice quizzes, study group opportunities and extra office hours before you administer the new exam.
Though reviewing and retesting may seem burdensome and time consuming, there is usually little point in proceeding to new topics when many of your students are still struggling.
(Source: Erickson and Strommer, 1991).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What effective tactics would you adopt in the grading of Examination and assignments?
4.0 CONCLUSION Grading or award of marks to assignment is more complex and intricate than it seems on the surface.
As teachers we need to use the grading of assignments in such a way that students will not only know their areas of strengths and weaknesses but be spurred in to better work.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have looked at marking (grading) and assignments.
We have seen that there are many approaches to this subject.
Even though in every setting where learning takes place there has to be a way that the teacher’s and the students’ progress must be emerged, grading must not be seen as an end in itself.
We have also seen that assignment and grading go together.
We have also seen that grades are no judgments on the students but on a specific task or skill.
Ultimately like all other things done by the teacher the ultimate aim is to help student fulfill their potentials.
88EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the strategies you would adopt in the marking (grading) of assignments.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Allen, R. A., and Rueter, T. (1990).
Teaching Strategies.
Dubuque, Lowa: Kenda/Hunt.
Boston (1983).
Little, Brown.
Crooks, T. J.
(1988).
“The Impact of Classroom Evaluation Practices on Students.” Review of Educational Research, 58 (4), 438-481 Davis, B. G. Wood, L. and Wilson, R. The ABCs of Teaching.
Elble, K. E. (1988).
The Craft of Teaching (2nd ed.).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Erickson, D. A. Diamond, N.A.
and Ory, J.C. (1988).
Assigning Course Grade.
Excellence, Taxes A & M. University.
Excellence.
Berkeley (1983).
Office of Educational Development.
University of California.
Faculty Teaching Excellency Program, (1990).
University of Coloration.
Fuhrmann, B. S., and Grasha, A.F.A.
Practical Handbook for College Teachers.
Jacobs, L.C.M and Chase, C. I.
(1992).
Developing and Using Tests Effectively: A Guide for Faculty.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Johnson, G.R.
Taking Teaching Seriously.
College Stageion: Center for Teaching Tools for Teaching – Chapter.
Lowman, J.
(1984).
Mastering the Techniques of Teaching.
San Francesco: Jossey Bass.
Mckeachie, W. J.
(1986).
Teaching Tips (8th Ed.).
Lexington: Mass Health.
Scriven, M. (1986).
“Evaluation of Students”.
Unpublished Manuscript.
89EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Shea, M. A. Compendium of Good Ideas on Teaching and Learning.
Boulder.
Urbana (1979).
Office of Instructional Resources.
University of Illinois.
MODULE 4 Unit 1 The Art of Classroom Management Unit 2 Dealing with the Problems of Discipline in the Classroom 90EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Unit 3 Methods of Study UNIT 1 THE ART OF CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Art of Classroom Management 3.2 Knowledge of Learner’s Characteristics 3.2.1 The Mastery of the Subject Matter 3.2.2 Effective communication Ability 3.2.3 Creating Good Rapport 3.2.4 Qualities of a Good Teacher 3.2.5 Effective Management of Instructional Materials 3.3 Classrooms Management involves Many Interrelated and Interdependent Activities in Management 3.3.1 Classroom Planning 3.3.2 Organizing 3.3.3 Leading 3.3.4 Coordinating 3.3.5 Directing 3.3.6 Classroom Controlling 3.3.7 Evaluation 3.3.8 Reporting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to get you to understand of the major concepts of classroom management.
You will get to know what it means to manage and more specifically how this relates to your professions which is teaching in a classroom setting.
Essentially a manager in any organization is responsible for goals accomplishment.
Managers plan, organize, influence and control resources in such a way as to ensure that the organization achieves it objectives.
There are many definitions of “management” in the literature but Certo (1985) has helped to narrow down these numerous meanings into four namely: 91EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 1.
As a process which managers follow to achieve goals.
2.
As a body of knowledge, giving insight on how to manage.
3.
As a term to describe individuals who guide and direct organizations.
4.
As a term to designate a career devoted to the task of guiding and directing organizations.
Recently, the concept of management has been applied in school settings.
The school exists as an organization set up by society to serve certain ends, the principal one of which is to turn out (produce) individuals, who would be able not only to read and write and calculate, but also to be a useful citizen in the society (Cookey, 1969).
This end product, namely, turning out useful citizens is one of the major goals of education in Nigeria (NPE, 1981 P. 3).
In Nigeria, managing a classroom is the task of the subject and form masters respectively.
Classroom management occurs at the instructional level most of the time that is between curriculum planning and education.
It involves the provision of an adequate physical and psychological environment in the classroom for learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of “management” • define classroom management • explain the qualities of a good teacher • explain and differentiate between instructional and managerial activities • respond positively to the classroom situations • be flexible in lesson plan formulation and implementation • anticipate problems and develop solutions well ahead of the time in the classroom encounters • deal effectively with the students, bearing in mind their individual characteristics and idiosyncrasies • perform to obtain results rather than follow duties.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Art of Classroom Management 92EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS As an effective classroom manager, you should be well prepared for lessons, anticipate difficulties and react immediately before problem escalate and execute with “verbal deftness”.
In their report on Classroom management Wragg and Dooley (1984) highlighted five main areas:- 1.
The establishment of good personal relationship with students.
2.
Effective preparation of lessons 3.
Organization of materials and students work during lessons 4.
Specific pedagogic skills 5.
Personal characteristics of the teacher The teacher’s professional competencies which influence classroom management.
Under this topic you will get to now the following: • Knowledge of learner’s characteristics • The mastery of subject matter • Effective communication ability • Creating good rapports • Teacher’s personality • Effective management of instructional materials.
3.2 Knowledge of Learner’s Characteristics Learner’s characteristics will include age, sex, attitude, socio-economic background, level of influences, previous knowledge, interest and so one.
The knowledge of the above will equip the teachers to be able to understand student’s behaviours and performances.
This will also make him to assist the students more promptly and effectively and by so doing you will become friends of the students and thus enjoy their cooperation and respect.
The knowledge of children’s psychological development, pretest, interviews and discussions with students helps the teacher to know more of his students’ characteristics which will help him to determine the student’s interest and ability more accurately.
3.1.1 The Mastery of the Subject Matter An ill prepared teacher will not only embarrass himself but also lose self-respect.
Students often look unto the teacher as an authority in the subject matter he teaches.
A good teacher should prepare very well and 93EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS know far more than he intends to cover.
Students know when a teacher does not know more of the subject and they often seize this opportunity to ridicule and embarrass the teacher by asking questions and making counter productive observations.
3.2.2 Effective Communication Ability Successful teaching implies effective communication.
Generally speaking good classroom communication should include the following: • Explain ideas clearly • Pronouncing words distinctly and correctly • Writing legibly on the chalk board • Using instructional media correctly The ability to express your thought and feelings accurately to the other person is very important in human interpersonal communication process.
As a teacher you should be learned in communication skills to be able to teach successfully.
The teacher is usually the source of the message.
He should therefore use simple but appropriate words for his message.
He should also select effective channel/medium of communication.
In addition to these he should reduce or eliminate communication barriers along the channel of communication.
His writing should be familiar to the students.
In order to remove misinterpretation and ambiguities, instructional media should be used to illustrate concepts.
3.2.3 Creating Good Rapport The teacher should be able to create good rapport between the students and himself and among the students themselves.
In other words the teacher should create a friendly environment in the classroom.
When the teacher develops interest in the students they are likely to reciprocate by loving and respecting the teacher.
“Teachers can show friendliness by being consistently polite, taking time to listen and avoiding situations that undermine student’s self concept” (Oyinloye G. K. 1988).
Being friendly with students, however is not to make one too intimate to the point of developing an unhealthy relationship.
Other important ways to build rapport with students is to regard them not as empty vessels to be filled with knowledge, but as individual in their own right.
They must be given permission not only to consult with the teacher in the classroom alone, but also outside it, when students have such free access to the teacher, it helps to narrow down the 94EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS psychological distance which normally exists between the teacher and the students.
3.2.4 Qualities of a good teacher “The way the teacher dresses, speaks and conducts himself in front of his class will go a long way in helping him to control the class effectively” (Bello, 1981).
A well dressed teacher will command more respect than a shabbily dressed teacher.
A teacher should dress moderately well and not to call attention unduly to himself.
He should therefore not be sensational.
The teacher’s dresses should be neat, simple and well tailored.
The choice of colours is important, therefore his clothes, shoes, caps should be selected to complement each other.
In short, there should be no colour riot.
The manner in which the teacher carries himself (deportment) whether smartly or sluggishly, and the way he conducts himself whether with dignity or debasement (comportment), portrays him to the students as either agile and business like or lazy and carefree.
Mannerisms such as foaming in the mouth, using of meaningless words, scratching of the body repeatedly, could put the teacher to ridicule and earn him nick names from the students.
The attitude of the teacher to his work and the type of leadership he adopts are important as that can affect control.
A teacher that is always punctual to class will by his or her example discourage late coming and truancy by students.
The teacher’s leadership style whether democratic, authoritarian or laissez fair is also important.
For example, a democratic class where the students take part in decision making process will be more acceptable to them than an authoritarian class; but care must be taken by the teacher so that students do not abuse this privilege and erode the authority of the teacher.
3.2.5 Effective Management of Instructional Materials Instructional Materials are no doubt very useful in facilitating learning.
It may however constitute a problem if not handled properly.
In the first place, production of these materials should not be solely a teacher’s affair; students should be involved in the production of some of the locally produced ones.
Their involvement in the production will enable them to see the work as their own creation and thus help in their preservation and storage.
Instructional Materials needed for the day should be selected and stored in such a way that the teachers can easily lay his hand on them when needed.
Great care needs be exercised to avoid disruption of lesson by running here and there for instructional materials.
This could result in a rowdy or noisy classroom.
95EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS The class monitor or any student designated to be in charge of instructional materials can be called upon to help in their display.
Students could also be engaged in the arrangements and fixing of apparatus for performing experiments.
If the equipment is electrically operated, for example electronics, teachers should have learned and mastered its operation before using it in the classroom or otherwise bring in a person who knows how to operate it.
If he fumbles with the equipment in the presence of the students, it could undermine his effective control of the class.
Instructional materials need to be stored in places provided for them when not in use.
They should not be left in places that will make them visible to students and thus distract their attention from the new and subsequent lessons.
Charts may be left hanging on wall for some days but could be removed when they are no more relevant to the students’ needs.
A class librarian could be appointed to be in charge of the class textbooks.
He should be made to distribute the textbooks to students during the class.
A situation where students struggle for instructional materials should not be tolerated and should be discouraged.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define the following: - Management - Classroom Management 2.
Enumerate and briefly explain: - Teacher’s professional competence - The mastery of the subject matter - Effective communication ability - Creating good rapport - Teacher’s personality - Effective management of instructional material.
Highlight in specific terms the relevance of each of the above to classroom management.
3.3 Classroom Management Classroom management involves many interrelated and interdependent activities in management.
Such activities can be grouped under the following – planning, organizing, leading, coordinating, directing, 96EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS supervising and reporting.
Specifically, physical resources must be properly and efficiently utilized.
Students must be properly arranged and carried along in the teaching-learning process, while the performance of the students and the teachers must be evaluated on regular basis.
Management activities in the classroom are under the following activities.
3.3.1 Classroom Planning This is a systematic process of preparing for a lesson.
It involves preparing a set of decisions in advance about the classroom encounter.
It is a process of addressing issues related to “what to teach”, “how to teach”, “when to teach”, “with what to teach” in the most effective and efficient manners possible.
Classroom planning is a short term type of planning and the paper work on this is referred to as the daily lesson plan.
3.3.2 Organizing Organizing the students as well as the physical and material resources available in the classroom demands your managerial skills and knowledge as a teacher.
This involves the teacher’s ability to anticipate classroom needs and ability to deal effectively with them at the appropriate time (Fawant 1980) A class ought to be organized so that little opportunity as possible is afforded for disruptions, noises and disorderly behaviours (Awoniyi, 1979).
This may involve grouping students or allo0wing a free activity class.
Classroom organization also involves the selection of competent class leaders, thus, the teacher should watch out for leadership qualities in the students and help develop such qualities by assigning certain duties to such students, as class monitor, group prefect etc.
Developing students for leadership role is part of education.
Instructional materials should be arranged within the reach of the students.
These materials should be properly cared for and maintained to be in good condition for use at all times.
Since these materials are meant to be organized for optimal utilization, safeguarding them or keeping them out of students’ reach could result into under-utilization or wastage.
3.3.3 Leading Leading in the classroom is the process of influencing the behaviour of the students to perform in a manner which will help the class achieve its goals efficiently and effectively.
A teacher is seen as a person who 97EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS because of rich or unusual experience or education or both in a given field is able to contribute to the growth of other persons who come in contact with him (Good 1973).
Teacher behaviour patterns have been found to be significant determinants of students’ academic performance (Morrison and McIntyre 1973).
For effective classroom management the teacher as a leader should: 1.
Be warm, understanding and friendly rather than being aloof, egocentric and restricted.
2.
Be responsible, business like and systematic rather than being evading, unplanned and slipshod 3.
Be stimulating and creative and imaginative rather than being dull and routinely.
The teacher should therefore be concerned with the development of students’ trait of self reliance, independent thought and cooperative activities right from the classroom setting.
3.3.4 Coordinating Coordinating the efforts and activities of students by the class teacher is a crucial aspect of classroom management activities.
Coordinating is the systematic process of integrating and synchronizing the class efforts to achieve the desired goals.
This is a group-process coordination, which is much more emphasized in the classroom than self-process coordinating, in which any student may relate his activities to those of others by either collaboration, cooperating or observation.
For effective coordination, you (teacher) must be able to translate your plan into activities involving the students.
The teacher is expected to apply theories of behaviour and development (learnt in psychology) and techniques of teaching learnt in methodology to actual classroom situations.
3.3.5 Directing The teacher is the director of knowledge, who motivates, influence and guides the student’s actions in the classroom towards the attainment of the lesson objectives.
These are various teaching or instructional techniques for teacher’s use.
These include lecture method, questioning method, group teaching, individual instruction, project method, activity method, story telling technique, play way method and non-graded instruction.
Details of these techniques are beyond the scope of this 98EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS course.
However, you should be conversant with these techniques to know when and how to use them effectively.
Any technique chosen must be relevant, appropriate and adequate for the lesson.
To be an effective classroom director, the teacher must know the subject matter and must use clear, fluent and appropriate language to communicate.
Furthermore, the teacher must ensure two-way directional communication, that is, communication from the teacher to the students and vice-versa, in a free and democratic atmosphere.
3.3.6 Classroom Controlling This is the process of ensuring that the objectives of the subject are achieved possibly with minimum effort.
This involves using expert knowledge and experience to oversee, evaluate and improve the conditions and methods of doing things connected with the teaching- learning process.
This is also known as supervising (Nwankwo 1981) Controlling in the classroom management enables the teacher to maintain order (rules and regulation) in the class.
The teacher assumes the role of a pacesetter, an innovator, an evaluator, a guidance- counsellor and indeed a model to the students.
He should, however, be loyal to his ideals and ideas, while he should respect the beliefs, right, worth and dignity of the students.
He should be approachable.
For instance, a teacher who comes late to the class or who chews (gum, kolanut etc) in the classroom might find it difficult to check these activities among his students.
3.3.7 Evaluating This is judging class activities in relation to the stated objectives.
Evaluation depends on clearly stated objectives and efficient instruments for measuring extent to which change has taken place towards objectivities (Farrant 1980).
Evaluating students may be summative (which is meant for certification or grading of students at the end of a course) formative (which is meant for a feedback on student progress through a unit), or diagnostic (which is meant for determining prerequisite skills for placement).
Students could be evaluated using objective or subjective (essay) tests, self-report technique or observational technique.
The teacher must ensure that whatever method is used must be valid (that is, the evaluating procedure should measure what it is intended to measure) and be reliable (that is, it must be trust worthy and must not be doubtful) 3.3.8 Reporting 99EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS The teacher needs to give constant progress report of the students in his class.
This would serve as a means of promptly intimating the appropriate authorities, for instance, the school, the parents, the employers, the scholarship or bursary award institutions and even the students themselves with performances and problems in the classrooms so that necessary actions could be taken for improvement.
The teacher acts as information manager.
In order to do this, the teacher keeps adequate records of the student’s performance.
The report form classroom manager (the teacher) serves as a means of feedback in classroom management activities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the management activities of a teacher and explain two of them into details.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit we have covered some ground in the very important and wide subject of class management.
It is obvious that the purpose of classroom management is to ensure that the students learn in a comfortable and conducive environment.
The students, the teacher and the physical aspects of the classroom are all involved.
The teacher must therefore familiarize himself with the various elements in the classroom such as ventilation, lighting etc and ensure they are appropriate.
5.0 SUMMARY To manage the classroom successfully the teacher must first and foremost examine and prepare himself in light of such things as his personality, competencies, knowledge of the subject matter etc.
he must also apply correct management principles conveniently grouped under management functions such as planning, organizing, leading etc.
there must also be a feedback mechanism so that there will be continuous renewal and improvement.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are those things a teacher should avoid in order to be an efficient and effective classroom manager?
100EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdulkareem A. Y.
(1997).
The Teacher as a Manager.
Ilorin Journal of Education 17 (1) 42-49.
Adesina S. (1980).
Some Aspect of School Management.
Ibadan: Educational Industries Limited.
Awoniyi, T. (1979).
Principles and Practice of Education.
London: Hodder and Houghton.
Calisle H. M. (1976).
Management Concepts and Situations.
Chicago: Science Research Associates.
Farrant, J. S. (1980).
Principles and Practice of Education (2nd ed.).
London: Longman Group.
Good C.V. (1973).
Director of Education.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Mashauk M. J.
(1979).
Management Theory and Practice.
Boston, Toronto: Little Brown and Co. Morison, A. and McIntyre D. (1973).
Teachers and Teaching (2nd ed.).
Manchester: The Phillips Park.
Nwanko J. I.
(1982).
Education Administration, Theory and Practice.
New Delhi: Vikas.
101EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 2 DEALING WITH THE PROBLEM OF DISCIPLINE IN THE CLASSROOM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Discipline 3.2 Externally imposed Discipline versus Self-Discipline 3.2.1 Laissez-Faire or Per Missive 3.2.2 Authoritarian 3.2.3 Democratic 3.2.4 Behaviour Modification 3.2.5 Social Emotional Climate 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION To be successful in all our undertakings as human beings, we need to be disciplined.
Specifically within the educational sector discipline must be maintained in the classrooms in order to produce useful and productive citizens who will bring about the much desired development in our society.
Therefore, we will be learning about how to deal with the problem of discipline in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able: • define discipline • explain what it means to deal with the problem of discipline in the classroom • differentiate between externally imposed and self discipline • explain the different models of discipline.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Discipline Many people often get confused when trying to explain the meaning of discipline.
This confusion is not out of place because the word is used 102EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS in many different ways in different contents.
Entomologically (its origin) the word “discipline is derived from the Latin “discere” which means “to learn”.
There is thus a close connection between “discere” and discipulus” (meaning disciples), that is “one who learns from a master”.
Discipline also means “training”, learning” or “living under the rule of compulsion”.
(Souper, 1976).
The word may therefore be regarded (in the context of Souper’s definition) as a willing submission to an authority for the purpose of learning something worthwhile.
As an extension of this meaning, subject areas are regarded as disciplines because learners subject themselves to the structural processes in the chosen field.
It is therefore not uncommon to find that experts in certain fields have their personalities moudled so that they think and act in ways which instantly suggest their disciplines.
Frequently, many people (especially lay people) use the term to mean use of force to ensure that commands are carried out.
Hence, this meaning equates discipline with punishment.
Akinboye et al (1981) defined discipline as a “strategy of training the child in the art of self management”.
In this case discipline can be regarded as a process involving external persons or agents.
3.2 Externally Imposed Discipline versus Self-discipline There are two broad types of discipline.
External discipline consists of the influence that comes upon us from our parents, teachers and peer group.
They require us to be obedient, to be punctual and to attend to our lessons regularly.
They can punish us and compel us to behave properly when we misbehave.
Internal discipline or self-discipline is the control we exercise over ourselves.
It comes from within.
We exercise self-discipline when we control our temper and when we can do right things without being told.
By means of external discipline, the teacher should encourage self-discipline in his students.
Order is external while good discipline is always self-control.
In the classroom, discipline may be measured by the extent to which the pupils are self controlled and willingly apply themselves to task assignment by the teacher.
According to Burton (1963) five forms of disciplines can be considered.
They include 1.
Laissez-Faire or permissive 2.
Authoritarian 3.
Democratic 4.
Behaviour Modification and 5.
Socio Emotional climate.
103EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Which is better, externally imposed discipline or self-discipline?
Explain.
3.2.1 Laissez-faire or Permissive This type of discipline refers to absence of any degree of imposition or external standard or control on individual conduct.
The learner is left to develop on his own.
A teacher who chooses this type of discipline may lack confidence in himself.
He or she cannot take decisions and may be generally weak.
This type of discipline should be avoided as much as possible.
In a permissive class, misbehaviour should not be tolerated any more than it would be in a traditional class.
3.2.2.
Authoritarian This is the opposite of the permissive.
The discipline of this nature is rigid, excessive, arbitrary and autocratic.
The teacher who employs this kind of discipline may not want criticism.
He wants unquestioning obedience to order.
Where this method is adopted, the learner’s initiative is killed.
Learning under this situation is deficient because the necessary conducive atmosphere for learning is being hampered.
The learners may develop hatred for the school and this may lead to truancy.
It is suggested that this pattern of discipline is avoided.
3.2.3 Democratic The democratic approach is one that employs explanation, discussion and reasoning to help the students understand how to develop control over their behaviours so that they will do the right thing at the right time without any threat or punishment.
While they are expected to behave in certain ways, the emphasis here is the educational aspect instead of punitive aspect of discipline.
Punishment can be used but reward is stressed more than punishment.
The key to a democratic approach is the regular and frank group discussions.
Teachers utilizing this approach acting the role of leaders, guide the class in group discussions that focus on problems of concern.
Three products of that process have been identified.
1.
The teacher and the students have opportunity to express themselves in a way on the issues to be heard 104EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.
The teacher and the students have an opportunity to know and understand one another better and 3.
The teacher and the students are provided with an opportunity to help one another.
The essential by-product of such group discussion is the opportunity that teachers have to influence those values of their students that may differ from those considered more productive.
The democratic strategy encourages students.
3.2.4 Behaviour Modification Discipline is always concerned with regulating or changing behaviour.
That is to say that the change can be brought about through the use of external stimuli or it can result from the individual’s own purposive behaviour.
Behaviour modification depends on external stimuli to effect the desired changes in behaviour.
Thus it depends on the students to change their behaviour in order to receive definite reward.
This model does not require students to think through their behaviour at a very high level, instead the students are conditioned to behave as the teacher wishes them to behave.
Of all the approaches, this approach to classroom discipline has the strongest base in theory and research.
Its basis comes from the work of B.F. Skinner which views classroom discipline as the process of modifying student’s behaviour.
The teacher’s role is to foster desirable student behaviour and to eliminate undesirable behaviour.
This is accomplished primarily by consistently and systematically rewarding (reinforcing) appropriate student behaviour and removing rewards or punishing inappropriate student behaviour.
For this reason, the teacher should master and apply the four basic principle of learning, that behaviours have identified as influencing human behaviour.
These are positive reinforcement, punishment, extinction and negative reinforcement.
The introduction of a reward is called positive reinforcement and introduction of punishment is simply called punishment.
The removal of a reward is called either extinction or time out, depending upon the situation.
The removal of punishment is called negative reinforcement.
Behaviourists assumes that the frequency of a particular behaviour is contingent (depends) upon the nature of the consequence that follows the behaviour.
Positive reinforcement, the introduction of a reward after a behaviour, causes the reinforced behaviour to increase in frequency.
Rewarded behaviour is thus strengthened and is repeated again in future.
105EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS For example, Iyabo prepares a neatly written paper, which she submits to the teacher (student behaviour).
The teacher praises Iyabo’s work and comments that neatly written papers are more easily read than those which are sloppy (positive reinforcement).
In subsequent papers, Iyabo takes care to write neatly (the frequency of the reinforced behaviour is increased) Punishment is the introduction of an undesirable stimulus (punishment) after a behaviour and causes the behaviour to decrease in frequency.
Punished behaviour tends to be discontinued.
For instance, Remi prepares a rather sloppy written paper, which he submits to the teacher (student behaviour).
The teacher rebukes Remi for failing to be neat, informs him that sloppily written papers are difficult to read, and tells him to rewrite and resubmit the paper (punishment).
In subsequent papers, Remi writes less sloppily (the frequency of the punished behaviour is decreased).
Extinction is the withholding of an anticipated reward (the withholding of positive reinforcement) in an instance where that behavior was previously rewarded.
Extinction results in the decreased frequency of the previously rewarded behaviour.
For example, Ngozi whose neat work has always been praised by the teacher, prepares a neatly written paper, which she submits to the teacher (student behaviour previously reinforced by teacher).
The teacher accepts the paper without comment (withholding of positive reinforcement).
Ngozi becomes less neat in subsequent papers (the frequency of the previously reinforced behaviour decreased).
Time out is the removal of the student from the reward.
It reduces the frequency of reinforcement and causes the behaviour to become less frequent.
For example, the students in Mr. Bode’s class have come to expect that he will give them an opportunity to play a number game if their work is satisfactory.
This is an activity they all enjoy.
Mr.
Bode notes that all their papers were neatly done except Sanmi’s paper.
He tells Sanmi that he will not be allowed to participate in the class game and must, instead, sit apart from the other members (removal of the student from the reward).
Subsequently, Sanmi writes less sloppily (the frequency of the behaviour decreases).
Negative reinforcement is the removal of an undesirable or obsessive stimulus (punishment) after a behaviour, and it, causes the frequency of the behaviour to be increased.
The removal of the punishment serves to strengthen the behaviour and increases its tendency to be repeated.
For example, Ojo is the student in the class who consistently presents the teacher with sloppy papers.
Despite the teacher’s constant nagging of 106EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS Ojo, his work becomes no neater.
For no apparent reason Ojo submits a rather neat paper, Mr.
Bode accepts it without comment and without the usual nagging (the removal of punishment).
Subsequently, Sanni’s work becomes neater (the frequency of the behaviour is increased).
1.
The behaviour modification approach strengthens the idea that rewarded appropriate behaviour and withholding the reward of inappropriate behaviour are very effective in achieving classroom control.
2.
Punishing inappropriate student behaviour may eliminate that behaviour, but it may have serious negative side effects and 3.
Rewarding appropriate behaviour is a more effective technique.
3.2.5 Social-Emotional Climate The roots of this approach stem from counselling and from clinical psychology which places great importance on interpersonal relationships.
Advocates of this model believe that effective classroom control is largely a function of teacher-student relationships.
The teacher’s task, then is to build positive interpersonal relationships and a positive socio-emotional climate.
Theorists who could be classified as proponents of this approach include Carl Rogers who posits that attributes such as realness, accepting and empathic understanding must be present if the teacher is going to be able to facilitate learning and promote classroom discipline.
Haim Ginott emphasized the importance of effective communication in enhancing good teacher-student relationship.
William “Glass also opined that good teachers must help students develop a sense of identity, worthiness and success (see Ryan and Coopper 1984) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the different models of discipline and enumerate some of their pros and cons.
4.0 CONCLUSION Discipline is necessary for any form of training or learning to take place.
Education is about teaching and training citizens to become productive well behaved members of a society.
In order for this to be achieved teachers must get to know the latest and most efficient and effective ways to maintain discipline in the classroom.
The teacher should combine different approaches for teaching to be effective.
107EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS SUMMARY • This unit provides the definitions of discipline and its necessity in the classroom for learning to take place.
• Different models of discipline were examined so that the teacher can apply this knowledge to successfully carry out his professional responsibility.
• The ultimate aim of the teacher is that students should be self disciplined.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Thoroughly explain the following: Punishment should be a last resort in maintaining discipline in the classroom and even then it should be used sparingly.
2.
As a teacher, good attitude to the maintenance of discipline in the classroom should be guided by certain models.
Enumerate and fully explain these models identifying the most appropriate one.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adejoro R. S. (1999).
“Factors Influencing Discipline in Kabba/Bunu Local Government Area Secondary Schools, Kogi State.” Unpublished.
D.P., Pendergrass, R. A.
& Keogh A. J., (1985).
Teaching Strategies: A Guide to Better Instruction (2nd ed.).
Toronto D.C. Health & Company.
Masters Degree Project University of Ilorin, Nigeria.
Oyedeji N. B.
(1998).
Management in Education.
Principle and Practice.
Lagos: Aras Publishers.
Ryan, K. & Coo-per J. M. (1984).
Those Who Can Teach (4th ed).
Boston: Houghton Mufflin Company.
Swick, K.T.
(1985).
A Proactive Approach to Discipline.
Six Professional Development Modules for Education Washington National Education Association.
108EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS UNIT 3 METHODS OF STUDY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Why Study 3.2 Methods of Study 3.2.1 Use of Text Book 3.2.2 Art of Note Making 3.2.3 Organization of Work 3.2.4 Time management and Time Table 3.2.5 Revision and Review of Work 3.2.6 Physical Environment of the Classroom 3.3 Improving Study Skills 3.4 Preparation of Examination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to expose you to the significance of studying, cultivating good study habits with emphasis on the appropriate use of textbooks, the art of note making, organization of work; time management and time-table.
The significance of revision and review of work will also be explored.
You will also gain insight into the relevance of the study environment.
By the end of this unit, you would have had an overall view of methods of study and preparation for examination.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain why people study • state methods of study with special reference to use of textbook and art of note-making; revision and review of work.
• explain the relevance of the school environment to academic achievement • state various ways of improving study skills • explain how you can prepare for examination.
109EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Why Study?
The motive of studying influence to a great extent the type of method one devices in ensuring that understanding takes place.
As mentioned by Adegbija (1987) and Akande (2004) the following are the reasons why people study.
1.
To maintain a well informed state of mind 2.
To gain knowledge in a particular area 3.
To be enlightened intellectually, socially and aesthetically 4.
To sharpen the mind of individuals 5.
To develop peoples personalities 6.
To enrich the individuals world view 7.
To enrich the individuals vocabulary 8.
To get certification for certain line of expertise 9.
To carry research on specific topic 10.To be able to invent or find solution to specific problem 11.To contribute to the body of knowledge 12.To be able to write articles, books etc 13.To pass examination that can enhance job opportunity 14.To make studying become a thing of interest and pleasure.
With the listed reasons for why people study, it is certain that one cannot go through the school system without studying.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why are you as a person studying?
3.2 Method of Study The significance of studying in the life of students cannot be over emphasized.
Studying is very essential to good academic performance but very little attention is paid to methods of study.
Most students do not get much out of their hour of study because of poor study habits.
Methods of study means ways or approaches to studying.
What constitutes good study habits include the use of textbooks, art of note- making, organization of work, revision and review of work.
Plus the relevance of the classroom environment.
Living is learning.
For learning to be a pleasure and not a burden, students should cultivate good study habits as early as possible in their academic pursuit.
110EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.2.1 Use of Text Books Studying cannot be successful unless understanding occurs.
That is why you as a student needs to master effective reading habit that will help you read fast and effectively.
In the first instance, avoid pointing at words and vocalizing, for such slow down learning.
Akande (2004) enumerated the following as effective comprehension strategies: 1.
Linking the previous knowledge acquired to the current knowledge 2.
For understanding of the passage being read to take place, the basic foundation needed is concentration.
Without concentration, the mind will just be wondering far and wide.
3.
Focus your mind on the most important details, while you neglect the less important ones.
4.
Integration of information by trying formerly stated content with new information in order that the two will reinforce each other.
5.
If you are in doubt try to question the importance of the truth of the subject matter as the information you read about in books may not always be true.
6.
With the interpretation of the text, it is important that as you read, you - Summarize - Make conclusion - Formulate hypotheses - Try to draw inferences from what you read - Make use of general knowledge, association, background information and experiment to explain - Verify, clarify, validate and generalize or react to the content of what is happening, ponder on it and attempt its description.
7.
Always try to find out whether you actually understand what you have read by setting questions to provide answers.
8.
To ensure understanding paraphrase a portion of the text which you find difficult to understand using your own words.
9.
You can re-read any portion of a text that you find difficult to understand.
111EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS On the whole, good study strategies hinges on the kind of material you study.
The material you use must be current, authoritative and reliable.
Ensure you buy your own textbooks and read journals, which report recent research findings in your own areas.
Make sure you study your textbooks diligently, religiously and regularly.
3.2.2 Art of Note Making As a student, you must be skillful in note-making as it aids memory in respect to the information received during lessons and from textbooks and other printed materials.
One of the important study skills is learning how to take notes since it helps to separate important points from the supporting ideas and relevant materials in your now words.
These also improve the understanding of what has been studied.
Good Note Making 1.
Ensures the active participation of the student in the process of lesson.
2.
Encourages the students to listen with intent attention.
3.
Saves time, you don’t have to read the whole text book once you have taken down good notes.
4.
Helps in revision when preparing for examination, you can cover a wide ground within a limited period of time.
To ensure good note making: 1.
Endeavour to get to the class on time so that you can comfortably sit.
2.
Be familiar with abbreviations, acronyms that will aid fast and accurate writing of notes during the lesson 3.
Cultivate good listening and writing skills so that you will be able to put facts together on what you have heard.
4.
Listening skill will enhance comprehension 5.
As a student, don’t just copy any note word for word without understanding 6.
Attempt to write down whatever the teacher says 7.
Indicate queries or reaction on the note where necessary 112EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 8.
Make sure to you up date your notes 9.
Make sure you review and revise your notes regularly The habit of making good notes from what you read or heard from the teacher is an important factor that affects cultivating of effective study habits.
As a student you must apply seriousness to proper note making.
3.2.3 Organization of Work Organization of students as well as the physical resources available in the classroom is an essential element that brings about good study habit.
A class must be organized so that as little opportunity as possible is afforded for disruption of work, or interruptions, noises or disorderly behaviour.
Part of organization is grouping of students to ensure efficient management in the classroom.
Also proper sitting arrangement whereby short students sit in front, while tall ones are arranged at the back, to allow for proper view of the teacher, the chalkboard and instructional materials.
Selection of competent class leaders by watching for leadership qualities in students.
The teacher assigns certain duties such as group leaders, class monitor, class prefect and class representative to such students that posses leadership qualities.
So also instructional facilities are properly arranged by the teacher to be within the reach of the student.
There should be proper care and maintenance of all facilities to be in good condition for use all the time.
Many failed because they could not manage their time very well.
- You must set aside a few hours each day for study rather than spending many hours once a week because studying regularly aids retention and habit formation.
- Make a private time table to include all subjects including the subjects you do not like but which you must pass.
- Follow the time schedule strictly.
Never wait until the school time table for examinations is out before you begin to study.
Those who wait for examination time table subject themselves to a lot of stress and strain.
113EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS - Give more time to the subjects you find difficult and study such subjects when you are mentally alert and fresh.
This will enhance concentration.
- Have a break after some hours of studying to increase your concentration potential.
- Sleep for at least six hours per day to retain freshness.
- Find time for hobby and recreation to further promote your level of concentration.
- Whenever you are given an assignment, try to complete it before it is due for submission so that you are able to read over and make necessary corrections.
3.2.4 Time Management and Time Table One of the effective keys for studying is judicious management of time.
Time poorly spent frustrates, discourages and could hinder success.
3.2.5 Revision and Reviewed Work Revision of work means an act of going over work done previously with the aim of improving one’s knowledge, typically for an examination.
While review implies a formal assessment of something with the intention of bringing change if necessary.
In the process of effective learning there is a need to go over and also to assess work done.
These can be carried out in the following ways: 1.
The teacher should ensure that each student has personal private time-table in which all subjects, extra curricular activities, free and rest periods are included.
The time table must be followed strictly.
2.
Planning for one’s homework must be stressed as this is the period a student can on his own go over work done in the class and understanding is ascertained.
3.
Preparation for weekly and monthly tests are necessary and should be stressed.
Once there is a test ahead students are bound to revise and review their work.
4.
While going over their work, students should be told not to mix listening to music and studying at the same time as this does not allow for maximum concentration.
114EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 5.
Subject teachers should guide their students on how to study their specific subjects.
This will aid their going over work done.
6.
Students should not lie down while studying as one cannot assimilate much and one can easily fall asleep.
7.
Students should keep away from noisy environment and distractions at all times 8.
Ensure comprehension of what you learnt by being able to apply it to real life situations 9.
Students should learn how to turn headlines or topics into questions and make attempt to answer such questions.
10.Recite what you have read by answering questions in your own words 11.Revise and review what you have studied to ensure retention and understanding.
3.2.6 Physical Environment of the Classroom There is a lot of relationship between classroom environment and student academic performance.
If the classroom environment is conducive to learning, students will perform very well.
The physical environment of the classroom means the classroom building, the outside and inside of the classroom with their equipment, tools and other facilities.
Classrooms are part of the school structures provided by the proprietors of schools in accordance with the approved plan by the Ministry of Education.
The teacher does not have control over the site, size and structure of the classroom.
The teacher manages the classroom because learning and teaching take place in the room.
The classroom is where the teacher puts into practice all he has learnt theoretically.
A good teacher could get his efforts frustrated in a disorganized and poorly managed classroom.
This implies that a teacher must be a good manager of his classroom for effective teaching and learning processes.
1.
The lighting conditions in the classroom should be moderate.
This can be done through the opening and partial closing of the windows.
115EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 2.
Classroom should be painted in light colours 3.
The classroom should be well ventilated.
The teacher ensures that the windows are opened on either sides to allow for cross ventilation.
4.
In the class, each child should have his or her own seat and each child should have enough space to move.
5.
More often than not, the method of teaching by the teacher affects the sitting arrangement.
6.
The classroom arrangement can be made attractive in the following ways: - Students should be encouraged to keep their seats clean and tidy - There should be provision of dust bins and wash hand basin - Charts, maps and other instructional materials should be placed on walls.
- There should be nature corners, library and shopping corners in the class - Sweeping of the classroom regularly - Opening and closing of windows and doors as at when due - Scrubbing of the floor when necessary - Renovating the chalkboard - First Aid Box - Removing cobwebs - Taking care of the surroundings.
If all the above are put in place the classroom will be conducive for learning 3.3 Improving Study Skills The reasons for the need for good study habits can be seen as ways of finding solution to the problems of students failure, examination malpractices and the like.
The following outline the roles for the teachers and the students in improving study skills: 1.
The teacher should stress that good study skills are essential to successful academic performance 2.
Teachers should guide the students on how to use dictionaries 116EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 3.
The librarians should help students learn how to use encyclopedias and reader’s guide 4.
Students should be taught how to budget their time effectively.
5.
The importance of good health and exercise should be stressed by games master or school nurse.
6.
Teachers should avoid the habit of giving lengthy notes to students 7.
Students should be encouraged to make their own notes while the teacher should collect students’ notes to examine so as to correct faults.
8.
Students should watch their physical health and ensure fitness.
9.
Students must have regular sleep and proper eating habit 10.Students should avoid the use of candle light to protect their eyes.
Both the teacher and students have significant role to play in ensuring effective study habit.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the various methods by which students study skills can be enhanced?
3.4 Preparation of Examinations The level of preparedness of the student determines to a great extent the performance of such a student.
A student who has failed to prepare for his examination has planned to fail.
There are basic things a student must do in preparing for examinations: 1.
It is generally advisable that you jot down notes while you are studying.
2.
Summarize what you have to read in an outline form, such summary notes will be very helpful during revision for examination 3.
Such summary notes should be made in your own words and not a carbon copy of what is in the textbook.
117EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 4.
Students studying mathematics should attempt working some exercises 5.
Students should establish a relationship between facts in a textbook and some events outside to aid recollection 6.
Remembrance is enhanced by picking out the first alphabet in each of the key words that make up the item you want to remember.
This is called Acronym.
7.
Students must join discussion groups as they prepare for examination 8.
Endeavour to attend the study group promptly.
The group must have a time table 9.
At the end of each day’s discussion, go through all the topics you covered and make highlight of each 10.Make use of previous past questions on each of the subjects you offer 11.Find out how to answer past questions using marking scheme.
If need be let the subject teacher take you through the process of scoring marks.
12.Combat anxious thought with positive statements like I can make it, I will pass, worrying about situations aggravate the problem.
13.Two weeks to the examination period begin intensive revision and review of all your jottings and summary notes 14.If need be, clarify and cross check your points with your notebooks and textbooks.
15.Make summary flash cards which you can pocket and make reference to at anytime and anywhere.
16.Review all topic.
Don’t leave out any topic.
17.Attempt to answer all questions that flash your mind 18.Get prepared very well for all examination.
4.0 CONCLUSION Methods of study provide numerous ways by which good study habits can be inculcated in the students during the process of teaching and learning.
The bulk of what to be done to enhance effective studying 118EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS habits rest mainly on the students.
The teachers must endeavour to pay attention to the fact that their students have a good foundation in the use of textbooks, art of note making and all manners of ways by which their study skills can be improved.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major highlights of what this unit teaches: The reason why people study.
• Various methods of studying and study skill such as - use of textbooks - art of note making - organization of work - time management and time table - revision and review of work and the relevance of classroom environment • Various other ways by which study skills can be improved.
• Preparation for examination 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline three (3) methods you will use in enhancing your students study skills.
2.
What are the preparations your students need for their forth coming examination?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeloye, E. A. and Olasehinde, W. O.
( ).
A Handbook on Classroom Management and Discipline.
Ilorin, Kwara State: Indemac Nigeria Publishers Limited.
Duntoye, J.
A.
(2005).
Introduction to Guidance and Counselling and Adolescent Psychology.
Ilorin, Kwara State: Natadex Publishers.
119EDU 233 GENERAL TEACHING METHODS 120
