EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Course Code EDU112 Course Title PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer Dr. E M. Umar – BUK Course Writer Dr. F. M. Umar – BUK Programme Leader Dr. U. M. Okonkwo – NOUN Course Coordinator Dr.
I. O. Salawu – NOUN EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Annex Office 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja.
E-mail: centrainfo@nou.edu.ng URL www.nou.edu.ng ©National Open University of Nigeria 2004 First Published 2004 ISBN 978 058 120 0 All Rights Reserved Published by University Press PLC for National Open University of Nigeria EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Table of Contents Pages Course Guide 1 Module 1 Concepts and Issues in Teaching 7 Unit 1 Concept of Teaching and Professionalism 7 Unit 2 History of Teaching in Nigeria 11 Unit 3 Teaching as a Profession 14 Unit 4 The Professional Growth of Teachers 17 Unit 5 Educating the Educators 21 Unit 6 Professional Studies Programme for Teachers 24 Unit 7 The Teacher and the Child 28 Unit 8 Why Teachers Should Care 32 Module 2 The Making of An Ideal Teacher 36 Unit 1 The Qualities of an Ideal Teacher 36 Unit 2 Teachers as Role Models 39 Unit 3 The Nigerian Union of Teachers (N.U.T) 42 Unit 4 The Parents Teachers Association (P.T.A) 45 Unit 5 The Role of Subject Teachers Association 49 Unit 6 The Old Students Association 53 Unit 7 The Status of Teachers in Nigeria 56 Unit 8 Strategies for Professionalizing Teaching in Nigeria 59 EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING COURSE GUIDE Introduction - The issue of professionalism in relation to the teaching occupation has occupied the la and writing of many scholars for a longtime.
Very often, occupational groups have referred to their occupations as professions as long as members are able to come together to discuss issues of common interest.
Sociologists have addressed professionalism and made some contributions regarding its ingredients or characteristics.
For example, an occupation can be truly a profession or a semi-profession, depending on the level of autonomy enjoyed by the group.
Other considerations, which are not exhaustive, include normal educational level of authority enjoyed by members and so on.
This course will expose you to issues of professionalism, which will prepare you for the tasks you may be required to perform as teachers or teachers’ trainer or even education inspectors or administrators.
The course consists of 19 units of teaching.
They include Course Guide, Introduction and Definitions of Teaching and Professionalism, Teacher Training Programme, Qualities of Ideal Teacher, The Personal Development of the teacher as well as Agencies and organizations that have any influence on education.
The course guide briefly explains to you what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using as you work your way through the course.
It also gives you advices on the amount of time you may spend on each unit of the course so that you can complete the course successfully and in good time.
The course guide provides some guidance on tutor-marked assignments, which will be made available in the assignment file.
There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend the sessions.
What You Will be Learning in this Course The overall aim of the course is professionalism in teaching.
During this course, you will be learning the definitions of the concepts of teaching and professionalism, the history of teaching in Nigeria and the concern for professionalism in the teaching occupation.
As teachers in training, or prospective teachers, it is important that you study the teacher education and training programmes and teacher’s professional development efforts.
You will be learning all of these in this course.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Later in the course, you will be learning all that goes into the making of an ideal teacher.
These include; the qualities of a good teacher, the role of the teacher in the school, the teacher’s self development issues, and education of teacher educators, as well as the history, role and functions of agencies like the Nigerian Union of teachers, the Old Students Associations and the Parents-Teachers Associations in relation to education.
Course Aims The aims of this course can be-summarized as follows: This course aims at giving you an understanding of the functions of teaching in the School system and all that makes up the teacher.
It is hoped that this will be achieved by introducing you to: i.
The basic issues and concepts of teaching.
ii.
Outline of the preparation of teachers in terms of teacher education, professional development and training.
Roles of the teacher in the school system (will be discussed): iii.
The roles of different agencies and associations that are involved in the making of an ideal teacher.
iv.
All the information that will prepare you to argue in favour of, or against teaching being &profession in Nigeria, whether as teachers in training or teachers in practice.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set, the course sets its overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives, which are always stated at the beginning of each unit.
Please read them before you start working through the unit.
It will be helpful to you if you refer to them in the course of your study of the units, so that you can check your progress.
After the completion of the unit, also read over the unit objectives.
That way, you will be sure of doing what is required of you by the unit.
After you have successfully completed the study of this course, you should be able to: 1.
Define the concepts of teaching and professionalism.
Describe who a teacher is.
2.
Outline the history of teaching in Nigeria.
3.
Explain teaching as a Profession.
4.
Explain and outline Teacher Education in Nigeria.
5.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Describe the teachers as a role model.
6.
Discuss the professional studies programme for teachers in 7.
Nigeria.
State any four qualities of an ideal teacher.
8.
State the roles and functions of the Nigerian Union of Teachers.
9.
State the roles of Parent-Teacher Associations in schools.
10.
Outline the functions of Old-students Associations.
11.
Discuss the functions of Subject Teachers Associations.
12.
Discuss how Teacher Education can be improved.
13.
Examine the strategies of making teaching a profession.
14.
Working Through This Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read set books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises and at some points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purpose.
The course should take you about 17 weeks to complete.
You will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order that you may complete the course successfully on time.
Course Materials Major components of the course are:- 1.
Course Guide Study units 2.
References 3.
Assignment file 4.
Presentation schedule.
5.
Study Units The study units in the course are as follow: Module 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching Unit 1: Concepts of Teaching and Professionalism Unit 2: History of Teaching in Nigeria Unit 3: Teaching as a Profession Unit 4: Professional Growth of Teachers Unit 5: Educating the Educators Unit 6: Professional Studies Programmes for Teachers Unit 7: The Teacher and the Child EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Unit 8: Why Teachers should Care Module 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher Unit 1: Qualities of an Ideal Teacher Unit 2: The Role of the Teacher Unit 3: The Nigerian Union of Teachers [N.U.T] Unit 4: The Role of Parents-Teachers Associations [P.T.A] Unit 5: The Subject Teachers Associations Unit 6: The Old Students Associations Unit 7: The Status of Teacher in Nigeria Unit 8: Strategies for Making Teaching a Profession.
The first three units discussed the meaning and nature of teaching and professionalism as well as the historical development of teaching.
In the next four units, the professional development will be explained.
The next three units explained the qualities and role of the teacher in terms of the ingredients that make an ideal teacher.
We went on to outline the functions and roles of agencies that are involved with teaching and learning in schools.
In the last four units, we examined ways and means of making teaching a profession in Nigeria in the context of training and ethics.
Assignment File There are five assignments in this course.
The five assignments will cover: 1.
The definition and explanation of concepts of teaching and professionalism.
2.
The education and professional growth of teachers.
3.
The role and qualities of an ideal teacher.
4.
The functions and activities of teachers related unions and associations.
5.
Strategies for improving teacher education and making teaching a profession.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this academic year.
You must ensure that you complete your tutor-marked assignments and attend tutorials.
Remember you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guide against falling behind in your work.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are set Assessment Exercises, and second, are the tutor-marked assignments and the third is a written examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises.
You are expected to apply information knowledge and skill that you have acquired during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assessment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 50% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final examination, which will also account for 50% of your total works.
Tutor-Marked Assignments There are five tutor-marked assignments in this course.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course work.
Assignment questions for this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your reference books, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to read and research more widely.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with a TMA [tutor-marked assignment] form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given on the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your/ruler before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the date unless in exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination The final examination for this course will be of three-hour duration and have a value of 50% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All the areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sifting the examination EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING to appraise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-assessment exercises, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers all part of the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the acutal course marking is broken down.
Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Assignment Marks Assignments 1 – 5 Five assignments, 10% each = 50% of the course mark Final examination 50% of overall course mark Total 100% of course marks Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
How To Get The Most From This Course In distance teething, the study units replace the course lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING points.
Each of the study unit follows a common format.
The first item is introduction of the subject matter of the unit.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you finish studying the unit, you must go back to check if you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly increase your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the unit content material.
.
Self-assessment exercises are spread throughout the units and answers are given at the end of units.
Working through these assessments will help you to achieve the Objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-assessment exercise as you come to it in the unit.
The following is it strategy for working through the course.
1.
Read this course guide thoroughly.
2.
Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
3.
Note the time to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to each unit.
Important information like details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available at your study centers.
You need to gather together all this in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Once you have created your own work schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind in their course work, If you get into any difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to unit and read the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is in the "overview" at the beginning of each unit.
6.
Work through the unit.
7.
Do your assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and therefore will help you pass the exam.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can now start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule when the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor's comments both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
If you have any question or problem, consult your tutor as soon as possible.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutor And Tutorials There are 20 hours of tutorials (ten 2-hour sessions) provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter during the course and provide assistance to you.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if:  You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings;  You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises;  You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor's comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it interesting and useful.
In the longer term, we hope you enjoy your acquaintance with NOUN and we wish you every success in your future.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching UNIT 1: Concept of Teaching and Professionalism Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Concept of Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.6 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit is a foundation unit in this course.
It is a guide to concepts of teaching and professionalism in which the definition of the two concepts and their characteristics, are outlined.
The charge characteristics of a profession are also discussed.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Understand and use the concept of teaching and professionalism, as students of education.
ii.
Explain the concepts of teaching and professionalism.
iii.
Be informed enough to make up your mind on whether or not teaching is a profession in Nigeria.
3.0 The Concept of Teaching Teaching is defined by many scholars of education as "the promotion of learning".
The teacher in his work of teaching must provide appropriate conditions for learning.
Some others define teaching as helping other people to learn.
Teaching is the art of impacting knowledge.
It is knowing what to teach the learners and ways of imparting the knowledge in the most effective way possible.
Teaching is also that important art that builds up the society by the way it is done, the area in which it is conducted and its cumulative effect on the life of the society.
Teaching is a process of inducing learning, It is guiding someone to behave in a given or certain manner beneficial to himself and the society.
Teaching is the process by which a teacher guides the learners in the acquisition of knowledge, skills and attitudes.
It is essentially a EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING system of interactions involving the teacher, the learner and the learning materials, thus, forming a triangular interaction as shown below: Teacher Learner Material Here, it is possible for the teacher to interact with the learner and the materials at the same time while the learner too can interact with both the teacher and the materials.
Now let us go on to see what professionalism is.
Activity I What is teaching as you understand it?
3.1 Professionalism The word profession has been defined as an occupation that can claim exclusive technical competence and also adheres to ethics of professional conduct.
Elsewhere, a profession is being defined as a calling in which one professed to have acquired special knowledge used by either instructing, guiding or advising others or serving them in some art.
Examples of professionals are: Lawyers, Doctors, Engineers, Accountants, Architects, and Quantity Surveyors.
These are professions that have quality control measures and compulsory registration of their members.
3.2 Characteristics of a Profession A true profession must have the following characteristics: (i) Knowledge acquired after a period of specialized intellectual study and training essential for the practice of an occupation.
(ii) Controlled entry into the occupation.
(iii) A code of conduct to guide the behaviour of the members of the profession.
(iv) A strong professional organisation which guides the interest of its members as well as codifies the entire professional framework.
(v) Independence and freedom a practice without any interference.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING The watchwords here are knowledge, specialized training, controlling entry, code of conduct and freedom to practice.
Let us now expand on this.
A professional must possess knowledge required to practice his occupation.
This knowledge must be of a specialized type, which is acquired after a specified period of training.
Furthermore, entry into the profession must be controlled.
This is done by specifying the pre-requisite for entry into training, the probable duration of training, the basic knowledge required for the practice of the occupation and the minimum qualification for one to be admitted into the occupation.
A profession generally has some ideals.
There is therefore a code of conduct clearly defined for members.
Such code of conduct includes standard of practice taken as good by the profession.
These ideals are expected to be strictly abided by, by the members.
This means a professional must not only be professionally competent but must also be of unquestionable character.
The professional is not expected to exploit the ignorance of his clients, (in this case students) but to use his knowledge to benefit them in the practice of his occupation.
On the whole, a profession is a service occupation, where public interest supersedes that of the individual.
Activity II Define professionalism with some examples.
We now go on to the other character of a profession.
Freedom of practice is one of the basic features of a profession.
This is in two parts; first the freedom of the profession to determine its form of operation and the freedom of the individual professional to take decisions on his clients (students) as he sees fit.
Because of his specialized training for a specified period, well-defined code of conduct and controlled entry into the profession, the professional is an expert in a particular field of knowledge and so requires absolute freedom to practice his profession.
The professional expects that he be left alone to do his work without undue interference from the layman.
Finally, a profession has a governing body for the advancement of the profession and the monitoring of the interest and professional conduct of its members.
In this case, the professional governing body of the teaching profession is the Nigerian Union of Teachers (N.U.T.).
The N.U.T.
is the subject of discussion in a later unit in this course.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 4.0 Conclusion The operative words in professionalism are knowledge, specialized training, controlled entry, code of conduct and freedom to practice.
Teaching on the other hand is the transmission of knowledge by an expert in education who is known as a teacher.
5.0 Summary You have just learnt the concepts of a profession and the art of teaching, including all the characteristics that make an occupation to qualify as a profession.
In the other units of this course, you will be learning the relationship between professionalism and teaching.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Define the concept of professionalism.
2.
Discuss the issue of teaching as mentioned in this unit.
3.
What are the characteristics of a profession?
7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment 1.
Is teaching in Nigeria a profession or simply an occupation?
2.
Compare teaching as a profession and any other professions of your choice.
8.0 References John, O, A (1995) Teacher Education in Nigeria: Trends, Issues and Challenges.
N.E.R.A University of Benin.
Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1982) 'African Education in Perspective': In Fafunwa.
A.
B. and Aisiku, J.O (eds) Education in Africa — A Comparative Survey.
London: George Allen & Unwin.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING UNIT 2: History of Teaching in Nigeria Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Beginning of Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self - Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction We are still on the foundation units of this course.
We now go on to discuss the history of teaching after having discussed the concept in the previous unit.
Teaching is an old profession, as old as man himself.
Human beings begin to learn as soon as they are born.
They learn consciously or unconsciously, with teachers and sometimes without teachers.
In this unit, we shall discuss the history of formal teaching in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives i.
By the end of this unit, you should be able to exhibit an understanding of how teaching began in Nigeria, from the missionary days to the present.
ii.
You are also expected to discuss the beginning of teaching in Nigeria.
3.0 The Beginning of Teaching Teaching is an old craft.
With the need to formalize education, it became a job open to all that have some expertise to share with others.
During the early years of teaching, anybody at all could be called upon to teach.
In fact many of the teachers were practicing a trade and the early teacher training colleges hoped to build a profession out of their practice.
With the coming of the British into Nigeria, they established the typical missionary schools, The schools had curriculum and programmes that were hardly relevant to the needs of the society.
The schools taught values that were alien to the societies they were located therein.
The products were educated for no task in particular but to serve the missionaries and colonial masters of that time.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Activity I Look back to the beginning of teaching and see how the missions influenced the choice of teachers.
Teaching was in two folds.
First, as an apprentice teacher and then on the job training.
The prospective teachers were required to serve first as auxiliary teachers under close supervision of the European masters and pastors before going into training.
Early teacher training colleges were established but could not produce "teachers" but individuals with basic learning components of teaching most of which are bible studies and basic subjects like English and Arithmetic.
First teacher training was aimed at becoming pupils' teacher and catholists/evangelists.
Under this arrangement, the syllabus consisted of the New Testament, preaching and theology, hygiene, geography, history, English, carpentry and masonry.
This apprenticeship kind of training emphasized on the job training under the watchful eye of the master, teacher or pastor.
Later, student teachers were drawn from Elementary VI, after serving as auxiliary teachers for two years.
They would now qualify after training as pupil teachers.
The teachers then had to teach at the end of all training programmes for sometime before moving forward in his studies.
This practice is the same today.
Teachers who are sponsored to higher education have to serve their sponsors for some two years before they can be free With the approach of independence, (1950 — I 960s), the Nigerian citizens had the desire for good health programmes, expansion of transportation, communication and agriculture (Asiedu & Kroft, 1985).
These created possibilities for change and the provision of educational facilities alone has the answers to these demands.
Teacher training institutions were therefore established in different parts of the country.
The Colleges went on to produce teachers at the Grade three, and later Grade two levels.
At the end of each training period, teachers had to work for their sponsors for a minimum of two years before they can go back for further education or be free to leave.
Before the teachers could go on to the next class, he must have received three good annual reports to his credit.
This is a more stringent measure for the teachers.
But they endured and went on.
With demands for schooling, school expansion was inevitable.
Existing schools were expanded and governments were establishing new ones.
This means more teachers would be required, and therefore needs to be employed.
In 1976, when the Universal Primary Education (UPE) EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Scheme was launched, to satisfy the yearnings of Nigerians for more educational provisions especially for children, UPE teacher training schools were established.
These schools trained prospective teachers for nine months to two years, thus the influx of everybody into teaching.
From a specialized profession, teaching became the dumping ground for all, especially those that are not qualified for other jobs or further education.
This is the situation till date.
In Fafunwa's words (1991), suddenly practically, all cooks, stewards, and baby nurses disappeared from the various households in Nigeria and enrolled for teacher training.
The UPE is one of the periods in the history of teaching when it was purely polluted and even filled up by people who should never be teachers in the first place.
But the number of these kinds of teachers swells the number of teachers up to date.
Activity II Briefly examine the trend of the development of teaching in Nigeria.
4.0 Conclusion In this Unit, you have learnt the historical growth of teaching from the times when there was even no focus for the production of teachers up till now that the profession is a little specialized for the practitioners.
5.0 Summary This unit discussed the evolution of teaching in Nigeria from the time of the missionaries up till now.
This will prepare you for the next unit which will discuss teaching as a profession.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise Trace and discuss the development of teaching in Nigeria from the missionary days to date.
7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 1.
Examine, briefly the history of teaching in Nigeria.
2.
What were the motives for going into teaching in the early days of the missionary?
8.0 References Asiedu, K. & A. Krofi.
(1985) The Professional and Personal Development of the Teacher.
Evans Brothers Limited, Ibadan.
Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1991) History of Education in Nigeria, NPS Educational Publishers, Ibadan.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching UNIT 3: Teaching as a Profession Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Teaching as a Profession 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction You have learnt the historical development of teaching in the last unit before this.
Now we are going to explain to you the issue of teaching as a profession.
There are many views about teaching as a profession in Nigeria or not.
In Unit 1, you learnt the characteristics of a profession.
This will help you to understand the concept of teaching as a profession.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  understand and explain the concept of teaching as a profession.
 determine whether or not teaching in Nigeria is a profession.
3.0 Teaching as a Profession The debate on whether teaching in Nigeria is a profession or not, has been going on for some time.
Professional workers get their training from educational institutions whose managers are teachers.
Teachers prepare practitioners for their own occupations.
In the past and sometime in the present, teaching has been used as a stepping-stone for other so called prestigious professions.
Let us digest the characteristics of a profession as was outlined in Unit I.
A profession has as its fundamental objectives, the furtherance of the profession and service to mankind.
Quality output and excellence are the essence of its existence.
There is an assertion that a profession is a vocation for which work is a thing of importance in itself and for which group dignity is the dominant factor.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING However, there is another facet to the issue of professionalism.
Umar states that although philanthropic in its ideals, ironically, professionalisation of an occupation is also a drive for economic gain.
For example, one important characteristic of a profession is the monopoly of skill it enjoys over its own affairs.
Once an occupation has achieved this, it often uses this monopoly to set standards for practice and in doing so restricts entry into its membership.
Such measure tends to lower the number of professionals on the fields thereby increasing scarcity of such professionals and value of the profession which in turn enhances the level of remuneration to those already in.
Examples of such professions include law, engineering or medicine etc.
Now let us see whether teaching is a profession or not.
Activity II Now do you distinguish a professional from the way he carries out his work?
Some of the broad characteristics of a profession are discussed below.
They are central to all professions.
Knowledge and Skills Teaching being defined as the art of imparting knowledge from the teacher to the learner, implies that the teacher has to be knowledgeable in order to be able to impart knowledge.
One must know the way and the direction that he would take.
This shows that teaching is an intellectual activity that requires knowledge and skills, knowledge of the subject matter and the skill of imparting such knowledge.
This is gotten from long period of intellectual training.
Every professional requires some intellectual training.
The teacher needs these qualities more than anyone else because he is central to the formation of the child's personality and the formation of the human mind at its most impressionable age.
The teacher is also central in the training and preparation of people to fit into all other professions.
Control of Entry The Nigerian teaching service has no control over its entry.
Anybody and everybody can be a teacher.
In fact people who have searched for jobs in their areas of specialization and failed, go into teaching until their choice of jobs comes around.
There is also no minimum basic qualification for entry, training or practice except of course on paper.
With other professions, the aspirant must possess additional professional qualification in order to qualify for practice.
For example, doctors undergo internship for a year, acquiring practical skills before they are EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING qualified to practice.
It is the same for lawyers and engineers.
This is in addition to their university degrees.
Code of Conduct Code of conduct is a kind of orderly procedure to set the standard of professional conduct, or ethics.
This is drawn and enforced by professional groups.
The code of conduct is a set of expectations on the behaviour of members.
The code of conduct is usually drawn to maximize the productivity of the members so that the clients get value for their money or trust, and so that the members are fully protected.
In the case of teaching, the code of conduct expects that the teacher: 1.
Should deal impartially with his pupils and students irrespective of their individual differences; 2.
Should avoid defamatory remarks or comments on a student or his home; 3.
Should respect the basic desire of Nigerian parents for the education of their children; and 4.
Should also keep parents informed about the progress of their children in terms of their schoolwork.
All these code of conduct are to be enforced by the Nigerian Union of Teachers (NUT).
However, employers determine much of the professional conduct of the Nigerian teacher.
Even where the teachers collectively prepare the code, the function of enforcing it lays with the employer.
It is the government or private proprietor that can hire and fire and indeed make or unmake a teacher.
Professional Association For a body of workers to be recognized as professionals practising their profession, they have to unite themselves in a professional association.
The Nigerian teachers have the Nigerian Union of Teachers (NUT).
This union as the name implies, is a trade union, not a professional organisation, although it has helped to unite the teachers across ethnic and state boundaries as well as improve the condition of service of its members.
It is therefore a pressure group, which has not been able to so far offer sufficient influence in defence of the occupation.
The Nigerian teacher has no professional organisation.
What obtains here are trade unions, which the Nigerian Union of Teachers is the parent body.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 4.0 Conclusion In the course of our discussion, we have been able to state the place of teaching in accordance with the characteristics of a profession.
In some areas, teaching qualifies to be a profession and in others failed to qualify in terms of the characteristics of a profession in broad terms.
5.0 Summary Teaching as a profession in Nigeria has some pluses and minuses.
Using the yardstick of professionalism, teaching does well in some but poorly in other and the debate goes on.
As practicing or aspiring teachers, you can put on your views either in favour or against teaching being a profession in Nigeria.
6.0 Self-Exercise Assessment Is teaching in Nigeria a profession or simply an occupation?
7.0 References Onwuka, U.
(1986) The Status of Teachers in Nigeria, Cudimac Series No.10 NSUKKA.
Taiwo, A. and Alani, R.A (1992) Contemporary Issues in Nigeria Education.
Triumph Books Publishers, Ijebu-Ode.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching UNIT 4: The Professional Growth of Teachers Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Pre-service Training of Teachers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self - Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction We have so far discussed the concepts of teaching and profession, the history of teaching in Nigeria, and teaching as a profession in Nigeria.
We hope by now you have been sufficiently informed about both concepts — teaching and professionalism.
In this unit, we shall examine the institutional setting of teacher education as it relates to pre-service training for prospective teachers and in - service training for those already in the service as well as any other professional programme for teachers in Nigeria.
The emphasis is on the relevance of these programmes to the requirements of teaching.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, it is hoped that students will be able to:  raise and discuss issues and problems associated with the pre- service and in-service training of teachers in Nigeria.
3.0 Pre-service Training of Teachers Let us start with a quotation by the British Colonial Office Study group on West Africa as far back as in 1952.
The reason being that as relevant as it was in 1952, it remains relevant up till this moment, and I quote.
"You cannot have good teachers until you have good schools or good schools until you have good teachers".
The colonial government at that time decreed that no new schools in West Africa are to be opened until teachers are available.
What good logic this was!
To make teachers available, teacher training colleges were established.
Teacher training began with three year training for the EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING award of Teacher Grade III certification.
Those who were successful were then absorbed into a two year teacher training programme to graduate as Grade II teachers.
These were teachers who qualified to teach in Elementary and Primary schools.
This trend continued to post independence period through the seventies.
To go further in teacher training, there was the National Certificate in Education (NCE) programme, which prepares prospective teachers to teach in secondary schools.
In 1977, when the National Policy on Education came into effect, the National Certificate of Education (NCE) was proposed to be the minimum qualification for teachers in Nigeria, thus phasing out the Grade II Teachers' Certificate programme.
These are professional training programmes that lay emphasis on the art of teaching at both primary and post-primary schools levels.
Activity I Let us break here so that you can look back to identify the kind of training you went through before you enroll into this programme.
How did it go?
There are also University degrees in education that prepare aspiring teachers.
These range from purely education degrees titled Bachelor of Education (B.ED) to Bachelor of Arts Education degrees with teaching subjects in other areas both Arts and Science based.
These are the pre-service training programmes for teachers in Nigeria.
Some of these are programmes that can also come under in-service teachers' training efforts.
In-service Training This is the training given to teachers already in the service.
This training is encompassed in all the programmes stated above except the Grade III.
The teachers' programme, which was the entry point in the training of teachers, was the Grade Ill. Teachers enroll into Teachers Colleges to qualify as Grade 11 teachers, while stilt in the service.
This level of teachers can go on to obtain the next higher level, which is the National Certificate of Education (NCE) while they still perform their jobs as teachers or they are released to go to school if they so wish.
The same teachers are eligible for the Bachelor of Education degree programme.
In the same vein, graduates can go on to post-graduate programme in education up to the Doctoral levels.
All of these are most times carried on as in-service programmes.
In either pre-service or in- service programme the training is exclusively teacher based.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Teacher who wishes to undergo an in-service further education programme can do so either still serving or may be released for the period of study, after which he/she goes back to his station to continue with his work.
The account on teacher education will not be complete without mentioning the Diploma and Sandwich programmes in education.
The former is an education course generally offered to graduates from Universities and Polytechnics who had no previous training in teaching but wish to be or are already practising teachers but have no teaching qualification.
They last from one to two years and consist of professional courses.
The certificate gotten which qualifies one as a professionally trained teacher is the Post-Graduate Certificate of Education (PGCE) or Post Graduate Diploma in Education (PGDE), or the Technical Teachers Certificate (TTC) of the Polytechnics and Colleges of technology.
The sandwich programmes are run during the long vacations often of ten week duration.
These are designed for full time teachers who, because of their jobs cannot attend the full time training programmes.
They are spread between two to six years depending on the programme and or institution.
They are mostly meant for Grade II teachers or NCE teachers.
Universities, Colleges of Education and the National Teachers Institute (NTI) run them.
The professional growth of the teacher is a rigorous one, such that teachers are not only to learn the various school subjects, but also, and most importantly to behave in a way befitting the people who are to bring up young generations.
To be able to do this comfortably, they learn from psychology in order to understand how the child grows and learns.
They learn some sociology so that they would understand the environment in which the child lives and learns.
This understanding will enable the teacher to do his work well.
The teacher studies a little philosophy.
Being the only adult in the classroom environment, he needs to fit in properly amongst his students.
To fit in well, he has to appreciate the level of his pupils.
He has to speak in the language that they will understand, and teach them to understand.
Activity II Let us pose to see what we have been doing so far in this unit.
Think back to your primary or secondary school days.
Did your teachers use the psychology, sociology and philosophy that they learnt in school to teach you well?
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING You can pick the ones that did not use what they learnt in school to teach their own students.
The teacher in his professional growth has to learn to be character builders.
That is what they are.
Since they are expected to build the character of the young ones in their charge, they should show good examples for the students to emulate.
That way they themselves grow professionally and as individuals.
They become all rounder.
4.0 Conclusion You have just learnt in this unit the types of teacher training programmes either as pre-service or as in-service training.
The levels of training have also been enumerated upon and explained.
In the end, some recommendations were offered to help the teacher attain functional professional growth.
5.0 Summary This unit explained the professional training of teachers at pre-service and in-service levels.
Various types of programmes that would in the end produce professional teachers who would have attained heights in their professional growth are also discussed.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise Enumerate and discuss the various Teacher training programmes in Nigeria both at pre-service and in-service levels.
7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment Discuss the training programmes that lead to the professional growth of the teacher, as discussed in this unit.
8.0 References Kanu, D. R. Teacher Education in Nigeria: A Historical Perspective.
Ark Publishers.
Umuahia.
Macauley, J. I.
(1986), Training of Teachers as a Key Factor in the Successful Implementation of the 6-3-3-4 Scheme in Nigeria.
Journal of Curriculum Studies, Special No.
1(July).
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching UNIT 5: Educating the Educators Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Educating the Educators 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction As long as the educational system is the key to societal development, so long as transmitters of knowledge as teachers or teacher educators constitute a significant component of the system for study, a good teacher education programme must reflect the awareness that teaching is in a dare need of dedicated, capable and well seasoned people to teach in our schools.
You have learnt about teachers and teaching, now we go on to learn about educating the educators.
This is a programme of study that will prepare the teacher to teach not only the academic subjects, but also prepares him as an all rounder in teaching.
2.0 Objectives By the time you finish reading and studying this unit, you should be able to:  understand and identify the ingredients of teacher education in Nigeria.
 you should have learnt about the issues that the education of educators should include.
3.0 Educating the Educators The aim of educating the educators is for the teacher to have good general education and specialized knowledge within the realm of academic training.
The value of academic training should be to have valuable intellectual development of the students.
We must try to avoid the development of inert ideas; that is ideas that are simply absorbed without being used in different circumstances.
Emphasis of educating the educators should be on the development of the art of thinking because in the final analysis, an expert is an expert for his ability to EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING think than for accumulated knowledge.
The education of educators should expose them to some amount of experiences, which is what truly balanced education would demand at this level.
Like for a student teacher specializing in Art subjects, he should take as his minor, some science subjects so that such a teacher would at graduation be an all rounder, although graduating in arts, he has some knowledge of science as well.
Activity I What is the general aim of the education of the educators?
In the same vein, the education of educators should lay more emphasis on teaching in all situations both in urban and rural areas.
This will prepare the educators to come to grips with both environments.
It is very likely that in the course of the teacher's job, he would be posted to the rural area.
With an all round education conducive for any setting, the teacher is ready to take on the work.
Teachers who are educators should be encouraged to develop a philosophy of life and education, such that will enable him to render the best possible service to the child, profession, society at large and to himself as an individual.
In trying to encourage the prospective teacher, we must be sure that there is no attempt to impose any particular philosophy on the student teacher.
A safe approach will be to expose him to the various philosophies and allow him to adopt one or formulate his own according to his needs, ideologies and purpose in life.
This is the reason for studying such persons as Rousseau, Dewy, Pestalozzi, Mentosory and their Nigerian counterparts.
The education of the educators, should assist the would-be-teacher to realize that when he is wasting with children and adolescents, he should always have in mind a set of objectives, that the educative experiences and the growth of the pupils or students must be evaluated in terms of objective and that any method or techniques or procedures which will bring about the achievement of set objectives must be used.
The education of teachers must also create on the part of the student teacher a complete professional attitude, a love for and an interest in the profession, a devotion to duty, a belief in the work, worth and dignity of the profession of teaching.
In this regard, teaching comes next to the family.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Teacher education should promote in the aspiring teacher a desire for professional growth through reading further studies and other media in- service education such as vocation and refresher courses in various types.
The education of teachers will not be complete unless it helps the educators to recognize and attach himself to professional associations, national and international, which help to raise the dignity of the teaching profession and promote better understanding of the various agencies that are involved in education.
Activity II State some of the issues that should feature in the education of teachers.
The purpose of education of the educators is to help the teacher to develop, as a person, and as a teacher.
The quality of instruction in the education of educators should be such that will make the student a well educated teacher who is expected to look beyond today's professional patterns in order to prepare himself for schools of tomorrow since no society is ever static.
4.0 Conclusion You have just learnt about the education of the educators, what content of such education should be as well as some scholastic views on how the instruction should go.
The education of teachers should prepare the teacher to enter into the profession with a thorough knowledge and understanding of the joys, status, ethics, opportunities, difficulties and problems of teaching.
This is because to be forewarned is to be forearmed.
It is the responsibility of educator to prepare the future educators to face the tasks and problems ahead of them.
5.0 Summary It is no gain saying that no education system can rise above the level of its teacher.
The education of the educators is paramount in all considerations.
I have given you the concept and processes of educating the educators in this unit along with all those areas that the educator's education should address in the process of training.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
What is the purpose of educating the educators?
2.
Give some of the considerations in the education of educators.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment As one of the educators of the educators (teachers), what are the areas you would emphasize in your work?
8.0 References Kanu, D. R. (1994) Teacher Education in Nigeria A Historical — Perspective.
Ark Publishers.
Umuahia.
Alan, P. (1983 ed) The Effective Teacher in Primary and Secondary Schools.
Wordlock Educational.
London.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching UNIT 6: Professional Studies Programme for Teachers Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction Teachers are very often made not born.
If teachers are to be made, they are supposed to undergo some professional studies within a stipulated period of time.
Teachers need to learn what to teach; how to teach; when to teach; and why to teach.
This unit therefore, discusses the professional studies programme for teachers.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you are expected to:  define teaching as a profession  outline and explain the characteristics of teaching as a profession  explain the teacher training process.
3.0 Contents What is a profession?
Profession as defined in a dictionary as an occupation usually involving relatively long and specialized preparation.
The acquisition of high education is also important and a profession is also governed by its own code of ethics.
Is Teaching a Profession?
From the definition of profession given above, one can agree beyond doubt that teaching falls within the realm of a profession.
Teaching is a profession because it meets most of the characteristics of a profession.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING The characteristics of a profession include the followings: i.
The members have to be specially prepared for this job by a prolonged course of training.
ii.
The members have to practice their profession freely, but in accordance with the existing laws.
iii.
The practice of the profession has to be guided by a code of conduct prescribed by the members for themselves.
iv.
There have to be well spelt out conditions of service.
v. The members have to be united together under one organisational form known as a union or an association.
vi.
The members and the profession have to be seen by the public as enjoying a prestige comparable to other professions.
Activity I 1.
List the characteristics of a profession.
2.
Is teaching a profession?
Give reasons to support your answer.
Teacher Training Process Teachers are made not born.
If teachers are to be made, then they have to undergo certain training, usually teachers' institutes/colleges prescribed by the National Policy on Education (NPE).
In the NPE, a statement was made to this effect.
'All teachers in our educational institutions, from pre-primary to university will be professionally trained……’ To be professionally trained, whoever is aspiring for teaching profession must attend either federal/state college of education or study education programmes in the universities in the federation.
This is only possible if the teacher is to be acquired by pre-requisite (i.e entry qualifications) as required by their bodies.
When undergoing the training process, teachers are expected to study prescribed courses that will enable them to know the subject matter to teach, methodology of teaching and how to evaluate the attainment of the prescribed objectives.
The contents of the teacher-training programme as reflected in the courses being offered by colleges of education and universities are given below.
Philosophy of education - intended for teachers to know the philosophical basis of teaching - learning processes.
&Mlle major questions of concerned in this course are; Who am I as a person?
What do we teach?
Why education?
How is education going to be distributed?
etc.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Educational psychology - intended to give teachers an in- depth analysis of how children grow and develop for the purpose of teaching them according to their differential needs, how learning takes place, how to motivate a learner, how to provide for the differences that exist within learners etc.
Education - to grasp the notion education, its objectives problems, major issues and general principles underlying it.
Sociology of education -to provide teachers with in-depth sociological issues as it relates to education and teaching-learning situations.
Rime Major issues of concerti are; the teacher and how he relates to the society, teacher - teacher interaction and students - teacher interaction etc.
Evaluation-Principles of measurements and evaluation are taught to teachers.
The essence is to acquaint a training teacher with how to measure and report the extent to which the desired educational goals are or not obtained by the learners.
Other areas include educational administration, research, curriculum development, history of education and teaching practice.
Professional development training: To further qualify teaching as a profession, teachers are very often encouraged to go for professional training, further education, attend workshops and seminars from time to time to enrich their profession.
Activity II 1.
Outline the areas of studies teachers undergo in their training as professionals.
4.0 Conclusion This unit talked about teaching as a profession and the professional studies required of teaching as a profession.
The emphasis is not on joining the popular debate as to whether teaching is a profession or not.
However, the crux of the matter is what should teachers study to make their job a profession.
The prescribed studies programme for education is what matters.
5.0 Summary The unit defines a profession and outlines the characteristics of a profession.
It further justifies teaching as a profession on the ground that EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING it meets some of the criteria that defined profession.
The unit also discusses the teacher training process required of teaching as a profession.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Using the characteristics of profession outlined, examine two other professions and compare them with teaching.
2.
Outline the course areas that must be studied by a teacher in training.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Question Justify the statement that Teachers are made not born.
8.0 References The Nigerian Teacher, 'A Journal of Teacher Education', The Education, Kaduna Vol.
No.
1(1995).
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching UNIT 7: The Teacher and the Child Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7,0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction The authority, which a teacher exercises over a child, is as a result of his standing in place of the parent.
That is in loco Parentis.
By a teacher being in loco Parentis to the pupils in his care is meant that, he assumes of the rights and duties of the natural parent of the child.
By sending the child to school, the parent has authorized the school teacher to administer reasonable school regulation in addition to his teaching responsibility to the child.
In this unit, we look at the relationship between the teacher and the child.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  outline circumstances in which the teacher relates with his pupils.
 list two ways in which the teacher should relate with his pupils.
3.0 Content One of the very first things the teacher should ensure in relating with his student is a friendly atmosphere in the classroom.
The students should know by the teacher's words and actions that he is ready to help and guide them.
They should be able to speak to him if they are in difficulty, knowing that he will listen sympathetically and help if he can.
It is terrible if the student fears to speak to their teacher for fear of harsh word or even punishment.
If a teacher is friendly and kind to his students, it does not mean such EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING students are allowed to misbehave and be disrespectful.
They must be disciplined and trained to behave in a desirable way.
3.2 Discipline The best way to describe the discipline the teacher gives to his pupils is to say, 'it is the way he helps his pupils to behave well.'
Discipline trains a child to know what is good and reasonable behaviour so that gradually, the child learns to control himself and behaves reasonably without the teacher's continuous control.
When this happens, the teacher feels he is succeeding in his discipline training.
Let us look at two classrooms and see the relationship between the teacher and the child.
In a classroom, a very dull uninteresting lesson is being taken.
The children are sitting quietly and they appear to be listening, but when the teacher asks questions, the students can only answer in a muddled way.
The teacher is keeping order in the class.
But the class is quiet because they are afraid to move or talk knowing that if they did they will be punished.
Yet some are just bored and are not even listening.
In another classroom, there is a little noise as the children are all busy arranging their teaching aids, which they will be using to learn, and discussing them.
The teacher is going round all the groups individually, helping them to write the names of their teaching aids (toys) and what they will do with them.
Although the class is a little noisy, the children are learning, as they discuss what to write.
They are learning to work together and are learning to keep themselves a little quiet even when the teacher is not with their group.
When the teacher wants the children's attention, he asks them to listen and they quickly put down their toys to listen.
These children like and respect their teachers, and are very interested in their schoolwork.
Activity I In which of these classrooms would you say there Is good discipline that helps the children to learn?
3.3 Rules in the Classroom Rules are usually connected with discipline.
They are actually necessary, but there should be as few of them as possible.
Children are really very sensible if they are treated properly.
If they are told the reasons for a rule, they will try to keep it because they know why the rule was made in the first place.
For example, if you make a rule that says, "Don't climb the table", you now go on to say "why?".
You may then add that "because we may fall down and get hurt.
We must sit still in our places while writing, because when we move around, we may touch someone EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING and spoil his work; our own work will also not be neat and tidy".
But the teachers should know that students do not like to sit still for long periods, so the teacher should include as much activities in his work as possible, so that the child would not be bored.
If the teacher is sympathetic and understanding about his students, he will be happy to do as the teacher asks.
But it is important that teachers note that children are not perfect, so they are sometimes naughty.
Let us then go on to punishment.
3.4 Punishments The most common of students' faults are:  Noise making  Inattention  Disobedience  Dishonesty  Unkindness to other students Whatever the offence committed, the: a.
Teacher should remember that punishments are meant to correct the students and educate them to do better, b.
Good teachers do not give punishment too often or the students expect that all the time and punishment become ineffective.
c. The punishment should not be too much or too little as to be ineffective.
d. A teacher must never punish in anger.
He must wait until he cools down and think of a reasonable punishment.
Remember a child may be punished for being lazy or careless, but it is very wrong to punish a child who is not clever for doing a poor work.
If such a child has tried and done his best, he should be praised for trying, even if the result is not good enough.
It is not his fault to be borne with a weak brain.
Types of Punishment 1.
Speaking to a child is often enough.
For example, 'Muhammad, get on with your work'.
'That is not tidy enough, or do it again'.
2.
If the children are all quiet and listening in class and one plays about or is talking to his friend, the teacher stops talking and looks fiercely at the offender.
There will be silence except for the naughty child who quickly looks around and at the teacher to see why he stopped talking.
The child now is ashamed and sits up ready to listen.
The silence and looking at the child is enough punishment, more effective than even talking.
3.
Naughty children can be denied some privileges or not allowed to EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING take part in some activities.
For example, 'since you have been naughty despite many warnings to you, you are no more the leader of your team.
I will choose a child who is obedient and does what he is told'.
Or, 'son, you cannot join the drama lesson because you have not done your homework yet'.
Activity II There are many punishments that will improve the child's performance in school.
Site some of them.
3.5 Rewards Praise is the most usual reward children like very much.
Children like to be praised.
For example, say to a child "Fatima, that is lovely writing, you have tried".
Or, "Rabi has got all her sums right today, very good".
You can reward children for good behaviour or good academic achievement by giving them good marks like 10/10 or 7/10.
Some teachers give prices at the end of the term.
Don't give prices for only top marks in school work but also for those who worked hardest, most punctual, neat or well behaved.
4.0 Conclusion The cultivation of a good relationship between the teacher and the students is very important, without which the teaching and learning exercise does not achieve desired goals.
This is because the teacher- student relationship provides conducive atmosphere for learning to take place.
And children feel safe in a friendly atmosphere.
5.0 Summary Because the teacher is the parent in school, he should be fair in dealing with his students.
He should be firm but fair and should be ready to listen and help in anyway that he could.
That way he and his students teach and learn in happy and conducive setting.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Discuss the ideal teacher - student relationship.
2.
List two ways in which the teacher treats his students fairly.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Outline a classroom setting and discuss how best a teacher would conduct such a class with all the disciplinary measures.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 8.0 References UNESCO (1987), Educational Reforms and Innovations in Africa.
Paris.
UNESCO.
Umar, F.M.
(2001) Trends in Teacher Education.
Department Of Education, BUK, In print.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 1: Concepts and Issues in Teaching UNIT 8: Why Teachers Should Care Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Why Teachers Should Care 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction By now you should have seen that the work of the teacher is most important.
The state of any country in thirty years to come will largely depend on how well the teachers of today perform their duties.
A teacher has great influence on his learners not only by what he says but also by his actions.
This unit discusses why teachers should care about their jobs in terms of their concern about the children and youth that they teach.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to:  realize the importance of teachers  assess the roles and actions of teachers  understand why teachers should care about their work and their students.
3.0 Why Teachers should Care Learners especially children notice everything their teachers do and copy a great deal of it.
It is no use telling children to speak the truth unless they hear their teachers always speaking the truth.
It is no good telling them to be punctual and tidy unless the teacher is punctual and tidy.
The teacher is a guide who shows his students the pathways of the various dimensions of learning.
As a guide, he determines the pace and sequence of learning and decides which road to be followed to achieve desired results.
The teacher, with his zest for teaching awakens the desire in the student to learn.
The impressions given by the teacher to his students is helped by his understanding, insight and friendship towards the students.
The teacher is he who guides the students to a better EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING understanding of the subjects being taught as well as gains a better insight into ways of becoming a useful citizen.
The quality of a good teacher can be measured by how well students get along with each other and with the teacher.
The teacher should as a matter of importance feel welcome and accepted in school.
Activity I Discuss the statement that the teacher is a guide.
Teachers have been classified into in any groups according to how they care about their work and the students they teach.
The most common groups are: (a) The Authoritarian, (b) The Democratic, and (c) The Laissez-faire.
The character of the teachers according to the above classifications is shown in Table 9:1 Table 9.1: Types of Teacher Leadership Authoritarian Democratic Laissez-faire The teacher makes all All decisions are Complete freedom for class decisions.
matters of class decisions with a minimum of discussions, teacher participation.
encouraged and assisted by the teacher.
Techniques and activity Activity perspective The teacher makes it clear that steps dictated by the gained during he will supply information teachers, one at a time so discussion period in only when he is asked, that next step is uncertain, class.
Where technical supplies various materials.
advice is needed, the teacher suggests two or more procedures.
The teacher usually dictates The students are free to Complete non-participation of the particular work task and work with whomever the teacher.
work companion of the they choose, and the student.
divisions are left up to them.
Authoritarian classroom climate produces a great deal of work-oriented behaviour but low degree of student personal involvement.
Teachers who are authoritarian produce students who are unable to plan for themselves, unable to work together cooperatively.
They are easily discouraged and aggressive to weaker members of the class.
These EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING teachers are not concerned about their students.
It is hoped that you will take care not to be authoritarian teachers.
Democratic classroom climate produces less work, but a higher degree of personal involvement of students.
No class is completely democratic as long as teachers have ultimate control.
Students in democratic classrooms are able to work together after the teacher leaves the room.
In addition, they are better able to plan projects together and are less likely to victimize weaker students in school.
4 Laissez-faire classroom climate is characterized by both low moral and low work output.
Activity II Discuss one type of teacher leadership of your choice as discussed in this unit.
The teacher as a counselor bears a great responsibility for advising young people.
Students are continuously faced by problems, many of which are personal.
During trying times, students turn to their teachers for guidance.
In this capacity, the teacher is able to bend and shape students into many forms of behaviour that continue into adulthood.
Teachers, who do not care, create students who are failures in life.
When given an opportunity to offer guidance, it is important that the teacher does not belittle his role.
A teacher is an actor.
He fits Shakespeare's definition of "All the world is a stage and all the men and women are players.
They have exits and their entrances.
And one man in his time plays many parts."
An actor reads over a script, decides he likes it and studies it until he knows it.
When he is competent, he goes on stage and portrays his character so that it communicates with the audience, and they come to know the content of the character before he leaves the theatre.
It is much the same with a caring teacher.
He chooses education and goes to college to study it, until he knows it well (graduation).
Then he goes into the classroom and presents it to his students.
Before the teaching ends, they come to know the teacher and his subject matter.
Uncaring teachers are bad actors.
When a newspaper editor makes a serious mistake, he retraces it.
If a teacher makes a serious mistake, it passes on to other people at a geometric rate, making it difficult to retrace.
Victims of teachers' serious mistakes grow up, marry and have children who disrupt society.
No other profession is in such a critical position with such great influence on the lives of people.
This is why teachers would care about the all EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING round development of the learners.
4.0 Conclusion Now you can see that teachers' attitudes have tremendous influence their students.
A teacher's attitude can determine the success of his students.
If a teacher believes that a student is incapable of learning, it is likely that this belief will be communicated to the student in one way or another in the course of teacher student interaction.
The belief is likely to turn out true for the student to be incapable and vice-versa.
This is why teachers should care about their work as teachers and the students they teach.
5.0 Summary The teachers' attitude positively or negatively directly affects students in their learning and the formation of behaviour that follow them to adulthood.
The teacher by his caring or uncaring position towards his students lives his life positively or negatively respectably.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Discuss how a teacher's caring or uncaring attitude affects his students even at their later lives.
2.
What are some of the ways through which the teacher can improve his relationships with his students?
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Examine the three teacher leadership types as discussed in this unit.
2.
Which would you like to belong to and why?
8.0 References Henderson, F., Bibens, R.I. (1980) Teachers Should Care.
A Social Perspective, Herper and Row Publishers, London.
Taiwo, C.O, The Nigerian Education System: Past, Present and Future Thomas Nelson Nigeria Ltd. EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher UNIT 1: The Qualities of an Ideal Teacher Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction The learner learns many things at school.
He is not only expected to be taught academic subjects only but also be prepared morally and emotionally to take their places in the society.
This is not an easy task for the teacher who is charged with the responsibility of training the younger generation put in his care.
He must have some laudable qualities.
When we think of the teacher, we think of many things.
We think of the teacher as a person, as an educator, as a socializing agent and a transmitter of cultural values and heritage.
In other words, we think of the teacher as one with many roles, as a person first and a transmitter of knowledge.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, learners should be able to:  understand the qualities of an ideal teacher  identify an ideal teacher in any situation, by the qualities outlined in this unit.
3.0 Content There is a saying that "to improve the society, you must improve the school, to improve the school, you must improve the teacher".
What then should be the qualities of an ideal teacher?
Qualities of an Ideal Teacher 1.
Good teachers know what they teach and how to teach it.
2.
They know the human nature.
3.
They know how learning takes place and what motivates EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING behaviour.
4.
They know how to appraise an individual and make educational diagnosis.
5.
They know how to help people to be curious, inventive and creative.
6.
They must be able to work with large or small groups of people of varying ages.
7.
They know how to make people to be ever so ready to learn, to be conscious of their own values, to examine those values and to build values that are more satisfying to them and to their societies.
8.
The ideal teacher must also acquire those disciplines that enable him to understand growth and change in human beings, the way they learn, how they can be motivated, how their strengths can be nurtured and their weaknesses minimized.
More Concrete and Practical Qualities Below are listed specific qualities, which a teacher should have.
For simplicity, I shall refer to the teacher as "he", but obviously the qualities apply to both men and women.
1.
The teacher should be a person worth copying.
2.
He should be very interested in children, and should have endless patience with them.
3.
The children should know they can rely on him and can trust his words.
He should never make ideal promises and threats.
4.
He should guide the children in a friendly manner and they should never be afraid to come to him for help.
5.
He must be interested in the things that interest children and should listen with understanding to their childish views.
6.
He should be enthusiastic and active in his work so that he can pass on his enthusiasm and interest to the children.
7.
He should have knowledge of the needs of children and of the best ways of teaching children at different stages.
He should have the ability to explain things in a simple and imaginative manner.
8.
He should be interested in increasing his own general knowledge.
9.
He should remember that a teacher would never know everything.
He should continue to improve his teaching methods by reading, attending seminars and workshops and by experimenting.
10.
He should be a happy and lively person whom the children and their parents can respect.
Although it is impossible to have all of these in any one person, they all reveal one thing, the complexity of the teacher's role.
The ideal teacher must understand his pupils, guide them and bring out of them their EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING utmost potentials.
An ideal teacher is a guide.
He must be receptive and permissive without sacrificing discipline between himself and his pupils; the teacher must be able to show warmth and affection in his interaction with the children.
In every school, discipline, effective teaching and learning, and good classroom relationship depend to a large extent upon the teacher's personality.
He must be a mirror of what he teaches.
It is not what the teacher thinks or feels but what he does that actually affects the learner.
Umar (2000) asserts that learners tend to remember their teachers more than they remember what he taught them.
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion, the qualities of a good teacher include absolute control over himself, a good behaviour, sincerity, honesty, diligence, industry, punctuality, courtesies and sympathy for his learners.
5.0 Summary The qualities of an ideal teacher are numerous because of the complex role he plays.
He is a friend, a father, a fountain of knowledge, a psychologist, a counselor and much more.
This shows the complexity and importance of the teacher.
A teacher without many of the qualities outlined can do a lot of harm to his pupils in particular and the society at large.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1. Who is an ideal teacher?
2.
Outline any five personal characteristics of the ideal teacher.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss briefly (eight) of the qualities of an ideal teacher.
8.0 References Henderson, G., & R. F. Bibens (1989)A Social Perspective of Teaching.
Harper & Row, Publishers, London.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher UNIT 2: Teachers as Role Models Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction "A teacher affects eternity, he can never tell where his influence stops" (Hippocrates).
This quotation explains everything a teacher is expected to be.
It is true teachers serve as models for learners to copy.
So, how is a teacher expected to behave?
How can he stand a better model for others to emulate?
This unit describes the teacher's functions as models.
The objective is to guide the trainers emulate what teachers are supposed to be as models for others to copy.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, a reader is expected to:  enumerate such qualities expected of a teacher as a model.
 outline the specific qualities that disqualify teachers as role models.
3.0 Content Teachers should realize that how they teach matters as much as what they teach.
Therefore, the impressions set by teachers are very often modeled by the young ones and they last forever.
A teacher must realize that he is a guide - someone who shows his students the pathways to the various destinations of learning.
As a guide, a teacher determines the pace and sequence of the journey.
He decides which route is easy to achieve the desired goal.
It is his responsibility to make the trip interesting and enriching for the traveller (student).
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING  A good teacher should realize that he is a model for his students to emulate, an example which they can follow.
He is to reckon that good or bad, he is a model.
To execute this function, a teacher is helped by his understanding, insights and friendship towards those he comes across.
 To be good role model, a teacher must believe in people.
He must have basic moral and spiritual qualities that cause him to do what he believes is right for his students.
 To be a good role model, a teacher should act as a social extrovert.
He should be committed to abate social inequalities in and outside the classroom.
Fairness is what a teacher is supposed to give.
He is a judge and must function as such.
 A teacher must be dedicated to work - in his subjects, to his students and to his profession.
 A teacher acts as a counselor and as such he bears great responsibility for advising young people on this various problems.
 To the outer society, the teacher should be calm, helpful, and mindful.
He is to be part of the society as opposed to individualism.
 A teacher should not be ethnocentric if he finds himself in another society not his.
He should respect the ways of life of the people he lives with.
He is to adjust his life style to fit the situation at hand.
 A teacher must learn not to show his prejudices especially when they are against the students.
As such, he is to avoid making derogatory remarks about other people.
 A teacher must dress properly, and decently too.
He should mind what he utters and he should behave appropriately.
Activity I Enumerate the qualities expected of a teacher as a role model.
4.0 Conclusion Teachers should note that the more effective teachers are those who play a myriad of social roles, including a guide, a model, and an actor.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Failure to play these roles will result in the educational deprivation of some students.
5.0 Summary This unit enumerated and highlighted some basic expectations of teaching as role models.
The things emphasized include dedication, morality and spiritual role-play of teachers.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
Comment on the following statements.
"Those who educate children well are more to be honoured than even their parents; for these only give them life, than those the arts of living well" - Aristotle "A teacher affects eternity, he can never tell where his influence stops" - Hippocrates 2.
Outline some behaviours you think disqualify a teacher as a role model.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Question: Outline the qualities expected of a teacher as a role model.
8.0 References Taiwo, Ajayi, and Alani.
Contemporary Issues in Teacher Education.
Triumph Book Publishers, Ijebu-Ode.
Garforth, F.W.
(1985) Aims, Values and Educations.
Christy Gate Press, Hall.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher UNIT 3: The Nigerian Union of Teachers (N.U.T) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 3.1 Historical Development of the N.U.T 3.2 Aims and Objectives of the N.U.T 3.3 The role of N.U.T 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction We have just learnt the role of the teacher in the last unit.
We will now look at the functions of the Nigerian Union of Teachers (N.U.T) in relation to the teaching profession in Nigeria.
In the course of this unit, we will also be looking at the History of the Union in terms of the events that informed its formation, and the union's aims and objectives.
2.0 Objectives  At the end of this unit, students should have learnt the history and functions of the Nigerian Union of Teachers.
 You should also be able to analyse the functions of the N.U.T in regards to whether or not the union is a professional body or not.
3.0 Historical Development of the N.U.T Educational development in Nigeria experienced a major setback during the economic depression of 1930s.
At this time, the missionaries who were in-charge of education then found it difficult to pay teachers' salaries.
This led to open conflicts between the teachers and their employers (missions); which resulted in salary cuts.
The teachers then saw the need for them to unite and negotiate with the various missions, and so the Nigerian Union of Teachers was founded in 1930.
The traditional function of the Nigerian Union of Teachers was to negotiate with the employers the best possible salaries and conditions of service for their members.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 3.1 The Aims and Objectives of the N.U.T The N.U.T has the following as its aims: 1.
Study, promote and improve conditions affecting the teaching profession.
2.
Create a better understanding among the teachers in Nigeria.
3.
Be an organ through which the opinions of teachers on matters directly or indirectly affecting the teaching profession could be channeled to the government.
The N.U.T was registered as a trade union in 1941.
Activity I Outline the events that led to the formation of the N.U.T 3.2 The Role of the N.U.T The traditional role of the N.U.T was to negotiate with the employers for the best possible salaries and conditions of service for their members.
One of the reasons why teaching in Nigeria does still not qualify as a profession is the fact that the N.U.T has not yet moved beyond negotiating higher remuneration and seeking improvement in the conditions of service for their members.
It might be expected that the union should try to improve the performances of their members in the cause of doing their work.
This might even be, for example, by organising in-service training for their members as other professions do.
Up till now, the N.U.T does not have a professional journal in which teachers share their classroom experiences with one another.
This shows that the N.U.T is still a salary bargaining organisation and has not developed into a truly professional union.
The nature of this bargaining is almost always in the form of strikes, which disrupt school work.
There is the problem of making collective bargaining effective or meaningful in the absence of established rules for settlement through peaceful negotiations, which is yet to be solved.
Even if the N.U.T was ready to introduce a more effective way of bargaining, the government would have to be prepared to agree.
The N.U.T has a programme in which it helps its members with some welfare issues.
For example, the union purchases foodstuffs to resell to its members at subsidized rates.
The union also helps its members with loans whenever the need arises.
This is good in the sense that with a helpful welfare programme for its members, the members will be in a better frame of mind to do the job well.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Despite the fact that the N.U.T has been known to make some positive contributions to policies in education by presenting the feelings of teachers to the government, there is no doubt that there is plenty of room to improve on the existing functions of the union.
4.0 Summary It would do well for the N.U.T to find ways of improving the performances of teachers rather than play the role of bargaining.
This the union can do by organizing regular in-service programmes for the teachers and providing a forum to share occupational experiences of its members.
To enhance the productivity of teachers, the N.U.T may also encourage its members to go on further education.
This will make the teachers better stuff for their work and will even improve their bargaining power.
The teachers' union can explore open avenues through which teachers can update their skills and knowledge while on their jobs.
5.0 Conclusion Teachers have a poor self-image of their profession.
This is apparent in the fact that majority of teachers would not want their children to be teachers.
If the Nigerian Union of Teachers is to improve its self image and help promote teaching as a profession, it has to find a way of promoting teaching as a profession, and improve the performances of teachers.
Such moves by the N.U.T may include implementation of programmmes or events that would help the teachers to develop intellectual skills, communication skills, discovery skills and the skills of manipulation.
The union would do well to itself and its members if it organizes functions that would bring it and its activities to the attention of the public.
In fact, conferences with the parents-teachers association would go a long way to gain the sympathy and cooperation of parents in the effort to improve the welfare of the teachers as well as to enhance teaching and learning in schools.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise Hold an interview with a local or state Secretary of the N.U.T to find out from him the recent achievements of the union.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 1.
Discuss the role of the Nigerian Union of Teachers.
2.
Give some suggestions as to how the Nigerian Union of Teachers can improve the lot of its members as well as help improve the standard of education.
8.0 References Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1995) History of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan, Sarnadex Nigerian Commercial Enterprises.
MODULE 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING UNIT 4: The Parents-Teachers Association (P.T.A) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content Formation of the Parents-Teachers Association (P.T.A) P.T.A at School Level P.T.A at Village Level P.T.A at District Level P.T.A at Local Government Level P.T.A at State Level Registration of P.T.A The P.T.A Meetings 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction Parents-Teachers Association (P.T.A) like the name implies is an association of parents that have children in schools and the teachers who teach in these schools.
The parents-teachers association is important to the development of education because the parent and the teacher have the most direct and lasting impression on the child.
The Parents- Teachers Association is a free body of people made up of all the teachers of a school and the parents whose children attend that school.
This association is one of the most effective machinery for solving problems related to finance, staffing, discipline and other day-to-day school affairs.
2.0 Objectives By the time the student gets to the end of this unit, he should be able to:  see and appreciate the link between the parent and the teacher in terms of the education of the student.
Activity I Discuss the aims of the Parents-Teachers Association in schools.
3.0 Content EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING The Parents-Teachers Association is very important in the lives of the teacher, the student and the parent.
Every school at primary and secondary levels has to form a Parents-Teachers Association.
This is because both the parent and the teacher have come to realize the importance of working together to enhance the education of the child.
The formation of the association starts with the following aims and objectives: i.
To encourage and involve parents to take keen interest in the education of their children.
ii.
To develop cordial relationship between the teachers-parents and community for overall educational development.
iii.
To enhance parents' contribution (moral and others) to supplement government effort towards the improvement of education of their children.
Formation of the Parents-Teachers Association (P.T.A) Education is the responsibility of the community, the state and the nation in general; therefore the formation of P.T.A should cut across the various sections of the society in order to achieve maximum support and cooperation of all concerned.
In view of this, P.T.As are formed at various levels in order that the P.T.A may function uniformly.
The levels at which P.T.As are formed are as follows: 1.
School level 2.
Village level 3.
District level 4.
Local Government level 5.
State council Now let us look at the functions of the P.T.A at all these levels.
P.T.A at School Level The Parents-Teachers Association at the school level is charged with the responsibility of upholding the interest of the parents in the education of their children as well as provides a forum for improved relationships between the school, the community and the government.
P.T.A at Village Level At the village level, the P.T.A aims at monitoring its activities in its areas.
For example: (a) to embark on wider and dynamic publicity on the importance of education for their children; (b) to see to the satisfactory enrolment and attention of pupils in all schools in the area; EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING (c) to see to the adequate staffing and staff accommodation as the need arises; and (d) to embark on certain projects to supplement government efforts for the improvement of education and pupils welfare in schools.
P.T.A at District Level The P.T.A at District level is to coordinate and review the activities of all the village P.T.As within the district area.
It should also aim at: (a) wider public enlightenment on the importance of education and the responsibility of parents to their children.
(b) to supplement government efforts by encouraging communal projects and individual contributions to the improvement of education in their district.
P.T.A at Local Government Level The P.T.A at local government level acts as an advisory body to the local education authority in terms of the following: a.
To supplement government efforts in the public awareness of the importance of education for the children of their local government.
b.
To oversee the activities of all P.T.As in the Local Government.
P.T.A at State Level The state P.T.A council aims at supplementing government efforts in promoting quality education and also helps in developing a healthy competition among all P.T.As in the state.
To serve as a link between the parents and the state authorities on crucial issues pertaining to education of their children.
Registration of P.T.As In order that the P.T.A would be officially recognized, it is necessary to be registered by the State Education Board on the recommendation of the Local Education Authority.
The registration would enable the board to harmonize the establishment and running of the P.T.As' activities through standardized measures that would help bring efficiency and effectiveness in their existence as voluntary organisations.
The criteria for registration of P.T.As are as follow: i.
The school to be registerd must be legally established and approved by government.
ii.
Completion of application forms and signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the particular P. T.A.
iii.
The application must be recommended by the Education Secretary of the Local Education Authority.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING The P.T.A normally has the following officers to lead the association:- 1.
Chairman 2.
Vice-chairman 3.
Secretary 4.
Assistant Secretary 5.
Public Relations Officer 6.
Financial Sec/Treasurer 7.
A member of the N.U.T 8.
A member of the N.U.T 9.
The Imam The Parents-Teachers Association is sanctioned by the government who encourages individual schools to form the association if they have not already done so.
The association is very active in most schools.
Parents and teachers meet every month-end to discuss matters affecting the schools.
The P.T.A Meetings During the Parents-Teachers Association meetings, the school head gives information about the school, the students and any other issue pertaining to the school.
Parents are free to ask questions or contribute on any issue under discussion.
Parents can also ask to see the work of their children at such meetings.
In the event of any disciplinary case(s), the parents-teachers meeting discusses and decides on the best ways to tackle the matters.
The involvement of the parents in the affairs of the school provides avenue to look at things more carefully, encourages honest thinking and avoids common prejudices.
4.0 Conclusion Most parents believe they know their children better than the teachers.
In essence, parents believe that what they see and hear around the house is more accurate than what you hear and see around the school.
Adequate contact between parents and teachers will allow both parties to construct a truer picture of a child's academic potentials and behaviour.
The teacher's work of teaching and controlling children would be made easier when they comparatively involve parents in the process.
Parents- teachers meetings are a good way to get this cooperation.
The P.T.A is a good forum for solving pupils' disciplinary problems.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 5.0 Summary Parents-Teachers Associations afford both parents and teachers the opportunity to evaluate children's work, problems and together find ways of helping the child to grow up to be useful to himself and his society.
The P.T.A meetings provide good opportunities to give parents advice on such topics as hygiene, good diet and the child's need for sufficient sleep.
The teachers in an effort to advise parents should not be proud or showing off otherwise the parents may feel angry or ashamed and may not continue to attend such meetings.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise Assess the extent of contribution of your former school's P.T.
A to the development of the school.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss the functions of the Parents-Teachers Association at the various levels mentioned in this unit.
8.0 References Jowit, H. (1980) Principles of Education for African Teacher.
Longman, London.
Banjo, S. A.
A West African Teachers' Handbook.
University of London Press.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher UNIT 5: The Role of Subject Teachers Associations Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction We have just learnt the role, functions and objectives of the Parents- Teachers Associations.
We now go on to discuss the role of Subject Teachers Associations in relation to education.
These are associations that are involved in teaching and learning in particular subject areas as they are taught and learnt in schools.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, i.
Students should be able to outline and understand the different Subjects Associations in Nigeria.
It is expected that students would eventually become members of some to these associations when they start work as teachers.
ii.
The students should also be informed enough to make their own contributions to the improvement of these associations.
Subject Teachers Associations are groupings of people who are specialists in particular subjects.
They teach these subjects in schools.
These teachers now come together to form associations in their individual subject areas.
The subject areas include the sciences like Physics, Biology and Chemistry.
Other subjects, which are not science based whose teachers come together to form subject associations include Social Studies, Mathematics, English, History and Home Economics.
Membership of the Associations The conditions of membership of the subject teachers associations are as follows: 1.
Specialization in the particular subject area by training.
2.
Teaching of the particular subjects in schools.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 3.
Sometimes inspectors of the particular subjects from the state school boards or ministries of education.
By their training and practise in the particular subject areas, the teachers feel the need to come together to form a forum in which they discuss areas of concern as far as the teaching and learning of the particular subjects are concerned.
They work towards the upliftment of the particular subjects in terms of teaching and learning as well as the teachers' professional development.
Activity 1 What are the criteria for the membership of the subject teachers associations?
3.0 Content There are a number of Subject Teachers Associations in Nigeria.
These are divided into two groups for the purpose of this unit.
The groups are based on education levels, namely;- (a) The secondary school level and (b) The higher education level.
At the secondary school level, there are associations like: i.
The Science Teachers Association of Nigeria (STAN) ii.
The Mathematics Teachers Association iii.
The History Teachers Association iv.
The English Teachers Association v. The Nigerian Social Studies Association These are professional associations that have as their main objective, the improvement of their various disciplines.
They go a long way to ease the teaching of their individual subjects for their members and learning for their students.
These subject associations go the extra mile to produce text and work books in their various subjects.
They meet often to discuss important issues in the teaching and learning of their subjects.
Some of them like the STAN are very strong.
Their effort at producing text and workbooks yields some financial dividends, which make them all the more strong.
The associations are professional in nature and keep tract of development in their different subjects.
As a service to the students, they organise quiz competitions at state and national levels.
This effort has helped the teaching and learning of the various subjects.
Activity II In what ways do the subject teachers associations help the teaching and learning of their various subjects?
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING The subject or discipline associations in Nigeria at higher education level include: 1.
Counselling Association of Nigeria (CASSON) 2.
National Association of Educational Administration 3.
National Association of Adult Educators All of these associations have as their main objectives, the promotion and improvement of their various fields.
They organize workshops and seminars at which they share experiences by way of paper presentations and discussion.
They share experiences in the teaching and learning of the subjects in terms of: a. actual teaching by the teachers, b. the teaching facilities in the form of classrooms, laboratories and libraries, c. teaching materials or aids, d. students interest in the subjects, e. societal awareness of the importance of the subject, f. the practising teachers interest in the teaching of the particular subjects (positive or negative), g. sometimes the associations also deliberate and plan activities towards sensitizing the government to the various requests of the practising teachers towards the improvement of teaching and learning of the particular subjects in and outside schools: h. the subject teachers associations plan activities or programmes aimed at the teachers' personal and professional development.
4.0 Conclusion We have just discussed subject teachers associations at various levels.
The aim of these associations is to promote and improve their areas of work and study and to keep abreast with new developments in the areas of study.
They are professionals in nature, well organised, and plan different types of extra-curricular activities that would inform and encourage the teachers and students of the particular subjects, as they are taught and learnt in schools, as part of study subjects or specialization areas at higher education level.
5.0 Summary Subject Teachers Associations exist for the benefit of their members and that of the discipline that they represent.
They encourage further research and presentations of papers on their different subjects.
They are professionals in nature and go as far as publishing text and or workbooks for the students, and teachers.
These efforts are directed towards the professionalization of the different subjects as well as the improvement of the teaching and learning of the subjects in schools, and EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING the professional development of teacher.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise Identify four (4) Subject Teachers Associations and discuss how they help in the teaching and learning of their subjects.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the membership of subjects teachers associations in Nigeria.
2.
Show how they contribute to teaching and learning of the particular subjects in schools.
8.0 References Flanders, N. A.
(1980) Analysing Teachers Behaviour.
Addison Wesley Pub.
Fafunwa, A.
B (1995) History of Education in Nigeria.
NPS Educational Publishers, lbadan.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher UNIT 6: The Old Students Association Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Role of Old Students Association 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction You have just learnt about the parents-teachers associations and how they help in educating children and youth.
Now we go on to learn about another association that helps in education.
This is the Old Students Association.
The Old Students Association is defined as a voluntary and organized group of one-time students of a particular school seeking to improve on educational decisions, policies and their implementation in the school.
2.0 Objectives  The student is expected to list and describe some of the objectives of the old students associations at the end of this unit.
Activity I State what you understand to be Old Students Associations.
3.0 The Role of Old Students Associations The old students associations came into being as a result of the short fall in the effort of government to fund education adequately.
With the tremendous expansion of education, more schools were established and more blocks of classrooms were added to existing schools.
This means that more children and youth are attending schools especially with the Universal Primary Education launched.
The cost of running these schools is quite enormous, and government alone could not carry the burden.
On realizing this, communities now came in to render some assistance.
Part of this effort is the formation of old students associations.
This is a grouping of people who have gone through the EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING same school, have graduated and are now engaged in some work or trade.
They come together to help the school in anyway they can.
The nature of assistance rendered to their former schools varies in nature and size.
The association imposes levy on its members to be paid at specified periods.
This association functions in two ways.
First, they provide relevant information about their schools and about education in general especially as it was in their yester years.
Secondly, they function as critiques who make their positions known to governments, educational administrators and the general community about any school or education issue.
In these functions, they provide linkages between the school, the government and the general public.
Nature of assistance rendered by the Old Students Associations Building additional classroom blocks  Construction of administrative blocks  Provision of school vehicles  Provision of teaching and learning materials  Provision of class and office furniture and most recently  provision of scholarship to brilliant students.
In addition to the above, the Old Students Associations contribute to the improvement of education through the following: 1.
They fight against any other association or individual that they see to be detrimental to the provision of good education in their schools.
2.
The association influences the government and the general public towards the improvement of education.
3.
They liaise with any other organisation formally or informally to address improvement efforts.
4.
They maintain government and community support for a long time because of their individual members position in government and society.
The Size of Assistance The old students association renders assistance to their old schools in varying degrees.
Some very affluent ones, that is those whose membership includes very rich individuals do as much as sponsor very intelligent students to further their education, sometimes in very expensive courses like medicine.
This the old students do in a bid to uplift the educational standards of their former schools.
On many occasions, the old students associations organise fund raising activities to generate more money for the projects they plan for their schools.
These activities range from:  Sales of school magazines and or Newsletter  Bazaar EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING  Sales of personal old clothes, household and other items  Football matches  Setting up of a small school clinic or canteen Money realized from these activities is used for some capital projects like building structures or purchase of school items.
These efforts go a long way in uplifting the moral of the teachers and pupils who now have a better school environment to work in.
The result of such efforts usually is a rise in the standard of teaching and learning in which affected schools record more passes in final examinations.
Activity II Discuss some of the ways through which Old Students Associations help to improve the standards of education in their former schools.
4.0 Conclusion The Old Students Associations are a saving grace to our educational system especially where they are predominant, the primary and secondary school levels.
They provide many essential services to the school, which boost the task of teaching and learning in such schools.
5.0 Summary With the rapid increase in school enrollment and the task of providing many other social services, the cost of education becomes a little much for the government to bear.
Associations like the old students associations come in to help out where it can.
About every primary and secondary school in this country has an old students association unless of course those schools that were recently established.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise Examine the role of the old students association in your primary or secondary school and draw up a list of contributions that it has made to the school.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Examine the functions of Old Students Associations in the upliftment of education in schools.
2.
Give your own opinion on how these associations can further improve teaching and learning in schools.
8.0 References EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING Kano State Ministry of Education (1999), Old Students Associations Report, Kano Printing Press.
Educational Renaissance in Northern Nigeria (A Nososa Publication) Edited by: Habibu Angulu Sani (1998) Desmond Tutu Publishers, Okene.
MODULE 2: The Making of an Ideal Teacher EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING UNIT 7: The Status of Teachers in Nigeria Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction Teaching profession in Nigeria has many setbacks.
Notable among them is how members of the society look upon the profession.
The nature of the problems runs as follows: Teachers are key elements in the development of any society as education is.
But the problem is that the status of teachers remains very low.
Teachers are looked upon by the society as downtrodden who are at least in the strata of the society.
What is the cause of this and how can the problem be remedied?
This unit discusses the present status of teachers and look at the possible solutions to the problem.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Outline the possible causes that make teaching profession of low status.
 Offer possible suggestions that might uplift the status of teachers.
3.0 Content The Status of Teachers — An Overview Historically, teaching profession was of noble origin.
Very long time ago, teachers were regarded as top members of the social strata.
The knowledge they possessed enabled them to be regarded as such.
History has it that teachers had been at the services of kings and rulers of world ancient kingdoms in Greek, Asia and Europe.
The service they rendered as transmitters of knowledge made them to be noble.
In old Greece, Spartan and Atheman societies, teachers were employed not only to EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING teach the royals, but also to offer military and political advices.
By then teachers were handled with care as uncooked egg in someone's hand.
The teacher at the beginning of Nigeria educational system was also of noble origin.
When the British introduced the formal educational system in what is today Nigeria through the missionaries, the then teachers were of high status.
With the self-government, teachers continued to enjoy the pride their predecessors had in the ancient times during colonialism.
Factors Responsible for the Falling Status of Teaching  Number of teachers compared with other professions in Nigeria is very large.
 Recruitment of teachers anyhow to meet the teachers' requirement of the UPE scheme.
 The coming into teaching profession of many unqualified teachers.
 Lack of strong unionism to press for teacher's status.
 Poor salary for teachers as a result of governmental policies and large number of employed teachers.
 Teacher themselves have a poor self-image of themselves.
 Deplorable conditions of services government made teachers to be in.
 Poor performance of teachers due to some factors stated above.
Activity I 1.
Read this statements and judge it TRUE or FALSE History has it that teachers did not enjoy any pride in ancient kingdoms.
Ways to Improve the Status of Teachers Participants to be led to discuss some possible ways to alleviate the problems.
4.0 Conclusion As a matter of fact, the status of teachers within Nigerian context is very low.
A number of factors contribute to that.
These factors need to be carefully considered by teachers in training so as to seek remedy to the problem.
Unless care is taken, teaching profession will die completely and the society will suffer at large.
5.0 Summary This unit gives an overview of the status of teaching profession by tracing the historical aspect of the profession.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING  Factors responsible for the falling in the status of teaching profession are outlined.
 Participants have been taxed to study the factors and think of possible solutions.
6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 1.
What other possible reasons can you give in addition to those outline on the falling status of teachers in Nigeria?
2.
Outline some possible solutions that might help to uplift the status of teachers in Nigeria.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Questions 1.
Outline the possible causes that make teaching profession of low status.
2.
What possible suggestions would you give to uplift the status of teaching profession in Nigeria?
8.0 References Onwuka, U.
The Status of Teachers in Nigeria.
Cudimac Series No.
10 Nsukka.
Allan, P. (1983 ed).
The Effective Teacher in Primary and Secondary Schools.
Wordlock Educational, London.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING MODULE 2: The Making of An Ideal Teacher UNIT 8: Strategies for Professionalizing Teaching in Nigeria Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Content: Strategies for Professionalizing Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Self-Assessment Exercise 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References 1.0 Introduction Not until recently, it has been established that teaching is far from being recognized as a profession in Nigeria.
Unfortunately, the attitude of the society to teaching profession has made this statement applicable up till today.
You have learnt in the first unit of this course that a profession deals with a special field of knowledge of information and its practitioners must have had special training in the field.
They must also have Unions, which would protect the professional interest of their members, and devise programmes that would enhance the professional services to the public.
In this unit, we will discuss ways and means of making teaching a profession.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: explain the issues that make up a profession.
discuss the strategies that would professionalize teaching in Nigeria.
3.0 Strategies for Professionalizing Teaching The process of professionalism is a quest for status and legal control and monopoly over an occupation by its members.
It is an attempt by an occupation to have full control over its work and thereby enhance its social standing in the society.
In the effort of professionalizing teaching, there must be first and foremost the elimination of hitchhikers who go into teaching as last resorts.
This can be done in many ways.
All professions by virtue of their specialized qualifications and by virtue of the public services they render have control devices on their members.
If EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING membership is open to all both trained and untrained, then it is not a profession any more.
The teaching service in Nigeria should control its membership such that all those to be considered teachers are those that have gone through stipulated and approved teacher training programmes.
These would now be registered, and no teaching appointment shall be given to any unregistered person.
The practice whereby everybody and anybody can become a teacher should be stopped immediately to save this trainer occupation.
Secondly, all those Arts and Science graduates who do not have any teaching qualification should be called upon to return to their universities to acquire a diploma in education and get registered.
Although this is hardly enough to serve the purpose, nevertheless, it is better than nothing.
It is not good for teaching to accept people who have no teaching qualification or experience into its fold.
3.1 The N.U.T One of the most effective ways to professionalize teaching is through the effective functioning and a good professional organisation of the teachers themselves.
The N.U.T should leave up to its professional responsibilities to teachers by ensuring that teachers do adhere to their professional ethics.
Organizing lectures, seminars and workshops can do this.
It would help greatly if the N.U.T makes it a point of duty to organise on regular basis Teacher - based Radio or Television course or evening course for their members.
This will enhance their performance and even image.
The N.U.T should also publish on regular intervals professional journals that will nourish and improve teachers' competence in teaching and learning.
The union should also ensure that only aspirants with required qualifications are employed to teach.
3.2 Teacher Training Institutions On the part of the teacher trainers, post secondary or higher education institutions admissions should only be given to students who have shown keen interest in teaching as a profession.
Education departments can do without the rejects of other departments.
Only students with As and Bs as grades requirements for admission should be admitted.
Candidates with weak scores Ds & Es should be rejected right away.
Prospective teachers who would be the trainers of other professionals should be the best over and above all others.
If not, who would be able to produce adequate and competent manpower if they themselves are not?
Teacher training institutions should train aspiring teachers very well, so that academically competent teachers are produced who would later EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING train others whether as teachers or as other professionals.
They should be taught the foundation courses in education such as philosophy, psychology, history and sociology of education.
This will make the graduating teacher an all round academic, which is what the teaching profession needs most at the moment.
Teachers should be sound in knowledge and be of good behaviour so as to be able to hold their heads in the society and command respect and power in their work.
Government should ensure that 25% of its annual national budget expenditure should go to education as contained in the Vision 2010 document.
Budgetary allocation to education and Education Tax Fund should be properly channeled to fund education.
Through such funding, there would be better infrastructure and materials, which will ensure proper and adequate teaching and learning environment which is a giant step in the professionalism of the oldest and most important occupation.
A profession is autonomous if it is self-governed and can control its functions.
Once an occupation has achieved these, it has achieved professionalism.
Teaching is an old occupation dating from the time of human existence.
But despite its age, it has not been able to command as much respect and power as professions of Law and Medicine.
The process of professionalism is a strong one.
It is an attempt by the profession to grab power from those formal agencies, which have traditionally exercised control over it.
There is no doubt that the professionalism of teaching in Nigeria would give the Nigerian teachers the long sought for power and prestige.
3.3 Government Government being the biggest employer of teachers in Nigeria should revise the salaries and other benefits of teachers so that they get paid well.
This will boost their societal status, which will in the long run boost their confidence in their work and in their communities.
Any worker who is poorly paid is placed low in the society and does not command respect or power even in his place of work.
The recognized professionals in Nigeria are very well paid.
This makes them live comfortably and respectably in the societies.
Government should also make policies that will raise the standard of education and further raise the status of teachers, for how can we have an education system that will rise above its teachers?
Any and every education system is a replica of its teachers.
Good, competent and confident teachers, provide good functional educational system.
If the members of an occupation are not professionals, the practice of such an occupation may remain stagnant and may not improve.
EDU 112 PROFESSIONALISM IN TEACHING 4.0 Conclusion The move for professionalism in teaching involves every segment of the society especially the training institutions, the Nigerian Union of Teachers and Government.
Whatever plan of action either of the concerned segment of the society has must be approved and encouraged by government.
5.0 Summary The government, educational institutions and the Nigeria union of Teachers as well as the teachers themselves all have their individual contributions to make in the effort of professionalizing teaching in Nigeria.
It is a collective responsibility and all hands must be on deck to save this important occupation that has a good measure of influence on our lives.
6.0 Self- Assessment Exercise Write a short note on the strategies for professionalizing teaching in Nigeria as stated in this unit.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Give your views (for or against) the assertion that teacher education in Nigeria can never be a profession.
8.0 References Musa'azi, J.C.S.
(1988).
Planning and Development of Education.
George Owen.
London.
Fafunwa, A.B (1972) "Teacher's Education" in Adaralegbe, A.
(ed) A Philosophy for Nigerian National Curriculum Conference, 8 – 2 September, 1969 Ibadan, Heinemann Books (Nigeria) Ltd.
