 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 720 COURSE TITLE: ENGLISH METHODS 1  THE COURSE GUIDE EDU 720 ENGLISH METHODS COURSE DEVELOPER Dr. Uche M. Okonkwo Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City COURSE WRITTER Dr. R. B. Danner Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City COURSE EDITOR Dr. Uche M. Okonkwo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos PROGRAMME LEADER Dr. Uche M. Okonkwo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos COURSE CORDINATOR Dr Dorathy Ufoha School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos 2  ENG 720 English Methods CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to the Course Guide 3.2 A Guide through the Course 3.2.1 Course Aims and Objectives 3.2.2 Course Materials and Structure 3.2.3 How to Get the Most from the Course 3.3 Course Delivery 3.3.1 Tutorials 3.3.2 Facilitation 3.3.3 Counselling 3.4 Assessment 3.4.1 Self Assessment Exercises 3.4.2 Tutor-Marked Assignments 3.4.3 Final Examination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to EDU 720 English Methods, which is a two-credit unit course offered in the second year to students of the undergraduate degree programme in B.Ed.
English.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to the Course Guide This course guide is for distance learners enrolled in the B.Ed.
English programme of the National Open University of Nigeria.
This guide is one of the several resource tools available to you to help you successfully complete this course and ultimately your programme.
There are fifteen study units in this course.
There are no prerequisites for studying this course.
It has been developed with appropriate local examples suitable for training prospective teachers of English in Nigeria.
In this guide, you will find very useful information about the course aims, objectives, what the course is about, what course materials you will be using, i  ENG 720 English Methods available services to support your learning, information on assignments and examination.
It also offers you guidelines on how to plan your time for study, the amount of time you are likely to spend on each study unit, your tutor-marked assignments.
I strongly recommend that you go through this course guide and complete the feedback form at the end before you begin your study of the course.
The feedback form must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator along with your first assignment.
This guide also provides answers to several of your questions.
However, do not hesitate to contact your study centre if you have further questions.
I wish you the best in your learning experiences and successful completion of this course.
3.2 A Guide Through the Course 3.2.1 Course Aims and Objectives Aims This course aims at giving you an overview of the theories, approaches and methods in teaching English as a second language.
You will learn the methods and techniques of teaching language skills and sub-skills.
You will also learn the techniques of constructing language test items, scheme of work and lesson plans.
Objectives There are objectives to be achieved in each study unit of the course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
On completion of this course, you should be able to: • discuss the major approaches to teaching English as a second language; • discuss the different teaching methods; • distinguish the different methods and discuss their merits and demerits; • discuss the four basic language skills and identify their interrelatedness; • discuss procedures for teaching the basic language skills and sub-skills; • discuss how to teach the three different genres of literature; • identify different types of language tests; • construct credible language tests; and • prepare schemes of work and lesson plans.
3.2.2 Course Materials and Structure ii  ENG 720 English Methods Course Summary Module 1 introduces you to the major approaches to teaching English as a second language and the teaching of the four basic language skills.
Module 2 deals with the teaching of language sub-skills including literature-in-English, and techniques for constructing language tests.
It also deals with the preparation of schemes of work and lesson plans.
There are fifteen study units in this course.
Each study unit consists of one week s work and should take you about three hours to complete.
It includes specific objectives, guidance for study, reading material and self-assessment exercises.
Together with the tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual study units.
Study Plan This table is a presentation of the course and how long it should take you to complete each study unit and the accompanying assignments.
Weeks/Activity Unit Title of Study Unit Assignment Course Guide 1 Course Guide Form MODULE 1 MAJOR APPROACHE S TO TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 1 THE Grammar-Translation Method and the Direct Method 2 Assignment 2 The Audio-lingual, the Situational-context and Communicative Teaching Methods 3 Assignment 3 Teaching Listening Skills 4 Assignment 4 Teaching Speaking Skills 5 Assignment 5 Teaching Reading Skills 6 Assignment 6 Teaching Sound Skills 7 Assignment 7 Teaching Writing Skills 8 TMA 1 to be submitted MODULE 2 TEACHING LANGUAGE SUB-SKILLS 1 Teaching Vocabulary 9 Assignment 2 Teaching Grammatical Structures 10 Assignment 3 Teaching Reading Comprehension and Summary 11 Assignment 4 Teaching Literature-in-English 1: Prose 12 Assignment 5 Teaching Literature-in-English 2: Drama TMA 2 to be and Poetry 13 submitted MODULE 3 LANGUAGE TESTING 1 Test Types, Functions/Uses, and Qualities of Language Test 14 Assignment iii  ENG 720 English Methods 2 Basic Steps in Language Test Construction 15 Assignment 3 Writing Scheme of Work and Lesson Plans TMA 3 to be 16 submitted Revision 17 Examination 18 Total 18 • Now use this overview to plan your personal timetable.
References/Further Reading Your course material is the main text for this course.
However, you are encouraged to consult other sources as provided for you in the list of references and further reading below.
References American heritage dictionary of English Language (2002).
4th Edition.
New York: Houghton Mufflin Company.
Burns, A.
(1998).
Teaching speaking.
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 18: 102 123.
Brine, D. (1998).
Teaching writing skills.
London: Longman.
Devine, T.G.
(1962).
Listening skills schoolwide: Activities and programs.
Urbana IL: National Council of Teachers of English Emmert, P. (1994).
A definition of listening.
The Listening Post 51 (6).
Gbenedio, U.B.
(1996).
Teaching and learning Enlish as a second language.
Benin: New Era Publication.
Goodman, K.S.
(1971).
Psycholinguistic universals in the reading process.
In P. Pimsleur and T. Quinn (eds).
The psychology of second language learning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Graham, J.
(1994).
Four strategies to improve the speech of adult learners.
TESOL Journal 3(3) 26 28. iv  ENG 720 English Methods Lado, R. (1961).
Language testing.
London: Longman.
Nichols, R.G.
(1973).
Factors in listening comprehension.
Speech Monographs 15.
Palmatier, R.A. (1973).
A notetaking system for learning.
Journal of Reading 17.
Richards, J.C. and Rodgers, T.S.
(2000).
Approaches and methods in language teaching.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schmitt, N. (2008).
Instructed second language vocabulary learning.
Learning Teaching Research 12 (3), 329 363.
Further Readings Alderson, J.C, Clapham, C. and Wall, D. (2001).
Language test construction and evaluation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allen, V. (1983).
Techniques in teaching vocabulary .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Allen, M, Noel, R.C, Rienzi, B.M.
and McMillin, D.T.
(2002).
Outcomes assessment handbook.
California State University, Institute of Teaching and Learning.
Long Beach, CA.
Bacha, N. (2002).
Testing writing in the EFL classroom: Students expectations.
Forum English Teaching 40 (2), 14 19.
Bailey, K.M.
and Savage, L. (1994).
New ways in teaching speaking.
Alexandria, V.A.
( ).
Teachers of English to Speakers of other Languages.
v  ENG 720 English Methods Bamford, J. and Day, R.R.
(eds) (2004).
Extensive reading activities for teaching language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boadi, L.A, Grieve, D.W. and Nwankwo, B.O.
(1968).
Grammatical structure and its teaching.
Ibadan: African Universities Press Ltd. Brent, R. and Anderson, P. (1993).
Developing children s classroom listening strategies.
Reading Teacher, 47 (2), 122 126.
Brown, H.D.
(2000).
Principles of language learning and teaching.
(46th ed.)
New York: Longman.
Brown, H.D.
(2001).
Teaching by principles: An interactive approach to language pedagogy.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall Regents.
Burley-Allen, M. (1982).
Listening: The forgotten skill.
New York: Wiley.
Carrel, P, Devine, J. and Eskey, D. (eds) (1988).
Interactive approaches to second language reading.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carter, R, Hughes, R. and McCarthy, M. (2000).
Exploring grammar in context.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carter, R. and Long, M.N.
(1991).
Teaching literature.
Harlow: Longman.
Carter, R. and McCarthy, M. (1988).
Vocabulary and language teaching.
London: Longman.
Celce-Murcia, M. and Hilles, S. (1988).
Techniques and resources in teaching grammar.
London: Oxford University Press.
vi  ENG 720 English Methods Coady, J.
(1997).
Vocabulary acquisition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dubin, F. and Olstitain, E. (1986).
Course design: Developing programmes and materials for language learning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Duff, A. and Maley, A.
(1990).
Literature.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harris, D.P.
(1969).
Testing English as a second language.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hedge, T. (1988).
Writing.
London: Howatt, A.P.
and Widdowson, H.G.
(1985).
A history of ELT 1400 to the present.
(2nd ed).
London: Oxford University Press.
Koda, K. (2005).
Insights into second language: A cross-linguistic approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Krahnke, K. (1988).
Approaches to syllabus design for foreign language teaching.
New York: Prentice-Hall/Regents.
Larzar, G. (1991).
Literature and language teaching.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laye, V. (1979).
Teaching to read and understand.
In E. Ubahakwe (ed).
The teaching of English studies.
Ibadan: University Press.
McNamara, T. (2000).
Language testing.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nunan, D. (1988).
Syllabus design.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
vii  ENG 720 English Methods Peter, P. (1991).
A synthesis of methods for interactive listening.
In M. Celce-Murcia (ed).
Teaching English as a second or foreign language (2nd ed).
New York: Newbury House.
Quirk, R. et.
al.
(1985).
A grammar of contemporary English.
New York: Longman.
Raimes, A.
(1985).
Techniques in teaching writing.
London: Oxford University Press.
Rogers, T.S.
(2001).
Language teaching methodology.
ERIC Digest September 2001 Issue Paper.
Yorkey, M. (1970).
Study skills in English.
London: McGraw-Hill.
Vendler, H. (1997).
Poems, poets, poetry.
Boston: Bedford/St.
Martins.
3.2.3 How to Get the most from your Course In distance learning, the Study Units replace the university lecturer.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the course materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecture.
Just as a lecturer might give you in-class exercise, your Study Units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times.
These are called Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs).
Each of the Study Units has common features, which are designed to aid your learning.
The first feature is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
Self-assessment exercises are interspersed throughout each Study Unit and answers are given at the end.
These exercises are designed to help you recall what you have studied and to evaluate your learning by yourself.
You should do each self-assessment exercise as you come to it in the Study Unit.
Working on these exercises will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments, which you will submit and the final examination.
The summary at the end of each unit also helps you to recall all the main points discussed in the content of each unit.
viii  ENG 720 English Methods It should take you about three hours to read the contents of a Study Unit, do the exercises and assignments.
When you have completed the first study unit, take note of how long it took you and use this information to draw up a timetable to guide your study for the rest of your course.
The wide margins on the pages of your course book are meant for you to make notes of main ideas or key points which you can use when revising the course.
If you make use of all these features, you will significantly increase your changes of passing the course.
3.3 Course Delivery As an open and distance learner, you learn when you interact with the content in your course material in the same way as a student interacts with the teacher in a conventional institution.
You also learn when you are guided through the course, however you are not taught by a human being.
Instead, your course material is your teacher, and as such you will not be able to get answers to any questions, which may arise from your study of the material.
It is for this reason that, in addition to the course material which you have received, the delivery of this course is supported by tutorial facilitation, and counselling through support services.
Although these services are not compulsory, you are encouraged to take maximum advantage of them.
3.3.1 Tutorials The total number of tutorial hours for this course is 8 hours for the semester.
Tutorial sessions form a part of your learning process as you have an opportunity to receive face-to-face contact with your tutorial facilitator and to receive answers to questions or clarifications, which you may have.
Also, you may contact your tutorial Facilitator by phone or e-mail.
Tutorials also provide opportunity for you to discuss with classmates.
On your part, you will be expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units, write your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from tutorial sessions.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Tutorial sessions are optional.
However, the benefits of participating in them provide you a forum for interaction and peer group discussions, which will minimize the isolation you may experience as a distance learner.
3.3.2 Facilitation Facilitation is learning that takes place both during and outside of tutorial sessions.
Your tutorial Facilitator guides your learning by doing the following: • provide answers to your questions during tutorial sessions, on phone or by e- mail; ix  ENG 720 English Methods • coordinate group discussions; • provide feedback on your assignments; • pose questions to confirm learning outcomes; • coordinate, mark and record your assignment/examination score, and • monitor your progress.
The content of this course material is available in print or CD formats, and also on the university website.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Time of facilitation is flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial Facilitator.
You should contact your tutorial Facilitator if: • you do not understand any part of the Study Unit; • you have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutorial Facilitator s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
3.3.3 Counselling Counselling forms a part of your learning because it is provided to make your learning experience easier.
Counselling is available to you at two levels, academic and personal counselling.
Student Counsellors are available at the study centre to provide guidance for personal issues that may affect your studies.
Your Study Centre Manager and tutorial Facilitators can assist you with questions on academic matters such as: course materials, facilitation, grades and so on.
Make sure that you have the telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of the staff at the School on which your programme is housed.
3.4 Assessment There are three components of assessment for this course, namely: Self- Assessment Exercises and assignments at the end of each study unit, the Tutor- Marked Assignment and a written examination at the end of the semester.
In doing these assignments, you are expected to use the information gathered during your study of the course.
Below are detailed explanations on how to do each assignment.
x  ENG 720 English Methods 3.4.1 Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) There are self-Assessment Exercises spread throughout your course material.
You should attempt each exercise immediately after reading the section that precedes it.
Possible answers to the exercises are provided at the end of the course book; however, you should check the answers only after you must have attempted the exercises.
The exercises are for you to evaluate your learning; they are not to be submitted.
3.4.2 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are three Tutor-Marked Assignments for this course.
These assignments are designed to cover all areas treated in the course.
You will be given your assignments and the dates for submission at your study centre.
You are required to do all the three Tutor-Marked Assignments.
Each assignment carries 10 percent and together will count for 30 percent of your total score for the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutorial Facilitator for formal assessment on or before the stipulated dates for submission.
Guidelines for Writing Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
On the cover page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMA 1, TMA 2), and date of submission, your name and matriculation number.
It should look like this: • Course Code: • Course Title: • Tutor-Marked Assignment: TMA 1 • Date of Submission: • School and Programme: • Matriculation Number: 2.
You should endeavour to be concise and to the point in your answers and adhere to word limit where given.
Your answer should be based on your course material, further readings and experiences.
However, do not copy from any of these materials.
If you do, you will be penalized.
Remember to give relevant examples and illustrations to support your answers.
3.
Make and keep a copy of your assignments.
4.
Your answers should be hand-written by you.
Leave a margin of about 1.5 inches on the left side and about 5 lines before the answer to the next question for our tutorial Facilitator s comments.
xi  ENG 720 English Methods 5.
When you have completed each assignment, make sure that it reaches your tutorial Facilitator on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your Study Centre Manager and tutorial Facilitator for the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
3.4.3 Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDU 720: English Methods will be for two hours duration, and will carry 70 percent of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of Self-Assessment Exercises, and questions in the Tutor-Marked Assignment, which you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your answers to Self-Assessment Exercises and Tutor- Marked Assignments before the examination.
For you to be eligible to sit for the final examinations, you must have done the following: 1.
You should have submitted all the three Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course; 2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
The deadline for examination registration will be available at your study centre.
Failure to submit your assignments or to register for the examination means that you will not have a score for the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out the mars that constitute the total course score.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1 3 Three assignments each marked over 10%, totaling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, all the features of this course guide have been designed to facilitate your learning in order that you achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
They include the aims and objectives, course summary, course overview, Self- Assessment Exercises and study questions.
You should ensure that you make maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
xii  ENG 720 English Methods 5.0 SUMMARY EDU720: English Methods provides you with an overview of the approaches to methods of teaching English as a second language.
It is aimed at equipping you with the various methods, techniques and procedures for teaching the four language skills and the other language sub-skills.
Upon completing the course, you should be able to choose with ease suitable methods for teaching, listening, speaking, reading and writing skills and the sub-skills: vocabulary, grammar and reading comprehension and summary writing.
For literature, you should be able to discuss how to teach the three different genres of literature: prose, drama and poetry.
You will also be able to construct good language tests; objective and essay test items.
You will equally be able to prepare scheme of work and lesson plans.
xiii  ENG 720 English Methods EDU 720 ENGLISH METHODS COURSE DEVELOPER Dr. Uche M. Okonkwo Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City COURSE WRITTER Dr. R. B. Danner Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City COURSE EDITOR D r. Uche M. Okonkwo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos PROGRAMME LEADER Dr. Uche M. Okonkwo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos COURSE CORDINAT OR Dr Dorathy Ufoha School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos xiv  ENG 720 English Methods MODULE 1 MAJOR APPROACHES AND METHODS OF TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE: TEACHI NG THE FOUR LANGUAGE SKILLS Unit 1: The Grammar-Translation Method and the Direct -9+ Unit 2: The Audio-lingual Method, the Situational Method and the Communicative Method Unit 3: Teaching English Sounds Unit 4: Teaching Listening Skills.
Unit 5: Teaching Speaking Skills.
Unit 6: Teaching Reading Skills.
Unit 7: Teaching Writing Skills MODULE 2 TEACHING LANGUAGE SUB-SKILLS AND STRATEGIES Unit 1: Teaching Vocabulary Unit 2: Teaching Grammar Unit 3: Teaching Reading Comprehension and Summary Unit 4: Teaching Literature-in-English I: Prose Unit 5: Teaching Literature-in-English II: Drama and Poetry MODULE 3 LANGUAGE TESTING Unit 1: Test types, Functions/Uses, and Qualities of Language Tests.
Unit 2: Basic Steps in Language Test Construction.
Unit 3: Writing Scheme of Work and Lesson Plans.
xv  ENG 720 English Methods MODULE 1 MAJOR APPROACHES AND METHODS OF TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE: TEACHI NG THE FOUR LANGUAGE SKILLS Unit 1: The Grammar-Translation Method and the Direct Method Unit 2: The Audio-lingual Method, the Situational Method and the Communicative Method Unit 3 : Teaching English Sounds Unit 4: Teaching Listening Skills.
Unit 5: Teaching Speaking Skills.
Unit 6: Teaching Reading Skills.
Unit 7: Teaching Writing Skills UNIT 1 THE GRAMMAR-TRANSLATION METHOD AND THE DIRECT METHOD CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.1 Status of English Language in Nigeria 3.2 Major Approaches and Methods of Teaching English as a Second Language 3.2.1 The Grammar-Translation Method 3.2.2 The Direct Method 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION Teaching English as a second language is very demanding especially if the teacher is not a native speaker of the language.
This task can however be made a pleasurable experience for the teacher if she is exposed to the concepts associated with its teaching.
In order to equip you for this task therefore, this unit sets out to give you a brief on the status of English language in Nigeria as well as teach you important concepts and terms used in the field of language teaching and how you can apply these in teaching English as a second language.
Concepts we will be discussing here include theories, approaches, methods and techniques as used in the field of 1  ENG 720 English Methods language teaching.
We will also be discussing two of the major language teaching methods, namely, the Grammar-Translation and Direct methods.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the status of English language in Nigeria.
• give the full meanings of these terms and distinguish one from another L, L, FL, ESL 1 2 • define theories, methods, approaches and techniques as used in language teaching and learning • name the major language teaching methods • describe the characteristics of the Grammar-translation Method and the Direct Method • employ Grammar translation Method and Direct Method 3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Status of English Language in Nigeria Since the introduction of English in Nigeria by the British Colonial Government, the use of this language has spread beyond the conduct of government and commerce purposes to include social, educational, personal and interpersonal affairs.
Two reasons account for this spread.
First, was the global significance of English as an international language and the second was the multilingual situation in Nigeria where there are about 400 linguistically distinct Nigerian languages.
Not even the so called three main Nigerian languages, Igbo, Hausa and Yoruba, can play the roles that the English language is playing in Nigeria.
Because of its roles in the various facets of communication in Nigeria, English is considered a second language ( ESL ) in Nigeria as against French which is considered a foreign language ( FL ).
Given the significant position of English in Nigeria and its impact on the lives of Nigerians nationally and internationally, its teaching and learning must be conducted with utmost diligence.
EDU 220: English Methods, is one of the courses designed to teach you how to teach the English language to your students to enable them use it for various communicative purposes.
Below are some purposes that English serves in Nigeria and some important factors you must bear in mind to effectively teach it to Nigerian students.
2  ENG 720 English Methods 1.
Political/Government Purposes English is Nigeria s official language, that is , the lingua franca.
This is because it is the language used by the Government in conducting its affairs , whether at federal, state and even at the local government levels.
It is the language of administration, the judiciary and politics.
It is the language that unites and integrates the various ethnic groups into the entity called Nigeria.
2.
Economic Purposes The English language is used for economic purposes , for instance, for business negotiations, for buying and selling, within and outside Nigeria.
3.
Educational Purposes English is the medium of instruction in most Nigerian schools even at the primary school level.
Teachers teach through English and learners learn through English.
Tests and examinations whether in elementary, secondary schools or university are conducted in English.
Examinations by public examining bodies such as WAEC, NECO and JAMB are conducted in English.
4.
Social Purposes Social communication and interaction, at personal and interpersonal bases are largely done through English.
This is especially the case in most urban cities in Nigeria.
Entertainment, information dissemination by the mass media, such as radio, television and newspapers, are through English.
In summary, we can definitely say that the English language is the lingua franca of Nigeria considering the above purposes that it serves.
Given this situation therefore, you as a teacher of English, must endeavor to teach your students well enough for them to be able to use English for the various purposes it serves.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Does English really serve the above purposes in Nigeria?
Support your answer with live examples of instances and situations where this is evidenced.
2.
As a teacher of English, how can you help your students use English to access information from the Mass media?
3  ENG 720 English Methods First language ( L1 ) and Second language( L2 ) In the introductory part of this subsection, we noted that English is a second language in Nigeria.
What then is a first language and how does it differ from a second language?
A person s first language or L1, also called her mother tongue, is the language she acquires form infancy, while her second language or L2 is the language she learns after acquiring her L1.
Note that, while L 1 is acquired L2 is learnt.
Acquisition refers to an unconscious process that involves the naturalistic development of language proficiency through understanding a language and through using a language for meaningful communication.
Learning by contrast refers to a process in which conscious rules about a language are developed.
Formal teaching is necessary for learning to occur, and conscious correction of errors leads to the development of learned rules.
(See Krashen, S., and T. Terrell, 1983 ) For most Nigerians, their native language is their mother tongue and their L1 while English is their L 2.
As we noted above, the process of learning each of these differs.
We need to discuss this difference more in order to better equip you for your job as a teacher of English Distinction between First Language Acquisition Process and Second language Learning Process As we mentioned earlier on, a first language is acquired from infancy.
This means that the language is not learnt by the individual in a teaching / learning situation.
Rather, the person from infancy picks up the language orally as she listens and speaks with members of her family and community.
There is no systematically planned effort by her to learn it or by members of her family and community to teach her the language.
She simply naturally assimilates the language just as she assimilates other aspects of her community or ethnic culture.
Words/vocabulary, phrases and sentences are effortlessly learnt by the child while interacting with members of her community.
On the other hand, a second language, in most cases is learnt in a structured formal school setting.
For more on first Comment [UM1]: Reference Krashen, S. D. nd language acquisition and second language learning, read Krashen ( 1981 ).
Second Language Learning.
Comment [UM2R1]: As a prospective teacher of English in Nigeria, you must be familiar with the differences between the processes of acquiring first language and learning a second language.
Your B.A.
Ed.
Programme is preparing you to teach at the Junior Secondary Schoo( JSS ) and Senior Secondary School ( 4  ENG 720 English Methods SSS ) levels.
Students at these two levels have already acquired their L1 at infancy with all the linguistic habits formed.
In order to successfully teach these students English, you need to learn the following basic factors that affect L2 learning.
i Sociolinguistic Factors Your students are no longer infants but grown boys and girls.
As infants, most of them, acquired their first languages effortlessly.
Their languages were spoken all around them in meaningful real life situations.
As they listened to others speak , they responded by speaking to others.
It is not going to be exactly the same in a L2 situation where students are from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds.
Each already has set ways of speaking his/her first language.
This situation places some demand on you requiring your creating enabling learning environments where your students will have ample opportunities to listen to others speak English as well as speak English to others.
You will learn in this course how you are going to create such enabling learning environment.
ii Psycholinguistic Factors Students at J.S.S.
and S.S.S.
levels have developed attitudes, beliefs and ways of saying and doing things in their first languages that may interfere with their learning English , a L2.
You should as a teacher find ways of helping these students develop positive attitudes and interest in English language.
You should motivate them to learn English by teaching them using interesting learning materials, strategies and activities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Distinguish between L1 and L2 acquisition process with appropriate illustrations 2.
What are some of the factors you must consider in order to make learning English easy for your students ?
3.2 Major Approaches and Methods of Teaching English as a Second Language Language teaching has witnessed the development of an array of teaching methods.
However, for the purpose of this course, we are going to focus on five major ones, namely, the Grammar-translation method, the Direct method the Situational method, the Audio-lingual method and the Communicative method.
5  ENG 720 English Methods In formal school settings, languages like every other subject such as Mathematics, Social Studies etc are taught using one method or another or a combination of methods.
Language teaching methods are developed based on theories of learning from the field of Psychology and theories of the nature of language from the field of linguistics.
These theories determine the direction or approach a language teacher adopts in preparing and presenting what language content to teach students and how to test what has been taught.
A given approach for instance will direct the teacher on the elements of language to select to teach, the strategies and techniques to employ for teaching and testing what has been selected.
In this sub- section of this unit, we are going to discuss the major language teaching approaches and methods, their theoretical bases, and the techniques and strategies associated with them.
But before we go into this, we will briefly define the key terms mentioned above.
• Theory a formulation of basic principles about something, e.g.
the nature of language learning, supported by empirical evidence and open to confirmation or refutation by evidence yet to be discovered.
• Approach a set of assumptions about the nature of language and the nature of language teaching and learning; a philosophy or point of view.
• Method ( of teaching ) the overall plan for the selection, grading and presentation of material to be taught, based on an approach.
• Strategy a particular way of approaching or solving a problem or task at hand; a mode of operation for achieving a particular goal or objective • Technique a particular device, strategy, activity used to accomplish a goal or objective.
( Adapted from Savignon, 1981 ) 3.2.1 The Grammar-Translation Method Grammar Translation Method was used in the early years of learning foreign languages such as Latin and Greek.
The method involved studying a second language called the target language, for example, Latin, through a detailed analysis of its grammar rules, followed by application of this knowledge to the task of translating sentences and texts into and out of the language.
The learner s first language for example, English, is used as the means of translating the target language.
6  ENG 720 English Methods • Main Features ü Emphasis is on the grammar of the target language.
ü Translation is the principal practice technique.
ü Major focus is on reading and writing skills ü Little or no attention is paid to speaking and listening.
ü Students native language is the medium of instruction.
ü Sentence is the basic unit of language teaching and learning.
• Techniques ü Reading ü Translation ü Deductive teaching of grammar ü Memorization ü Writing Despite its antiquity, the grammar-translation method is still alive and well in use in language classrooms throughout Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Americas.
It is easy to apply as it makes few demands on teachers.
• Advantages ü Translation from one language to another is very vital because comparism between two languages presents a better understanding of the meaning of abstract words and complicated sentences.
ü The systematic study of grammatical rules helps in fostering students ability of reading comprehension and producing grammatically correct sentences.
ü The focus on the use of literary texts provides the situation in which reading and writing abilities are developed.
• Disadvantages ü Overemphasis on translation can never totally free the learners from dependence on the first language.
7  ENG 720 English Methods ü Knowing a large number of grammatical rules cannot ensure that students can use them in real communicative situations.
ü Too much emphasis is placed on reading and writing while listening and speaking are neglected.
In language communication, all the four skills are needed.
ü The texts are mostly taken from literary works, which most often don t meet the practical every day needs of the learners.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Compare the merits and demerits of Grammar -translation method.
3.2/2The Direct Method Towards the end of the late 1800s, a revolution in language teaching philosophy took place resulting in the birth of the Direct method.
This period was referred to as the dawn of modern foreign language teaching.
Second language theorists maintain that the first real method of language teaching was the Direct Method.
It was developed as a reaction against the monotony and ineffectiveness of grammar-translation classes.
The Direct Method was the brainchild of Charles Berlitz, a nineteenth century linguist whose schools of language learning were famous throughout the world.
The Direct Method is based on the notion that people could learn a L if 2 easily it was taught without using the L Essentially, the processes of learning the 1. new language should mimic the processes of a child learning his/her first language.
Specifically, the method promotes the learning of vocabulary and phrases of the second language without recourse to translating using the learner s first language.
The ultimate aim is to get the learners to think in the second/foreign language.
• Main Features of a Typical Direct Method Classroom ü There are few students in the class.
ü Students take turn reading aloud (mostly dialogues and anecdotal passages).
ü Teacher asks questions in the target language to test students understanding.
ü Students respond appropriately in the target language.
ü The question response session is followed by a dictation of the dialogues or passage by the teacher while the students write down what they heard.
ü Students would then read aloud the dictation they have written.
8  ENG 720 English Methods Technique Direct use of the target language Ø Use of small class size Ø Oral reading of dialogues Ø Choral[/group reading Ø Use of dictation • Shortcomings ü Its very intensity and small class size make it impossible in public schools.
ü For the method to be effective the teacher must have an excellent command of the target language, or better still a native speaker of the target language.
ü It is teacher- centered or teacher dependent.
By the late 1920s, the method started to decline and there was even a return to the grammar-translation method.
However, the Direct Method continues to enjoy a popular following in private language schools.
It was one of the foundations upon which the well known Audio-lingual Method took off from, starting half way through the 20th century.
4.
0 CONCLUSION To prepare you to face the enormous task of teaching English as a second language, it is important that you learn the concepts and terminologies associated with second language methodologies as presented in this unit.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt some important issues about the status of English language in Nigeria and the relevance of this knowledge to your teaching English to Nigerian students.
You also learnt some terms associated with second language teaching such as theory, approach, method and techniques.
Two language teaching methods namely; Grammar-translation Method and the Direct Method were also discussed.
9  ENG 720 English Methods 6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare Grammar-Translation Method with Direct Method 2.
Which of them would you choose to teach English JSS 1 students?
Give a reason for your choice 3.
Define each of the following as used in second language teaching and learning: Theory, approach, method, strategy and technique 7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Brown, H. D (2000).
Principles of language learning and teaching.
(4th ed) New York: Longman Howatt, A. P & Widdowson, H. G (1985).
A history of ELT 1400 to the present.
(2nd ed).
London: Oxford University Press Krashen, S. ( 1981 ) , Second language Acquisition and Second Language Learning.
Oxford: Pergamon Press Krashen , S., and T. Terrell ( 1983) The Natural Approach: Language Acquisition in the Classroom.
Oxford: Pergamon Press Richards, J.
C & Rodgers, T. S (2000).
Approaches and methods in language teaching.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Rogers, T. S (2001).
Language teaching methodology.
ERIC Digest September 2001 Issue Paper Savignon, S. J.
(1981) Communicative Competence: Theory and Classroom Practice.
Reading-Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 10  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 2 THE AUDIO-LINGUAL METHOD, SITUATIONAL METHOD AND COMMUNICATIVE METHOD CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 The Theoretical Basis of Audio Lingual Method 3.1.1 The Audio Lingual Approach to Language Teaching 3.
2 The Situational Method 3.
3 The Theoretical Basis of Communicative Method 3.3.1 The Communicative Approach to Language Teaching 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you were introduced to the concepts and terminologies associated with second language learning.
Two language teaching methods were also discussed.
This unit is a continuation of the discussion of language teaching methods.
The unit will introduce you to three other language-teaching methods: the Audio-lingual, Situational and Communicative methods.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe Audio-lingual, Situational, and Communicative teaching methods • describe the theoretical bases of these methods • describe the teaching approaches of these methods • state the principles of each of these methods.
• identify the advantages of using these methods.
• identify the shortcomings of these methods.
• employ these methods in planning, teaching and testing English language 3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 11  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
1 The Theoretical Basis of the Audio-Lingual Method The Audio lingual method dominated language teaching in the 50s and 60s.
It was originally labeled the aural oral method because of its emphasis on listening (aural) and speaking (oral) skills.
It was based on the theories of structural linguists and behaviorist psychologists.
The structural linguists consider language learning as a process of someone learning the structural patterns that make up the language such as the sound patterns, the syntactic patterns, the vocabulary and the grammatical patterns.
They advocate therefore that the language to be learnt should be studied and broken down into the above patterns for purposes of teaching and learning.
The behaviourist psychologists on the other hand theorised that human beings learnt by habit formation through the process of stimulus response reinforcement.
You may have observed that the Audio-Lingual method shares the idea of breaking down the target language into its components parts for purposes of studying it with the proponents of Grammar- Translation method.
The two however differ in their notion of what the target language should be used for.
While the proponents of the Audio- Lingual method taught the target language for the purpose of using it to communicate, through listening and speaking, the other group taught language for the purpose of using it to translate texts from the foreign language to the first language and vice versa.
3.1.1.
The Audio Lingual Approach to Language Teaching.
The Audio Lingual Method of teaching derived from the above two theories, adopted a teaching approach that consisted of an analysis and selection of structural patterns of the target language, commonly used in everyday situations.
These are embedded in dialogues as pattern or 12  ENG 720 English Methods structural drills and presented to the learners by the teacher first orally and much later in written form.
The vocabulary content is kept to a minimum so as to allow the learners concentrate on acquiring the sound, syntactical or grammatical patterns being taught.
The dialogues are learnt by a process termed mimicry memorization whereby the students learn the sentences in the dialogues by heart.
The teaching procedure consist of the following steps: - Teacher presents the dialogues orally by himself / herself or by using a tape recorder or a language laboratory - Students listen to the teacher s voice or to the recorded voice to identify the sounds e.g.
phonemic distinctions, stress and intonation patterns, to recognize the grammatical structures and new vocabulary in the dialogues.
- Students repeat the dialogues after the teacher as many times as possible until they can do so accurately and fluently.
The repetition is at first instance by the entire class.
Thereafter repetition is in smaller groups and finally by individual students, until the target sounds and structural patterns are memorized and repeated correctly.
Correctness is emphasized.
If a group falters, the teacher returns to class choral response.
If an individual falters the teacher returns to small group choral response.
The goal is to get every learner to commit to memory the structural patterns contained in the dialogue.
Whether a student or a group of students repeats the dialogue well, he/she or the group is reinforced or rewarded by some form of approval by the teacher e.g.
praise.
Whenever possible, the dialogues are presented with relevant pictures or drawings to further enhance students learning.
After a particular dialogue has been learnt by the class, students are guided by the teacher to adapt the learnt phrase or grammatical structure in other relevant situations.
This calls for 13  ENG 720 English Methods pattern drills using techniques such as substitution, transformation / conversion, expansion and combination procedures.
Here is an example: Dialogue: Teaching the expression let s have Ike: I am thirsty.
Are you thirsty, too?
Eze: Yes, I am.
Let s have a drink Adaptation by substitution: Binta: It is a hot and busy day Ejiro: Yes, It is.
Let s have a shower The Audio lingual method of teaching gave rise to the massive inclusion of structural or pattern drills in language text books.
After a particular dialogue has been learnt orally and adaptations of the dialogue made, the students are led by the teacher to read and write what they have learnt.
The Audio lingual method encourages a teaching learning procedure where the teacher is the active initiator and controller of learning and the students are the passive listeners and respondents.
The teacher determines the what and how to learn.
The audio lingual method therefore is teacher centred and not learner centered.
The main aim of the audio lingual method is that students should be able to comprehend (through listening and reading) and produce (through speaking and writing) the target language correctly without mistakes or errors.
An advantage of this method according to Rivers (1981) is that students could attain comprehension and fluency in the target language within a limited amount of language material very early in their learning experience.
Another advantage of the teaching approach based on this method is that it encourages the participation of all students through choral repetition of pattern drills.
This is especially useful in motivating the shy or less gifted students who may learn more easily in a group setting.
The approach may also be appropriate for young children who naturally love to mimic and act 14  ENG 720 English Methods out roles because being young they are not restricted by shyness or the fear of making mistakes.
In spite of the above advantages, the audio lingual method does have its limitations.
For instance, its emphasis on repetition and correctness may take a lot of class time which may result in the students learning very little in a class period.
Secondly, the teaching approach tends to be mechanical resulting in students learning like well trained parrots able to repeat sentences (learnt in dialogues) perfectly when given a certain stimulus but usually uncertain of the meaning of what they are saying.
Additionally, because the language material to be learnt is strictly selected for a given context or situation, students often are unable to use memorized materials in contexts other than those in which that they have learned them.
The teacher therefore has the additional work of ensuring that students begin early to apply what they have learnt from dialogues to various communication situations within the class and outside the class.
Another limitation of the audio lingual method is that it may not be suitable for adult learners and very bright or gifted students who may find the repetition of pattern drills boring, uninteresting and unchallenging.
Such people usually prefer learning by analysis and logical explanation of rules and principles underlying the target language as done using the grammar-Translation method.
A major criticism of the Audio lingual method is that it restricts the learners by not encouraging them to learn the language through the process of trial and error.
By insisting on correctness, the method kills the natural tendency of human beings to learn through making mistakes.
Additionally, the method does not present language elements in the manner by which language is naturally used.
In real life, language is used for purposes of communication.
That someone knows some vocabulary and grammar of a 15  ENG 720 English Methods given language will not readily equip that person to use the language in different communicative settings.
In spite of the limitations, associated with the Audio lingual method, it has continued to be used in language classrooms.
It is especially useful when the teacher wants to ensure that the students are well grounded in the vocabulary (lexical), grammatical and phonological systems of the target language.
For instance, it could be useful in teaching and testing different tenses as well as differences between sounds e.g.
hit and heat , lick and leak , fan and van .
Stress and intonation patterns of the target language could also be taught.
For instance, the differences between sentences that are statements, questions and exclamations could be taught effectively using the Audio lingual method.
Here is an illustration: - She is beautiful.
(statement) - Is she beautiful ?
(question) - She is beautiful !
(exclamation) Main Features o Separation of the basic language skills into listening, speaking, reading and writing with emphasis on the teaching of listening and speaking before reading and writing.
o Use of Mother Tongue highly discouraged in the classroom.
o The development of language skills is a matter of habit formulation.
o Use of structured dialogues and drills in practicing particular language patterns until response is automatic.
o Only everyday vocabulary and sentences are taught.
Concrete vocabulary is taught through demonstration, use of objects and pictures.
Abstract vocabulary is taught through the association of ideas.
o Use of language laboratory.
Techniques o Exercises/activities in form of pattern drills using mimicry, memorization for teaching vocabulary and grammatical structures 16  ENG 720 English Methods o Stresses the use of drills to help learners gain control over grammatical structure.
o Uses simple varied and graded language activities for intensive practice of specific features of the language.
- Shortcomings o Learners are seen as organisms that can be manipulated by skilled training techniques to produce responses.
o Method is teacher dominated, as materials are primarily teacher-centered.
Doesn t give room for learner creativity.
o The printed material must be kept away from the second language learner as long as possible.
Despite these shortcomings, the Audio-lingual method is easy to implement and cheap to maintain.
You can adopt most of its techniques in teaching grammar.
These techniques or strategies will be discussed in detail in Module 2, Unit 2.
NOTE: For examples of language exercises based on the Audio- lingual method, see Intensive English for Junior Secondary School by Oluikpe et al (1997) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the theoretical basis of the Audio lingual method ?
2.
What does the Audio-lingual method share with the Grammar- translation method and the Direct method?
3.
Briefly describe the teaching procedure of the Audio lingual methodologists.
4.
Select an English text book used in JSS 2 (a) give the names of the author(s) and the publisher (b) Take from it a pattern drill and describe a particular grammatical or phonological structure being taught in the drill.
3.
2 The Situational Method 17  ENG 720 English Methods The Situational Method evolved in the United Kingdom as a parallel method to the Audio-lingual Method.
The key difference from the Audio- lingual method was that the language presentation and practice was situationalised and so was always given social meaning.
Speaking and listening skills were given prominence in this method.
This approach is based on the belief that if you want to teach the language of a situation you have to make up the situation in the classroom through the process of role- playing.
One would say that the situational method is a bridge between Audio-Lingual Method and the Communicative Method.
From the start of the Reform Movement, practitioners made use of conversation readers in teaching language.
This was further expanded in the 1960s and 1970s when several language course books were written grouping language teaching units around situational themes such as At the Hairdresser s , The Post Office , At the Market Place and so on.
The dialogues and narratives in these texts centred on the situational themes.
Teachers were expected to produce appropriate teaching materials to support action-based language used in the defined situations.
• Main Features ü Use of the three Ps- PPP: Present, Practice, and Produce ü Use of role play ü Use of mimes, pictures, etc.
ü Use of contextualized situations • Shortcomings ü The major disadvantage of the method is that it is not easy to describe most situations; in fact some situations cannot be adequately described.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Compare the situational method with the Audio-lingual method bringing out their similarities and differences 2.
Describe two situations you could use to teach English to JSS 2 students.
3.
3 The Theoretical Basis of the Communicative Method The theory of behaviorist psychologists which viewed learning as a process of habit formation through imitation and memorization was 18  ENG 720 English Methods challenged by another theory, the cognitive code theory.
This theory propounded by Cognitive psychologists viewed learning as involving one s use of his innate mental abilities.
This theory appealed to linguists such as Chomsky (1966) and Lenneberg (1957) who applied the theory to language learning.
These linguists noted that these innate abilities explained why a child could learn his first or even his second language just by interacting with people in his environment.
It is these innate abilities that enable the child to acquire unconsciously the vocabulary, the grammar of his language as well as the psychological, cultural and social rules that regulate the use of the language.
Both Chomsky and Lenneberg argued that because of these innate abilities, normal children are able to identify and acquire (without being taught formally), the basic lexical and syntactic systems of their language.
It is from this identification that mastery of the language develops and not through the process of repetition and reinforcement as advocated by the Audio- linguists.
As Lenneberg puts it, Obviously, children are not given rules which they can apply.
They are merely exposed to a great number of examples of how the syntax works and from these examples they completely automatically acquire principles with which new sentences can be formed that will conform to the universally recognized rules of language learning.
(Lenneberg, 1960 quoted in Rivers 1981, pg.
76) The views of these linguists and others who supported their views, gave birth to another approach to teaching languages.
This is the communicative approach.
19  ENG 720 English Methods SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Which of the two approaches to learning a language would you say was the process by which your child or any child you know learnt his/ her first language?
Support your answer with at least three reasons.
3.3.1 The Communicative Approach to Language Teaching The communicative view of language learning changed the approach to language teaching from teacher centred to learner centred.
This approach emphasizes language teaching that is built around communicative situations involving topics and persons /participants performing different roles similar to those that learners may likely encounter in real life.
Thus, instead of repetition and memorization of dialogues, learning situations requiring students to act or play roles while using the language are set up by the teacher.
Consideration of what and how to teach the language is made on the basis of the language needs and interests of the learners.
Topics and contexts therefore must be of the interest of the particular group of learners.
This ensures that the learners get meaningfully involved in learning.
The teacher s role is that of a facilitator of learning.
He/she guides the learners to use whatever knowledge and skills they have in the target language to express themselves.
The Communicative approach has the following as its tenets: - There is no insistence on linguistic accuracy in terms of pronunciation, grammar or vocabulary in the beginning stages of learning.
20  ENG 720 English Methods - Emphasis is on the speaker or writer communicating a message which is understood.
The belief is that with time the leaner will achieve the desired correctness.
- The four language skills could be taught at the same time, that is integratively depending on the skills needed in the particular learning situation, the topic, the roles of the participants and the purposes of the communicative interaction.
This integrative approach enables learners see the interrelatedness of the four language skills.
- The basic unit of learning is a meaningful text or discourse e.g.
a paragraph for listening comprehension and a topic to speak on or write about or a text passage to summarise.
- The text for teaching must be based on situations, topics, and activities of interest and needs of the learners.
Advantages Communicative language teaching approach has made very useful contributions to language teaching and learning.
One could easily say that it has the following advantages: Ø Helps learners communicate in the language since focus is not on grammatical or pronunciation correctness but how to understand and convey meaning in the language.
Ø By not insisting on accuracy, learners are encouraged to speak, read or write the language without fear of making mistakes.
Ø By basing the what and how to learn on learners needs and interests, learning is meaningful and purposeful.
This makes for 21  ENG 720 English Methods possible transfer of what is learnt to similar situations outside the classroom.
Ø By not teaching the four language skills individually but integratively, learners are made to use the language in the natural way.
Ø Uses realistic, motivating and meaningful language activities.
Disadvantages Ø Where learners do not have many real life opportunities to practice what they learnt, errors not corrected at the beginning stages may persist.
Ø Learners who are teacher dependent and shy may be inhibited in learning by this method.
• Main Features ü Emphasis on learning to communicate through interaction in the target language.
ü Use of authentic texts into the learning situation.
ü Learners focus not only on language but also on the learning process itself.
ü Learner s own personal experiences are enhanced as important contributing elements to classroom learning.
ü Attempts linking classroom language learning with language activation outside the classroom.
ü Focus on all the components of communicative competence, not only grammatical or linguistic competence.
Engages learners in the pragmatic and functional use of language.
• Techniques Use of real life/ authentic texts for reading Contextualized situations of the real world involving learners to play roles Discussions, debates Reporting of events Conclusion All the methods discussed so far are symbolic of the progress second language teaching methodologies have undergone over the years.
As you 22  ENG 720 English Methods will notice most of the methods get recycled in different forms, but each time a new approach develops, it either adds or removes a slightly different perspective.
All of these methods were seen to work at some point and so none can be discounted.
By the mid 1980s there was a gradual move towards the concept of a broad approach to encompass various methods.
It would be fair to say that if there is any one umbrella approach to language teaching that has become the accepted norm in this field, it would have to be the Communicative Language Teaching.
CLT does not teach about language, rather, it teaches language.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed three additional second language-teaching methods: Audio-lingual method, Situational method, and the Communicative Method.
With this background knowledge, you are now better equipped to teach the language skills, which will be discussed in subsequent units of this course.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. a) State three principles on which the Audio-lingual method is based.
b) List and describe three differences between the Audio-language method and the Communicative Method?
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Brown, H. D (2000).
Principles of language learning and teaching.
(4th ed) New York: Longman Howatt, A. P & Widdowson, H. G (1985).
A history of ELT 1400 to the present.
(2nd ed).
London: Oxford University Press Richards, J.
C & Rodgers, T. S (2000).
Approaches and methods in language teaching.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Rivers , W. M. ( 1981 ) Teaching Foreign Language Skills.
Chicago : The University of Chicago Press Rogers, T. S (2001).
Language teaching methodology.
ERIC Digest 23  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 3 TEACHING ENGLISH SOUNDS CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 Teaching Vowel and Consonant Sounds 3.
1.1 Teaching Vowel Sounds 3.
1.2 Teaching Consonant Sounds 3.
.1 3 Teaching Stress 3.1.
4 Teaching Intonation 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings INTRODUCTION Being able to understand and speak any language begins with one s ability to distinguish correctly the sounds s/he hears as well as pronounce correctly the sounds of that language so that s/he is understood.
When this is not the case, meaningful communication is marred.
You may have had the experience of having great difficulty understanding someone who is not of your linguistic group speaking your language.
Your difficulty in understanding what s/he was saying might not have been because of the person s lack of knowledge of the vocabulary and the structure of your language but because the sounds the person produced seemed peculiar and the person s voice rose and fell in unexpected places.
You might also have had the experience of speaking English to a native speaker of English, for example a Briton or an American and the response you got showed that s/he did not understand what you said.
As with the example above, the person s difficulty in understanding you might have been due to your inability to pronounce the words the way a native speaker of English would.
As a teacher of English you must teach your students to listen and recognise English sounds in words and sentences so as to produce them correctly.
This means teaching them to listen and learn to distinguish and pronounce correctly the vowel and consonant sounds in English words as well as acquire and use the correct articulation, intonation and stress 24  ENG 720 English Methods patterns of English.
In this Unit you will learn the techniques for imparting these in your students.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Reading this Unit will enable you learn the techniques for teaching your students how to § recognize and pronounce English vowel and consonant sounds in words § recognize the differences between pairs of vowel and pairs of consonant sounds in words § pronounce English words and phrases/sentences with correct stress and intonation § recognize the function of stress and intonation in determining if a sentence is a statement, a question, a command, a request or an exclamation § recognize pronunciation changes brought about by changes in vowel or consonant positions.
3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teaching vowel and consonant sounds The English Language has 20 vowel and 24 consonant sounds.
This section will present to you the procedure for teaching samples of these sounds.
The procedure consists of the following steps: -the sound is presented first in the words it occurs -the sound is presented in short sentences containing words in which it occurs -the sound is contrasted with another sound using a technique called minimal pairs , first in isolated words and then in short sentences.
The purpose here is to show the students the difference between the sounds contrasted.
3.1 .1 Teaching vowel sounds The long vowel sound / i: / Here are examples of words in which this sound occurs bee- pronounced / bi:/ key- /ki:/ we- /wi: 25  ENG 720 English Methods meat /m:it/ seek /si:k/ field /fi:ld/ seize /si:z/ NOTE: for many more examples of vowel and consonant sounds, consult your course materials on phonetics and phonology.
Consult also the National English Curriculum for Junior and Senior Secondary Schools, Vols 4 & 2, Intensive English for Junior & Senior Secondary Schools by Oluikpe et al, 2000, Round Up English by Idowu et al, 2001 for examples of these sounds and how to select them and teach them.
Sample Teaching Procedure Step1- Using a tape recorder or your voice, you inform the class of the sound to be taught.
For instance, you say to the class-We are going to learn to pronounce the long vowel sound /i:/ Step 2- You pronounce the sound yourself explaining to the class the position of the lips, tongue etc.The students listen to you.
Step 3-students repeat after you while you listen to them and check for correctness of their pronunciation.
Ensure that pronunciation is first by the entire class and then by individual students.
Step 4- pronounce some words containing the sound while the students repeat after you e.g.
field, beans, Peter etc.
Step 5-say short sentences in which this sound occurs while the students repeat after you.
Examples - Musa eats meat everyday.
-We will clear the field tomorrow.
Step 6- write words and sentences as in steps 4 and 5 on the chalk board.
Read these to the students who in turn read after you while you listen and correct poor pronunciation.
Step 7 let your students note the different ways the sound /i:/ is spelt in English.
Examples: ee ea e i ie ei bee sea be police field seize tree meat Peter kerosine piece deceive Step 8-make your students read a short passage, for example, a dialogue in which some of the words containing the sound(s) taught are found.
The essence is to make the students pronounce these sounds in a larger context than they would in single isolated words or sentences.
( Consult text books in English language eg Intensive English for Junior/Senior Secondary Schools for samples of passages) 26  ENG 720 English Methods Step 9 dictate words and sentences containing the sound to students to write in their exercise books.
You go round the class checking students work.
Note that you started teaching the sound/i:/ by isolating it and then putting it in context, first in single words and sentences and then in dialogues.
This technique is called situating or contextualizing.
The technique enables you to teach your students that the ultimate use of any sound learnt is for the purpose of integrating it in words and sentences for meaningful communication.
Note also that after the oral practice of the sound, you wrote words and sentences containing this sound on the chalk board and made the students read these.
Finally, you dictated words and sentences containing the sound to the students to write in their exercise books.
The whole essence is to enable your students recognize and pronounce the sound in oral and written forms.
You were also able to make them use all the skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing integratively thus showing that language skills are inter-related or linked.
Recall that in Unit 1 of this course material we discussed the relationship and the inter-relatedness of language sub- systems and language skills.
The short vowel sound /i/ Examples of words in which this sound occurs i y e ie sit nymph pretty ladies village fifth rhythm wicked cities private rich symbol houses parties You will teach this sound by contrasting it with the long i: sound.
We will do this by following the teaching procedure a in 3.1 above Contrasting /i:/ and /i/ sounds To teach your students the difference between these two sounds you use a technique called aural/oral discrimination , of pairs of words.
This entails 27  ENG 720 English Methods the comparison of a set of words to bring out or show the difference or similarity in their pronunciation Procedure: Follow steps 4-6 as in 3.1 (a) Contrasting pairs of words /i/ /i:/ lick leak bit beat fill feel (b) Contrasting pairs of sentences with words that contain the two sounds (1) Hit the ball.
Heat the soup (2) The dog bit the man.
The man beat the dog.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1 Write 10 words which contain the sound /i/ 2 Write 10 words which contain the sound /i:/ 3 Write 5 pairs of sentences to contrast the two sounds.
NOTE: consult a Standard English Dictionary to confirm the right pronunciation of the words you wrote.
The short front vowel sounds /e/ and /ae/ i Examples of words in which /e/ occurs e ea a met bread any egg instead many help weapon i i Examples of words in which /ae/ occurs man hand cap cat sat map 28  ENG 720 English Methods Teaching procedure as in steps 1-8 in 3.1.
Contrast between /e/ and /ae/ Word contrast: /e/ /ae/ men man set sat lend land Sentence contrast The men are working.
The man is working.
Lending money is a risky business.
The plane is landing.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i Write 5 words which contain /e/ sound i i Write 5 words which contain /ae/ sound iii Write 4 pairs of sentences to contrast the two sounds.
Consult a standard Dictionary to check for correctness of what you wrote.
The long back vowel /a:/ in word and sentence contexts Examples of words in which /a:/ occurs a ar ear er al au pass part heart clerk half aunt father star hearth sergeant calf laugh branch march calm Word contrast / a : / / a / cart cat car cap park pack aunt ant march match 29  ENG 720 English Methods Sentence contrast The motor park is full of travelers I packed the books in boxes 3.1.2 Teaching consonant sounds The teaching of consonant sounds follows the same procedure as in teaching vowel sounds.
A few examples are given here for illustration.
Contrasting the consonant sounds f and v. Examples of words in which these sounds occur /f/ sound / v / sound fat physics laugh van sofa alphabet rough leave Contrasting the two sounds in sentences 1.
The van is full of books.
The fan is full of cobwebs.
2.
He has a fine house.
He has a vine garden.
Contrasting the consonant sounds / / and /t / / / /t / thought naught path part thin tin thank tank thigh tie both boat Contrasting the consonant sounds / ð / and / d / / ð / / d / though dough then den they day other order these Ds those dose 30  ENG 720 English Methods Contrasting the two sounds in sentences They traveled the day you returned.
The few examples given above are to show you how to teach vowel and consonant sounds.
You should be able to teach any English sound if you follow the procedure outlined in 3.1 above.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Write four pairs of consonant sounds and contrast them in words and sentence contexts.
3.1.3 Teaching stress You will begin by explaining to your students what stress is and its importance in the sound system of the English language.
Word s Your students need to know that words are stressed by syllables.
You should tell them that the parts of a word formed by sound combinations are called syllables.
Tell them too that there are words of one syllable and others of two or more syllables as shown below.
• Words with one syllable: it, an, a, boy e.t.c.
• Words with two syllables: mo/ther, bro/ther, su/gar, con/duct e.t.c Teach them that syllables are generally produced with force but some are produced with more force than others and that such syllables are said to be stressed.
Such syllables are said to have primary stress while those stressed with less force are said to have a secondary stress.
Here are some words with syllables of primary stress underlined: reason, mother, three, thirteen.
To teach words of different syllables make a table of these words beginning from those with fewer syllables to those with more syllables.
Adapt the teaching procedure in 3.1.1 above ensuring that your students understand the difference in the syllabification of the words.
Grammatical use of word stress Teach your students that stress is used to make a distinction between classes of words.
A very good example is the distinction between words 31  ENG 720 English Methods which are spelt the same way but by pronunciation, one is a noun and the other is a verb.
Here are some examples.
The stressed syllables are indicated by capital letters.
Noun Verb SUBject subJECT INsult inSULT PREsent preSENT EScort esCORT To teach the difference between the two sets of words adapt the procedure in 3.1.1 above using word and sentence contexts.
Sentence stress You should teach your students that stress is often used to give emphasis on some words at the sentence level when such words are considered important to drive home the intended message of the speaker.
Here are some examples: a. I need the money today not tomorrow.
Here today is stressed to indicate when the speaker needs the money.
b. John is expected home at 6 o clock.
c. Musa did not go by air ,he went by road.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Explain the reason for the underlined words in sentence b. and sentence c. above.
2 Write five words of one syllable 3 Write five words of three syllables and underline the syllable with the primary stress in each word.
4.
Write four sentences and underline the words that are stressed.
(b) Explain why the underlined words are stressed.
3.
1.4 Teaching intonation Intonation is the rise or fall of the pitch of the voice when a person speaks.
It is used to indicate what part of an utterance a speaker wishes to draw attention to.
It is also used to distinguish between a statement made on a falling pitch and a question asked on a rising pitch.
It is also used to signal exclamation with a rising pitch.
32  ENG 720 English Methods .
Intonation types and uses 1.
Statements • She is coming.
• Olu likes ogbono soup 2.
Questions • Is she coming?
• Does Olu like ogbono?
3.
Commands • Come here, John!
• Will you stop making noise, Mary!
4.
Expression of surprise, admiration or anger • You made it to our party!
• What a beautiful baby!
• You fool!
To teach intonation types adapt the teaching procedure in 3.1.1 4.0 CONCLUSION To speak a language, one must first of all recognize and use the sound system.
In learning the English language, this involves recognizing and using the vowels and consonant sounds and the stress and intonation patterns of the language.
A mastery of the sound system of a language enables someone to comprehend and speak it well.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit you learnt the importance of someone mastering the sound system of a language in order to understand it and speak it well.
You learnt the procedure for teaching vowel and consonant sounds as well as stress and intonation patterns of the English language .
You learnt how to contrast vowel and consonant sounds first in single words and then in sentences.
You also learnt how to teach stress and intonation patterns of English first in single words and then in sentences.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Which of the methods of teaching a language would use the teaching procedure described in this unit?
Support your answer with reasons 33  ENG 720 English Methods 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Rivers , W. M. ( 1981 ) Teaching Foreign Language Skills.
Chicago : The University of Chicago Press Oluikpe, B. O., Obah, T. Y. and Okole, M. K (.1994) Itensive English for Junior Secondary, Book 2 Ibadan: Africana-FEP Publishers UNIT 4 TEACHING LISTENING SKILLS CONENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2 .0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 What is Listening?
3.
1.
1 Factors that Determine Comprehension 3.
1.2 Types of Listening 3.
1.
3 Goals/Purposes of Listening 3.
1.4 Listening Skills 3.
2 Phases in the Listening Process 3.
3 Strategies for Developing Listening Skills 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you learned the importance of the sounds, intonation and stress patterns of the English language and you were taught some procedures for teaching these.
What you learned in that unit was to equip you to effectively teach the two skills used for oral communication, namely, listening and speaking.
In this unit and the next, we are going to dwell on the teaching of speaking and listening.
These skills are interrelated, because in a normal communication setting, one can hardly occur without the other.
Speaking for instance does not of itself constitute communication unless there is a listener or there are listeners to what is being said.
Neither is communication complete unless what is listened to is understood by the listener(s).
Both skills are very essential for personal and social communication purposes.
Enjoyment of and participation in 34  ENG 720 English Methods community life and thought are possible only by one s ability to understand other members of the community and for others to understand her/him.
Teaching listening and speaking skills therefore, is of primary importance if learners are to attain the objectives of meaningful communication in schools and other settings in the larger society.
Although listening and speaking skills are considered to be interrelated and therefore ought to be taught together, we have chosen to devote a unit to each of them to enable us focus attention on specific aspects of each skill.
Bear in mind however, that while you are teaching one skill, you are also teaching the other.
In this unit you will learn how to teach your students listening skills while in the next, you will learn how to teach them speaking skills.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you will be able to • define listening • describe factors that determine a listener s comprehension of utterances • list and describe purposes for listening • list and describe types of listening skills • describe phases in the listening process • describe strategies/ activities for developing students listening skills • assess listening abilities/skills of your students • conduct a listening comprehension lesson for a given JSS or SSS class 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is listening?
Listening is an active creative skill that enables someone to comprehend a speaker s utterance.
It is a process by which we receive, construct meaning from, and respond to spoken messages (Emmert, 1994) The act of listening involves hearing, thinking, as well as having a good deal of interest to what the speaker is saying.
When we listen to someone speaking, we hear sounds.
These sounds are a combination of several language components such as words (vocabulary), arrangement of words, (syntax), stress and intonation (the rise and fall of the speaker s voice).
Comprehending a speaker s utterance requires our mentally processing these language components in order to create meaning or significance from 35  ENG 720 English Methods the speaker s utterance.
Listening entails three components: the speaker, the listener and the meaning being shared.
How then do we ensure that our learners understand when they listen to?
We present and discuss below some factors that determine a listener s comprehension of utterances.
3.1 .1 Factors that Determine a Listener s Comprehension of Utterances Rivers ( 1981), states that the meaning or significance that a listener attaches to a speaker s utterance is dependent on three factors namely, the linguistic information perceived by the listener, the situational context, and the listener s comprehension of the speaker s intentions.
I will add two more factors.
These are: the topic/subject of speech and the listener s interest and attitude to the speaker.
Ø The linguistic information emitted by the speaker.
This is what the listener perceives aurally of the speaker s utterance.
Linguistic information is made up of sounds, words and their arrangements and the rise and fall of the speaker s voice.
Comprehension occurs as the listener creates meaning from what she hears.
The implication of this is that when teaching listening skills, selected listening comprehension exercises must contain mostly vocabulary and grammatical structures your students are familiar with.
Unknown words and grammatical structures must be very few and should appear in contexts where their meaning is easily understood.
When this is not so, comprehension is impeded.
Ø The situational context This is the setting in which the utterance was made and will determine the meaning the listener will attach to the utterance heard.
The situational context will also determine the listener s expectation of what the speaker would say next.
A listener s understanding of an utterance in any communicative setting will largely be affected by what the listener knows and understands of the setting.
Examples of typical communicative settings are the market places/shops, classrooms, places of worship e.g.
churches/mosques, political rallies, social gatherings e.g.
naming ceremonies, weddings, birthday parties etc.
The implication of this is that you must teach your students variety of vocabulary and registers of communicative situations they are likely to come across in their every day lives.
Equipping them thus will enable them learn and understand what vocabulary and registers speakers will likely use in a given communicative setting.
36  ENG 720 English Methods Ø The listener s understanding of the speaker s intentions Every speaker in any communicative setting has a reason(s) for speaking.
These are her intentions or purposes for speaking.
The goal of any speaker is that her listener/audience would understand her purpose for speaking.
This should also be the listener s purpose for listening.
This however is not the case sometimes.
There are instances for example when you listen to some one and you do not understand the speaker s purpose.
This may not be because you do not understand the linguistic information in the speaker s utterance.
Rather it may be due to a number of other factors.
Such factors include, your lack of knowledge of the topic/subject the speaker is talking about, or your lack of interest in the topic or speaker or both.
Understanding the speaker s utterance means understanding her intentions.
This understanding has to do with what we know about the topic and the speaker or persons like the speaker.
( examples are: pastors/imams, teachers, parents, children, friends and political associates).
Understanding also depends on the expectations the situation and previous utterances have aroused, the tone and nonverbal behaviors ( body language) of the speaker.
All these constitute what Rivers(1981) terms interactional content.
Research has shown that the more the interactional content the more the listener s understanding of the speaker s utterance.
This is because interactional content gives the listener more insight into the meaning the speaker intended to encode.
What does this mean to you as a language teacher?
This has implication for planning your listening comprehension lessons.
The texts you use must be interesting and on topics/subjects familiar to your students.
Additionally, the medium ( e.g.
video/audio cassette players, television or live voice) through which you deliver the listening comprehension passage must be appropriate.
Ø The topic/subject of speech Comprehension requires a listener s prior knowledge of the theme or topic of the speaker s discourse.
This knowledge enables the listener infer or guess the speaker s meaning beyond what is contained in the linguistic information.
Prior knowledge can be activated by the speaker through preparatory discussion of related topics and by ensuring that key words in the listening passage are known by the students or have been learnt by them in recent language lessons.
If there are new words in the text you must ensure that they appear in context where their meanings are easily understood.
37  ENG 720 English Methods Students familiarity with the topic or subject of speech is very important.
Understanding is often impeded when we listen to some one speak on an unfamiliar topic.
If for example you select a text in the area of Law or Government or Economics or Education, you must make sure that your students are conversant with the vocabulary and registers and general notions about the particular field of profession.
If that is not the case, your students will have a hard time understanding the text selected.
Ø The listener s attitude/interest to the speaker and topic Attitude and interest play a vital role in achieving our lives goals.
Positive attitude and interest will yield positive results.
The meaning a listener gets from a speaker depends on the listener s interest and attitude to the speaker and what she is saying.
When we do not show interest to a live lecture or television/radio programme for example, we will very likely miss a lot of what the speaker is saying.
As a teacher, you must encourage your students to listen with interest and pay attention when someone is speaking to them.
A useful way of kindling your students interest is by selecting texts they can connect with.
Examples are texts on family, social, political economic issues at national and international levels.
You must also ensure that the language of the text( vocabulary and registers) is at your students level of understanding.
SELF-ASSESSMENTEXERCISE 1 1.
List and describe three factors that determine a listener s comprehension of utterances.
2.
.How important is it that a teacher considers these factors when planning a listening comprehension lesson?
3.
1.
2 Types of Listening There are five main types of listening: • Informational Listening: In this type of listening, we listen for the content of the message to get the gist of the message.
For example, when we are listening to a lecture in a classroom, or being given instruction to carry out.
• Critical /Evaluative Listening: Here, we judge/evaluate the message we received in terms of its worth or whether we agree with the speaker or not.
For example, we do this at debates, discussion sessions etc 38  ENG 720 English Methods • Appreciative /Aesthetic Listening: This type entails listening for entertainment (enjoyment).
For example, listening to music, drama, concerts, poems, entertaining radio and television programmes etc • Therapeutic/Empathetic Listening: Listening to support or encourage others, for example, a sick person, angry person, disturbed/ worried person • Inferential Listening: We do this when we interpret a speaker s message beyond what s/he has said.
If you look at all the above types of listening, you will find that they are for academic purposes as well as for personal and social purposes.
You must teach your students to develop the ability to perform these types of listening.
SELF-ASSESSMENTEXERCISE 2 1.
Choose any two types of listening and describe two language activities you would use to develop them.
3.
1.
3 Goals/Purposes of Listening Listening skills should be taught not as an end in themselves but as means for attaining specific communication purposes Below are listed some purposes for listening.
You can see that they are closely related to types of listening discussed above.
In this section you will learn of different purposes of listening and the activities for teaching students the skills for attaining these purposes.
The National Curriculum for Junior and Senior Secondary Schools (1985) has listed the following as goals for teaching listening.
• Listening for main ideas • Listening to follow directions and to note details and sequence • Listening to understand a speaker s purpose, tone and mood • Listening to the same ideas repeated in different words • Listening for verbatim recall • Listening for implied meaning • Listening for critical evaluation in order to express one s opinion or to judge 39  ENG 720 English Methods Other important purposes for listening are: o Listening in a conversational interchange o Listening during group discussions o Listening to identify another viewpoint o Listening to radio and television programmes o Listening to someone speak over the phone o Listening for a sequence of ideas or plot of a story o Listening to anticipate an outcome o Listening for exact statements of a speaker o Listening to identify lexical and grammatical errors o Listening to distinguish facts from fiction o Listening for appreciation and pleasure o Listening for new vocabulary/words o Listening to recognize relationships expressed or implied o Listening to learn various subject matter areas The above list of purposes may seem too many to you but these are essentially the purposes or reasons why any body would want to listen.
It takes some learning and practice to acquire skills for these purposes, whether in our mother-tongue or in another language.
In the case of English as a second language, students at various school levels should be taught how to acquire and use these the skills needed to attain the above purposes.
SELF-ASSESSMENTEXERCISE 3 Describe three purposes for which you often listen.
3.
1.
4 Listening Skills Broadly speaking, listening skills can be classified into two, namely, bottom up and top down processing skills.
• Bottom Up Processing Skills These are basic fundamental listening abilities that a person must acquire in order to listen with understanding.
The bottom up processing skills are those used for decoding of language into meaningful units.
Bottom up skills you will have to develop in your students include the ability to: ü discriminate between intonation contours ü discriminate between phonemes ü distiguish morphological endings 40  ENG 720 English Methods ü select details ü recognize fast speech forms ü recognize stressed syllables ü recognize reduced forms ü recognize words as they link together in connected streams ü recognize sentence level features in speech/oral discourse.
ü recognize organizational clues.
• Top Down Processing Skills These are higher levels of listening skills needed in order to succeed in the art of listening.
Top down processing refers to the attribution of meaning drawn from one s own personal experiences to language input.
Top down processing skills include the ability to : ü identify a speaker s emotions ü get the gist of the speaker s message ü recognize the topic of the speaker ü use discourse structures to enhance listening strategies ü identify the speaker s tone ü evaluate the speaker s views ü find the main detail(s) ü make inferences ü recognize organizing principles of extended discourse.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What would happen if you do not develop bottom up processing listening skills in your students?
3.
2 Phases in the Listening Process A way of helping your students develop effective listening ability is to teach them the phases in listening.
Your students knowing these phases would make them consciously aware of their importance in listening.
There are three phrases in the listening process.
• Pre-Listening phase At this phase your students need your assistance in activating what they already know about the idea they are about to listen to.
The effective listening habits you should aim at developing in your students include teaching them: 41  ENG 720 English Methods ü use their background knowledge on the subject to understand the message being transmitted.
ü have a specific purpose for listening and attempt to ascertain speaker s purpose ü tune in and pay attention ü avoid being distracted • During Listening Effective listening habits you should teach your students to develop include during a listening exercise are: ü giving complete attention to the listening task and demonstrating interest.
ü searching for meaning.
ü constantly checking their understanding of message connections, making and confirming predictions, making inferences, evaluating and reflecting.
ü knowing whether close or cursory listening is required, adjust their listening behaviour accordingly.
ü being flexible note makers, outling, mapping, categorizing sifting and sorting information received.
ü taking fewer, more meaningful notes.
ü distinguishing the context and of words.
• After Listening At this phase, students act upon what they have heard to clarify meaning and extend their thinking.
Useful effective listening habits to be developed in your students include encouraging them to: ü withhold judgement till comprehension of message is complete ü follow up on presentation by reviewing notes, clarifying and reflecting and acting on the message received ü evaluate message based on facts presented and previous knowledge of the topic presented.
ü draw conclusion based on facts presented ü present by speaking or writing one s own points of views on the message heard.
42  ENG 720 English Methods SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 1.
Give two reasons why you should teach your students to give complete attention to the listening task and demonstrate interest in the message they are listening to.
3.
3 Strategies for Developing Listening Skills Perhaps the most valuable way to teach listening skills is for you the teacher to be a model, creating an environment through positive interaction, actively listening to your students and responding in an open and appropriate manner.
As much as possible try to minimize distractions and interruptions.
It is important that you provide numerous opportunities for your students to practice listening skills and to actively engage in the listening process.
There are several strategies that you can use to prepare your students for listening experiences.
You can: 1.
Ask your students to listen to radio, television and live speeches at home and social events, using the sample listening guide below.
The listening guide serves to focus the students attention on the content, organization, or devices used by a speaker/speakers as shown below.
Students are to complete the guide after listening and make their reports to the class.
Sample Listening Guide • Name of Student: • Nature of Spoken Presentation: e.g.
political, social, economic, cultural etc • Where heard: • Name of Speaker: • Topic /Subject • Speaker s expressed purpose: • Main ideal(s) and implied ideas presented: • Noteworthy features of presentation: eg the speaker s tone, manner of presenting her/his points of views, the way she/he argued her/his • Student s reactions to speaker s views • In what ways was the talk effective or ineffective?
Why: (Adapted from Devine, 1982) 2.
Teach your students to look out for the following when listening to a speaker: : • Structure of the speech(e.g debate, short stories, essay, poetry, play) 43  ENG 720 English Methods • Organizational patterns ( that is the order of the presentation e.g.
logical, chronological/ sequential).
• Transitional devices such as words or phrases used to indicate: ü Examples: for example, for instance, thus, in other words, as an illustration.
ü Time: first, second, third, meanwhile, next, finally, at last, today, tomorrow, soon.
ü Addition: in addition, also, furthermore, moreover, another.
ü Result: as a result, so, accordingly, therefore, thus ü Contrast: however, but, in contrast, on the other hand, nevertheless.
3.
Teach your students how to make notes.
Note-making is the act of listening and jotting down salient points heard.
Although, listeners need not capture on paper everything they hear, there are times that students need to focus on the message and so will need to record certain key words and phrases.
Students can adopt the Verbatim Split-page Procedure (VSPP) to develop note-making strategies.
Ask your students to divide their notebook/paper so that 40% of each page lies to the left and 60% to the right (Palmatier, 1973).
Students should take brief notes on the left hand side only.
They should use the right hand side to develop their notes after listening, reorganizing and expanding what they scribbled on the left hand side.
Sample VSPP 40% 60% 4.
Develop a curriculum plan for teaching listening skills to your students.
Here is a format you could adopt.
The format is taken from the National English Curriculum for Secondary Schools, published by the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council ( NERDC) Unit Topic Performance Content Teaching procedure: teacher s & Materials/Teaching Objectives class activities aids Students will be a.
Written 1.
Teacher explains to students the 1.A passage able to: passage(s) to meaning of main ideas in speech recorded on a a.
Identify main a. listen and be read out or written text and the importance tape and a ideas in a passage identify main orally by the of developing the ability to player ideas teacher.
identify main ideas.
2.A reading in a passage.
44  ENG 720 English Methods passage b.
Answer b. listen and b. tape questions on a summarize the recorded 2a.
Teacher plays a recorded passage.
main ideas in passage(s) or passage or reads a passage while speech (es) heard or short students listen.
passage(s) read.
conversation( 2bTeacher asks students to s) identify main ideas/points in the passage they listened to and explain why they consider the points they chose as main ideas.
2c.
Teacher asks students to summarise the main ideas in their own words.
Follow Students will be Selected 1.Teacher plays a recorded 1.
A tape recorder directions/proced able to follow recorded or passage or reads a selected 2.
A recorded ure or sequence simple and complex reading passage containing instructions on passage of performing a directions/instructio passages of how to perform certain tasks.
3.
A reading passage task, an ns on how to: appropriate 2.
Students listen to the passage assignment or an a. do an assignment difficulty and perform tasks/activities activity.
or an activity level required by the instructions.
b. use an appliance containing or medicine.
instructions c. get to or locate a on how to destination perform certain tasks/activitie s Students will be 1.Selected Teacher asks students to listen to Radio and television a.
Identify main able to listen in radio or specific radio or television sets in the class ideas/points of a order to: television programmes featuring discussions where it is possible to discussion or a. identify points programmes in the classroom or at home.
have these.
debate made by others featuring Teacher listens to the same b.
Argue a point b. agree or disagree discussions, programmes and asks students made by a with an opinion debates questions that will make them speaker made by another 2.
Selected identify main points made by a c. Disagree or person topics for speaker, dispute a speaker s point agree with an students to of view etc.
opinion discuss or expressed by debate on.
someone.
45  ENG 720 English Methods 4.
0 CONCLUSION Effective listening skills help students to listen meaningfully to utterances.
What you have learned in this unit will help you develop your students listening skills for academic, personal and inter-personal purposes.. 5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit we discussed what listening is, its nature, kinds and purposes.
We also looked at the listening process and how to develop listening skills in your students.
In the next unit you will be introduced to the second of the aural oral skills: speaking.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What listening skills do you consider essential for Senior Secondary School students?
2.
Why must you include bottom up processing skills when teaching listening?
3.
Briefly describe the phases in the listening process.
4.
Do a curriculum plan as shown above to teach a) Listening to identify a speaker s tone and mood.
b) Listening for a sequence of ideas in a story.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Brent, R. & Anderson, P (1993).
Developing children s classroom listening strategies.
Reading Teacher, 47(2), 122 126 Burley-Allen, M (1982).
Listening: The forgotten skill.
New York: Wiley Devine, T. G (1962).
Listening skills school wide: Activities and programs.
Urbana IL: National Council of Teachers of English Emmert, P (1994).
A definition of listening.
The Listening Post 51(6) Nichols, R. G (1973).
Factors in listening comprehension.
Speech Monographs, 15 Palmatier, R. A (1973).
A notetaking system for learning.
Journal of Reading, 17 46  ENG 720 English Methods Peter, P (1991).
A synthesis of methods for interactive listening.
In M. Celce-Murcial (ed).
Teaching English as a second or foreign language (2nd Ed) New York: Newbury House.
Rivers , W. M. ( 1981 ) Teaching Foreign Language Skills.
Chicago : The University of Chicago Press UNIT 5 TEACHING SPEAKING SKILLS CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 What is Speaking?
3.
1.
1 Goals of Teaching Speaking.
3.
2 Language Features involved in Speaking 3.
3.
Factors that Influence One s Ability to Speak 3.
4 Functions of Speaking 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Reading 1.
0 INTRODUCTION Recall that in the previous unit, we noted that oral communication involved speaking and listening and that in a normal communication situation, neither could occur without the other.
In that unit we discussed the teaching of listening.
In this unit, we are going to discuss speaking skills and what you should do to teach them well to your students 2.
0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit you should be able to: • define speaking • state the goals of teaching speaking • name the language features involved in speaking • discuss the functions of speaking 47  ENG 720 English Methods • outline the lesson procedures and activities for teaching speaking 3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 What is Speaking?
Speaking is a complex cognitive process.
It is an interactive process of constructing meaning, which typically involves receiving, processing and producing, information.
This can be through the use of verbal or non- verbal symbols.
Speaking is context bound, that is, its form and meaning depend on the context in which it takes place.
The context includes the participants ( speakers and listeners), their collective experiences, the physical environment and the purpose for speaking.
3.
1.
1 Goals for Teaching Speaking The purpose of teaching your students speaking skills is to ensure that they can: • recognize English sound patterns and produce English sounds correctly • express their thoughts using words, sentence structures and registers, appropriate for given social settings/situations, audience and subject matter of discussion • express themselves using correctly, the stress, intonation patterns and rhythm of English.
• organize their thoughts in a meaningful and logical order.
• use the English language as a means of expressing values and judgments.
• speak the English language fluently.
ü .
3.
2 Language Features involved in Speaking There are two groups of features involved in speaking.
These are the segmental and the supra segmental features of a language.
The ability to use these features, enables some one to speak a language fluently.
Although we had discussed these under the unit on teaching sounds, we will discuss them again in this unit because of their importance in speech development.
48  ENG 720 English Methods • Segmental Features Segmental features are the basic units of sounds which combine to form the spoken language.
These are called phonemes and they serve to distinguish words from one another.
You can teach your students this distinction through discrimination exercises of sounds using minimal pairs.
For example teaching the English vowel sounds in words like bee and tea, see, and tea.
Refer to Unit 3 of this course material where we have many examples of sound discrimination exercises.
• Supra segmental Features Supra segmental features include; stress, rhythm and intonation.
• Stress: This is the combination of length, loudness and pitch applied to syllables in a word.
All words that have more than one syllable have word stress.
What this means is that at least one of the syllables is longer and louder than the other syllable(s).
Most often your students may simply learn word stress as they acquire new vocabulary.
You should however teach your students some rules for identifying word stress such as shown in the following: o Compound noun: The first part of the compound word is stressed.
For example; BLUEbrid, BLACKboard, NOTEbook etc o Phrasal verbs versus Compound nouns: let DOWN LETdown In the above examples the stress pattern is different.
For phrasal verbs the stress is on the preposition while in the compound noun the first part gets the stress.
o Words with same spelling but different pronunciation and meaning.
In this case the part of speech changes with the word stress.
Noun Verb record re cord progress pro gress In the above example, if the word is used as a noun, the first syllable gets the stress while, the second syllable gets the stress in verbs.
49  ENG 720 English Methods • Rhythm: This is the regular patterned beat of stressed and unstressed syllables and pauses in a sentence.
For example: He WANTS to EAT later.
• Intonation: This is the variation of pitch of the voice when speaking.
In English, intonation is used to convey some ideas or concepts, such o as surprise, irony or to change a statement to a question.
For example: He did not say you stole my red shirt Nothing is particularly stressed in the above sentence, so the meaning is quite obvious.
However, the meaning of the same sentence will change depending on the word that is stressed.
HE did not say you stole my red shirt.
Someone else said it not him.
He did not say YOU stole my red shirt.
It is not you but someone else He did not say you STOLE my red shirt.
Maybe you borrowed it.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
With some illustrations, distinguish between segmental and supra segmental features of English language, and explain why it is important that you teach these to your students .
3.
3 Factors that Influence One s Ability to Speak The ideal goal for teaching your students to speak is for them to acquire native-like pronunciation.
However, certain factors make this goal unattainable.
These factors include: 1.
Age: Some studies have revealed that after puberty; Lateralization (the assigning of linguistic functions to the different brain hemispheres) is completed and adults ability to distinguish and produce native-like sounds is limited.
This is also referred to as the 50  ENG 720 English Methods Critical Period Hypothesis .
This hypothesis states that if humans do not learn a second/foreign language before a certain age, then due to changes such as maturation of the brain, it becomes impossible to learn a second/foreign language like a native speaker.
(Graham, 1994).
2.
Home/ School/Community Environment: The amount of exposure to spoken English that your students have at home/school/community will affect their speech pattern.
3.
Individual Ability: Due to biological and physiological differences, some of your students will be more sensitive to and better at imitating sounds than others.
4.
Attitude: Students attitude toward the target language, culture and native speakers can support or impede their speech development.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Describe three factors that that are necessary for one to develop his/her ability to speak.
3.
4 Functions of Speaking Speech is usually used for purposes of interaction, transaction and performance.
o Talk as Interaction You are not new to conversation.
Talk as interaction is the same as conversation.
When you meet people, you exchange greetings, engage in small talk, recount recent experiences etc.
You do these because you want to be friendly and wish to establish a relationship with others.
The main features of talk as interaction include the following.
It: o acts as a social function.
o shows role relationship.
o reveals speaker s identity.
o is formal or casual o reflects degree of politeness, familiarity For your students to effectively use talk as interaction you need to teach them how to do the following: 51  ENG 720 English Methods o Open and close conversations o Choose topics to speak on o Engage in small talk o Joke o Recount personal incidents and experiences o Take turns in discussions, debates etc o Use appropriate style of speaking for formal and informal settings and respecting standard speech ethiquete o Talk as Transaction Examples of talk as transaction include, classroom group discussion, asking someone for direction, buying something in a shop, ordering food from a menu in a restaurant etc.
For your students to use talk as transaction effectively you will need to teach them the following skills.
o Explaining a need or intention o Describing something o Asking questions o Making requests o Asking for clarification o Confirming information o Justifying an opinion o Clarifying understanding o Making comparisons o Agreeing and disagreeing with some body o Talk as Performance This last type of talk refers to public talk, that is, talk that transmits information before an audience.
This is one area where students are afraid.
They panic when you ask them to stand before an audience to make a speech, for example at debates.
You will have to teach your students the following skills to be effective speakers.
Teach them how to: o use appropriate formats of presenting information in logical/chronological sequence.
o maintain audience involvement creating an effect on the audience.
o use appropriate vocabulary and registers for given audiences o use appropriate opening and closing remarks 52  ENG 720 English Methods SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 State three functions of speaking.
4.
0 CONCLUSION Speaking is key to communication.
You should monitor your students pronunciation/speech production patterns in English to determine what skills they already have and what areas need development.
By determining what speaking tasks your students can perform and what specific skills your students need to further acquire, you can help them improve their speaking and overall oral competency.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit we discussed what speaking is, the goals of speaking and the features involved in speaking.
We equally discussed certain factors that inhibit speech and ways you can help your students develop skills in using speech to interact, transact and perform/.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State three goals for teaching speaking in secondary school.
2.
Explain the differences among the following utterance.
.
Jane will travel to Abuja next week.
JANE will travel to Abuja next week.
Jane will travel to ABUJA next week.
Jane will travel to Abuja NEXT week.
Jane will travel to Abuja next WEEK.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bailey, K. M & Savage, L. (1994).
New ways in teaching speaking.
Alexandria VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of other Languages Brown, H. D (2001).
Teaching by principles: An interactive approach to language pedagogy.
Englewood Cliffs, N. J: Prentice Hall Regents 53  ENG 720 English Methods Burns, A (1998).
Teaching speaking.
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 18: 102 123 Graham, J (1994).
Four strategies to improve the speech of adult learners.
TESOL Journal 3(3) 26 28 UNIT 6 TEACHING READING SKILLS CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 What is Reading?
3.
1.
1 Goals of Teaching Reading 3.
2 Reading Approaches and Methods 3.
2.
1 Language Experience Approach 3.
2.
2 Basal Reading Approach 3.
3 Types of Reading 3.
3.
1 Loud and Silent Reading 3.
3.
2 Skimming and Scanning 3.
3.
3 Extensive and Intensive Reading 3.
4 Barriers to Reading 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION The teaching of reading can be viewed from two perspectives.
First, it can be taken to mean the teaching of initial reading in the second language, English.
Secondly, it may refer to teaching aimed at improving the reading skills of those who have already learned to read in English .
In this unit, our aim is to focus on improving students reading skills, which is the second perspective.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define reading.
54  ENG 720 English Methods • state the importance of teaching reading.
• list and describe different reading approaches/methods.
• list and describe different types of reading.
• identify barriers to reading.
3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 What is Reading?
Reading is an active receptive skill, which entails comprehension and analysis of information presented in writing or print.
It is an essential part of language mastery.
The reading process involves the interaction between the reader and the text.
3.
1.
1 Goals of Teaching Reading As the aim of this unit is on how to improve the reading skills of your students, you should encourage them to: o comprehend texts written in English when studying English as a subject and when studying other school subjects, e.g.
Mathematics o read a wide range of texts in English outside the classroom.
o acquire a wide range of vocabulary, phrases and grammatical structures which would facilitate reading.
o adapt a reading type appropriate to a given purpose of reading.
o read to comprehend and recall main and detailed ideas, infer implied meanings, compare and contrast opinions, evaluate opinions etc 3.
2 Reading Approach /Method There are a variety of approaches and methods for teaching reading.
These include the phonic, whole word, whole sentence, language experience and basal reading approaches.
The first three of these are based on the Audio lingual approach/method of language teaching while the last two are based on the communicative approach/method of language teaching We are however, going to focus our discussion on just the last two , namely language experience and basal reading approaches.
3.
2.
1 Language Experience Approach/Method This approach although an recommended for teaching initial reading in second language is equally useful in teaching students who are already reading but with difficulties.
You may thus find it very useful particularly 55  ENG 720 English Methods in the junior secondary classes as a remedial approach for improving your students reading proficiency.
The Language Experience approach uses the child s experiences as the content for reading.
What this means is that the learner s oral language and his/her environment form the basis of the reading content.
Typically, the approach involves the use of a written record of the child s experiences, planned cooperatively by the pupils and the teacher.
This plan is kept on a chart known as the experience chart.
You should encourage individual and small group recording and reporting of experiences.
You can use the Language Experience Approach to develop your students reading by following these steps in your class.
1) Encourage your students to talk about events in their lives, for example, journeys they made, parties they attended, problems they encountered and incidents they witnessed etc 2) Students write these experiences in charts.
If it is a small class of 15 20 students, each student writes his/her experiences and reads these out to the class.
Your role is to guide and correct the students.
3) You can also write these experiences your self on the chalk-board as the students narrate them.
(You may find this very tasking especially if you have a large class size).
If the class is large, then organize it into small groups.
Appoint a leader for each group.
The leader will write in the chart the experiences of the group on a common incident 4) Let the students read these write ups while you provide the needed guidance for correct pronunciation of words and correct intonation and reading fluency.
Your students will find the exercise very interesting, because the content of the story is theirs and the vocabulary and expressions used are within their proficiency level.
3.
2.
2 Basal Reading Approach The Basal Reading Approach is the most widely used method in the teaching of reading in the Nigerian school system.
This approach uses a method of reading instruction, which is highly controlled in terms of vocabulary, language expressions/phrases , grammatical structures and levels of reading skills being developed.
Basal reading approach, uses commercially published course books which usually consist of the student s course reader, workbook or practice book as well as the teacher s handbook.
Examples of basal readers used in Nigeria include Oxford English Course Book Series, Evans English Course Book Series, 56  ENG 720 English Methods Macmillan English Course Book Series, Intensive English course book series etc.
These basal readers are written and developed in collaboration with specialists in English language, language educators and language curriculum developers.
These readers provide a sequential and controlled programme of reading instruction in such areas as pronunciation, word recognition/distinction, development of vocabulary, comprehension skills, and grammatical structures.
Most basal readers contain several controls, one of the most important being vocabulary.
The words selected are determined in part by earlier studies of word list compiled to show the frequency of use of words at various reading levels.
• Advantages: ü They provide carefully designed sequence of reading skills developed throughout the programme.
ü They are prepared with different grade levels in mind, for example, Primary 1 6 or JSS 1 to JSS 3. ü Student s workbook/practice book provides adequate practice for your students if properly used.
ü Teacher s handbook contains a lot of useful materials and guidance , which can aid you in teaching.
ü Nearly all the basal readers contain attractive illustrations, which attract students interest.
• Disadvantages: ü Basal readers are followed rigidly as students are made to read the same stories irrespective of their varied individual reading interests and needs.
ü In some cases stories are not typical of the experiences encountered by the majority of the students.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Compare basal reading and language experience approaches noting their merits and demerits.
2.
Take a students course book of any basal reading series, and study one of the lesson units.
Note down all the language areas being taught.
3.
3 Types of Reading Reading is essentially a process of decoding a written text.
It has various purposes, such as reading for academic purposes, personal interest, pleasure 57  ENG 720 English Methods or for gaining information.
Your purpose for reading will determine the type of reading to adopt.
There are various types of reading you can teach your students to equip them to read for different purposes.
Six of these will be treated in the subsequent sub-sections.
3.
3.
1 Silent and Loud Reading • Silent Reading Most of our daily reading is done silently.
It is the natural way of reading.
Silent reading involves individual reading without vocalization.
No sounds must be made, no lisping.
Silent reading is ideal and helps an individual student comprehend what he is reading.
This type of reading is especially useful to a student who needs to concentrate to absorb and reflect on what he/she is reading.
This type of reading is recommended for doing assignments, preparing or writing examinations.
You must help your students develop the ability to read silently by giving your class a few minutes during class to read silently.
• Loud Reading Loud reading involves vocalization or reading out loud.
It involves reading aloud to other people s hearing.
When we read aloud our concentration is divided.
This makes reading difficult and may cause problems of comprehension.
However, there are situations when you may have to read things aloud when others do not have access to the materials.
You can also use this type of reading to encourage your students to read aloud so that you can find how fluently they can read.
It will also help you to guide your students pronunciation, intonation and general speech fluency.
You will be developing both reading and speaking skills at the same time using this.
3.
3.
2 Skimming and Scanning • Scanning Scanning is a quick reading process with the primary focus of locating a particular information.
It involves quick eye movements, in which the eyes wander until the reader finds the specific piece of information he/she is searching for.
It is used when specific piece of information, such as key words like names, date, symbol, formula or phrase is required or when some one is looking for a particular topic in a table of content of a book.
58  ENG 720 English Methods The reader knows what he/she is looking for and so knows when he/she locates it.
• Skimming Skimming is reading for the essential meaning.
It is a quick reading process to get to know how a passage is organized, that is, the structure of the text: heading, sub-headings, title etc.
It can also be used to get an idea of the writer s intention or the theme of the passage.
Skimming is a more complex task than scanning because it requires the reader to organize and remember some of the information given by the author, not just to locate it.
Skimming is a tool by which the author s sequence can be observed unlike scanning by which some predetermined information is sought after.
3.
3.
3 Extensive and Intensive Reading • Extensive Reading Extensive reading refers to a relatively rapid style of reading typically of longer texts, which are judged to be within the language proficiency of the student.
It involves students reading long texts or large quantities for general understanding with the intension of enjoying the texts.
There are only a few tasks or comprehension exercises associated with the texts or there may be none at all.
Reading novels, newspapers, poems etc are forms of extensive reading.
For extensive reading, students are allowed to choose the books they read depending on their interests, and there is not always a follow-up discussion or work in class.
In this way you encourage your students to read for pleasure and become better readers.
o Features of Extensive Reading ü Reading Materials Extensive reading involves a large selection of books.
You will have to make available a large quantity for students to choose from at their level.
ü Students Choice Students choose what they want to read based on their interest.
59  ENG 720 English Methods ü Teachers Role The teacher s role in extensive reading procedure is to encourage and help students with their reading.
Students are put off reading when it is tied to class assignment.
You can ask your students about books they are reading informally and encourage occasional mini-presentation of the books review but these should not be seen as obligations by the students.
• Intensive Reading Intensive reading refers to a careful reading where the aim is to gain complete comprehension of the text.
Here the reader aims at a detailed comprehension and analysis of a short passage.
Intensive reading is recommended for academic purposes where the goal is to study and learn.
It requires concentration by the student and often needs that the student reads silently.
Texts for intensive reading are generally short (often around 500 words) and at a language level judged to be slightly above the reader s proficiency level.
It usually has a high proportion of tasks to be done or questions to be answered by the student at the end of the reading.
In order to complete the tasks the students may have to resort to frequent re-reading of the text.
Examples of tasks/ exercises your learners may after an intensive reading of a passage include: o Looking for main and detailed ideas.
o Understanding what is implied as against stated ideas.
o Making inferences.
o Making judgment of what the author wrote o Looking at the order or sequence of information and how ideas are linked from paragraph to paragraph.
o Identifying transition words that indicate change from one paragraph to another.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Compare each of these : silent and loud reading, skimming and scanning, intensive and extensive reading.
3.
4 Barriers to Reading o The Reading Process 60  ENG 720 English Methods Reading is the translation of symbols or letters into words and sentences.
When you read you must follow a sequence of symbols or letters arranged in a particular order.
In English we read from left to right, in Hebrew from right to left and in Chinese from top to bottom.
You can easily observe how people read.
Ask your colleague or course mate to read a book, preferably one produced with large prints.
He/she should read it holding it just below his/her eye level.
Watch his/her eyes, you will notice that, rather than making one smooth sweep across the page, his/her eyes move sporadically, going forward with a jump and then pausing.
This type of jumping movement is referred to as saccadic movement .
This stopping and starting movement is essential, since the eye can only take in information when it is not moving.
When the eye is motionless, it takes in part of a sentence and then moves on to the next part, so that, in fact we read sentences in small chunks.
o Factors that slow down Reading Speed: 1.
Faulty visual perception, that is limited perceptual span which invariably leads to word-by-word reading 2.
Slow perceptual reaction time, that is slowness in recognition and response to materials.
3.
Vocalization (reading aloud).
This slows down reading speed 4.
Head swinging, finger pointing or pencil/pen pointing can slow reading speed.
5.
Sub-vocalization (murmuring, making unnecessary sounds).
You can however help your students to overcome these problems through constant practice under timed conditions.
4.
0 CONCLUSION Reading is a receptive skill and there are various types for different purposes.. Knowing what each of the different types of reading entails and when to use them will help you make better choices with your learners.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, we looked at what the reading skill is all about and the reasons why you should teach it.
We also discussed two different approaches/methods to teaching reading: Language experience and basal 61  ENG 720 English Methods reading approaches and the different types of reading.
Some factors responsible for students slow reading speed were also highlighted.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. a) State two goals of teaching reading at the secondary school level.
b) Which reading approach will you recommend for remedial purpose in a junior secondary school class?
3.
Match the columns on the left with the definitions on the right.
Reading Type Definition Skimming Reading shorter texts to extract accurate detailed information Scanning Quickly reading a text to get the gist of it.
Extensive Quickly going through a text to find a particular piece of information.
Intensive Reading longer texts usually for pleasure.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bamford, J & Day, R. R. (Eds) (2004).
Extensive reading activities for teaching language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Carrel, P; Devine, J; & Eskey, D. (Eds) (1988).
Interactive approaches to second language reading.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Gbenedio, U.B.
(1996).
Teaching and learning English as a second language.
Benin: New Era Publication.
Goodman,K.
S. (1971).
Psycholinguistic universals in the reading process.
In P. Pimsleur & T. Quinn (Eds).
The psychology of second language learning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 62  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 7 TEACHING WRITING SKILLS CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1.
Purpose, Audience and Types of Writing 3.
2 The Writing Process 3.
2.
1 Hints to Enhance Students Writing 3.
3 Types of Writing 3.
3.
1 Correction of Written Composition 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION How to develop learners writing competence remains an arduous task for the English language teacher.
In this unit, we will take a close look at what writing entails, its very nature and the process of writing.
We will also review the different types of writing.
Finally, we will discuss how to correct your students written work.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define writing.
• describe the nature of writing.
• identify the different stages in the writing process.
• state the different types of writing.
• correct student s written composition.
3.
0 MAIN CONTENT Writing is a productive skill.
When we write we use graphic symbols, that is, letters or combinations of letters, which represent the sounds we make 63  ENG 720 English Methods when we speak (Byrne, 1979).
These symbols need to be arranged properly to form words, and then sentences in paragraphs.
3.
1.
Purpose, Audience and Types of Writing For you to successfully launch your students into the art of writing, there are three main issues in writing that you will have to take them through.
These are: • Purposes/Objectives of Writing Writing is defined by its purpose which is the goal or intention of the writer.
The goals of writing vary and are of the, following types: (i) taking notes at lectures or when you read; (ii) summarising e.g the main ideas of a text; (iii) answering test or examination questions; (iv) describing an incident, event, an experience; (v) describing a process, procedure and event, an object or a person; (vi) persuading someone or people; (vii) exposing an idea, a procedure, a belief a philosophy.
The last four are usually in form of essays or composition.
• Audience In any form of communication, the aim is the transmission of ideas from one person to another.
In the case of writing the audience is not physically present.
However, you should have at the back of your mind the target group you are writing the piece for.
You should be able to ask yourself such questions as: Who is going to read this piece?
For whom am I writing?
Are they: familiar known (friends, family, peers), extended known (community, student body, local media), extended unknown audience (wider range of media, other publications)?
• Types There are various types of writing which include reports, letters, composition / essays and summary.
Your purpose of writing will determine type of writing you are going to do.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What three issues should guide some one embarking on writing 64  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
2 The Writing Process: Useful Tips for Writing Essays/Composition (i) Choosing a topic You give a topic to your students to write on.
(ii) Planning Guide them to think about the topic and gather related ideas or points.
(iii) Shaping Show them how to organise the ideas into sections/ paragraphs in a related and orderly manner to signal relationship of ideas.
Teach them that a good coposition must have introduction, body and conclusion (iv) Drafting Teach them how to write the ideas in appropriate sentences arranged in paragraphs.
Teach them the use of link words such as additionall, then, next etc in linking ideas, paragraphs.
(v) Revising Students revise their work under your guidance.
Based on their evaluation, they make decisions on whether to re-write the draft of their work by adding, deleting, rewording or reorganising.
(vi) Editing Under your guidance students edit their work by checking the technical correctness of grammar, flow of expression and punctuations.
3.
2.1 Hints to Enhance Students Writing Teach your students to do the following things to enhance their writing skills: 1.
Write on topics / ideas they are familiar with when ever they have a choice.
2.
When given questions to answer, read through the questions carefully before writing their answers, for example, in comprehension and summary exercises.
3.
Write full meaningful sentences.
4.
Vary sentence and paragraph lengths.
5.
Vary sentence constructions.
6.
Ensure correct sentence agreement/concord.
7.
Use the most suitable tense 8.
Use direct speech/dialogues with discretion.
9.
Write numerals in words unless for dates and monetary amount or an instruction.
10.
Avoid: - repetition of words at the beginning of sentences.
E.g., I went to the market.
I met my friend.
I talked with her for over an hour.
65  ENG 720 English Methods - Overusing adjectives and adverbs.
- Overusing words.
- slang (except you are using it in direct speech to make a point.)
- redundancy and tautology - verbosity - unnecessary big words 3.
3 Types of Writing There are various types of writing as shown below.
Each has a format basically different from the other.
• Narrative Writing A narrative tells a story or gives an account of events or incidents.
The introduction usually indicates time and setting and introduces the characters.
The body is made up of a number of paragraphs.
This series of events contains the development of the plot.
Use of past tense and in the first or second person (I, he, she, they, them) dominate this type of writing.
• Descriptive Writing Descriptive writing paints a picture with words.
You may be required to describe a person, place, situation, process or even feelings.
This type of writing relies on details and requires suitable vocabulary, descriptive powers and creativity.
The present tense is often used.
Adjectives, adverbs and figures of speech should be used appropriately.
• Argumentative Writing In this type of writing you have a belief, a point of view or an opinion and your aim is to influence or persuade your audience or readers to agree with you.
You take a stand and support your opinion.
Appropriate use of connecting words such as; furthermore, of equal importance, in addition, it is clear etc, rhetorical questions and repetitions may be used for emphasis.
• Letter Writing There are different types as shown below: - Informal/Personal letters: Letters to friends and families 66  ENG 720 English Methods - Formal/Official letters: Letters of complaint, requests, job application (Use of Curriculum Vitae CV), letter to the editor; a formal letter expressing your point of view on an issue.
Curriculum Vitae CV: our students will be required to include their CV in job application letters so it is necessary that you teach them how to write CV.
A CV is a comprehensive biographical statement of your personal details, achievements and activities.
Below is a typical sub headings of a CV.
o Personal Data o Qualifications o Work Experience (if any) o Hobbies/Interest o References • Feature Article A feature article appears in a newspaper or magazine to inform, persuade or entertain.
It addresses social, cultural or political issues it is more detailed than a news report.
The writer states his/her opinion on the subject.
It has a short eye-catching heading.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Write a sample of a curriculum vitae in response to an advertisement for a job for the post of a teacher of English in a senior secondary school.
2.
Describe the stages in the writing process.
3.
Mention three things to check for during the editing stage of the writing process.
3.
3.1 Correction of Written Composition Correcting students written composition is time consuming especially with the large class sizes we have in most of our public schools.
Nevertheless we must find some ways of correcting our students composition.
There are two approaches you can adopt in correcting your students work.
1.
Write corrections on each student s paper, underlining the errors with red biro to make them clearly visible for the student.
Your students are then expected to do these corrections.
67  ENG 720 English Methods 2.
Write detailed comments explaining grammar points, raising questions concerning meaning and logical development, suggesting alternative wording and re-organizing the text.
This is surely a more effective method, but very tedious to use in a large class.
However, its results are rewarding, as your students will learn better because you will be able to go beyond simple correction.
You will provide explanations for your suggested changes.
You can also use students errors, which are repetitive in nature as samples for correcting the structure.
4.
0 CONCLUSION The written mode is important for communicating our ideas, thoughts and even for recording our thoughts.
We can always read our writings and reflect on the ideas at a later date.
Teaching your students how to write, would prepare them not only for writing for academic purposes but for writing for life.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, you were introduced to what the writing skill is, its nature, types and stages in the writing process.
You were also given hints on how to enhance your students writing.
We also discussed approaches you could use to correct students written composition.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write a sample of an argumentative composition titled, Civilian rule is better than a military rule to use to teach students of SSS 2.
2.
Write your Curriculum Vitae and a letter applying for a job in any Nigerian bank.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bacha, N.(2002).
Testing writing in the EFL classroom: Students expectations.
Forum English Teaching 40(2), 14 19 Byrne, D. (1988).
Teaching writing skills.
London: Longman Hedge, T. (1988).
Writing.
London: Oxford University Press 68  ENG 720 English Methods Raimes, A.
(1985).
Techniques in teaching writing.
London: Oxford University Press MODULE 2 TEACHING LANGUAGE SUB-SKILLS AND LITERATURE IN ENGLISH Unit 1: Teaching Vocabulary Unit 2: Teaching Grammar Unit 3: Teaching Reading Comprehension and Summary Skills Unit 4: Teaching Literature-in-English I: Prose Unit 5: Teaching Literature-in-English II: Drama and Poetry UNIT 1 TEACHING VOCABULARY CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 What is Vocabulary?
3.
2 The Need for Vocabulary Acquisition 3.
2.
1 How learners Acquire Vocabulary 3.
2.
2 Techniques for Teaching Vocabulary 3.
3 Word Formation 3.
3.
1 Prefixes 3.
3.
2 Suffixes 3.
4 Integration and use of Acquired Words 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION Vocabulary acquisition is a very important step in language learning.
Learners need to broaden their vocabulary in order to express themselves clearly and appropriately in different situations.
The greatest challenge inhibiting the ability of your students to read at appropriate grade level can be attributed to lack or insufficient vocabulary.
This unit will address the basic issues involved in vocabulary development, which include, strategies 69  ENG 720 English Methods for acquiring vocabulary, word formation and how learners integrate and use acquired words.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the importance of vocabulary in use of language • distinguish between conscious and incidental vocabulary acquisition.
• describe the different strategies you can use in teaching vocabulary.
• state the different ways of word formation.
• describe how words acquired are integrated and used.
3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 What is Vocabulary?
Vocabulary or lexis are words used in a particular language.
Your students can understand a written text if they know the meanings of majority of the words in the text.
Vocabulary is very crucial for a learner s language proficiency because it facilitates language production and fluency.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why is vocabulary acquisition crucial in language learning?
3.
2 The Need for Vocabulary Acquisition Learners need to acquire a large amount of lexical items in order to use a language effectively.
Learners need to understand about 98% of the words in a text in order to understand the main idea, or guess the meaning of the other words in the text using contextual clues.
For an un-simplified text, this means about 5,000 8,000 words (Schmitt, 2008).
This is a great task to achieve.
Many of the lexical items learners need to know are chunks .
Chunks are related words or expressions we learn as global units, which include collocation, fixed and semi-fixed expressions and idioms.
E.g.
by the way, all over the world, never mind, back and forth etc.
70  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
2.
1 How Learners Acquire Vocabulary In teaching vocabulary, perhaps one of the first problems you will face is what to teach and how.
Should your focus be on teaching lexical items by themselves or guiding students to acquire vocabulary through using various approaches to reading,?
The guiding principle should be to use any means or approaches that would help your students acquire sufficient vocabulary to be able to use the language fluently.
Using language experience , basal reading , and extensive reading approaches for instance would lead your students to build up their vocabulary knowledge.
When ever the need arises for you to teach specific vocabulary items do not hesitate to do so if that would help your students.
Such instances allow you to employ the Audio- Lingual procedure of language teaching.
You should however as much as possible, teach these lexical items in situations/contexts to enable the students understand their meanings.
It is widely accepted that vocabulary teaching should be part of the syllabus, and taught in a well-planned and regular basis.
Most of the basal readers in use in Nigeria deal extensively on vocabulary development.
These are grouped around words such as; household items, parts of the body, food, family members, sports, travel etc 3.
2.
2 Techniques used in Vocabulary Teaching • Guided Discovery This strategy involves asking your students leading questions or giving them clues for instance on a reading passage, that will guide them to guess the meanings of words correctly.
In this way they get involved in the process of semantic processing that helps learning.
• Contextual Guesswork You can also teach your learners how to deduce meaning of words by making use of the context in which the word appears.
In some cases, they can guess from the word itself through the knowledge of the word formation.
For example knowledge of the meaning of a prefix or suffix added to a root will help the learner in guessing the meaning of a word.
(Word formation will be treated in the next section.)
Identifying the function of a word in the sentence, e.g.
verb, adjective, noun etc can also help you to guess the meaning of the word.
71  ENG 720 English Methods • Using Dictionaries A good dictionary is a necessary companion of a second language learner.
Apart from using it to check meanings of words, students will be able to check pronunciation, the function of the word e.g.
verb patterns, verb forms, different spellings (American/British) style, as well as sample sentences that illustrate the use of the word.
• The use of synonyms and antonyms Asking your students to supply word synonyms or antonyms can help build up their vocabulary.
You should stress the fact that when words are substituted in a passage it must be in the same word class, e.g.
a noun for a noun or a verb for a verb.
You can encourage your students to get a small exercise book or index cards in which they enter any new words they learn.
It should indicate meaning, pronunciation, and sample sentences to illustrate the use of the word.
The class as a whole can also keep a vocabulary box with cards, which can be used for revision or recycling regularly.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State three techniques you can use in teaching your students new words.
3.
3 Word Formation Learners can increase their vocabulary through knowledge of word formation.
There are several ways of creating new words in English language.
These include affixation, compounding, clipping, blending, borrowing and so on.
We will however concentrate on the process of word formation through affixation in this course.
o Affixation is the process by which affixes combine with root words to form new words.
o Affix is a bound morpheme, which attaches to a base (root/stem).
They are either prefixes or suffixes.
Examples are , re, un,tion,ty etc o Prefixes are attached to the front of a base, e.g.
re- rewrite o Suffixes are attached to the end of a base, e.g.
-al critical 72  ENG 720 English Methods SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is affixation?
3.
3.
1 Prefixes Learners will be able to infer the meaning of a word if they know the meaning of the prefix.
Prefix Meaning Word class Examples non- Negation/opposite Noun Noun nonstarter Adjective Adj - nonpartisan un- Reverse action / Verb untie, undo opposite quality Adjective unsafe, unhappy re- Repeat action Verb retie, rewrite, Noun reunion 3.
3.
2 Suffixes Suffixes most often change the word class of the base.
Suffix Word class Word class Examples changed to -ity Adjective Noun electric electricity obese obesity -ous Noun Adjective fame famous glamour glamorous -al Noun Adjective institution institutional -able Verb Adjective print printable drink drinkable -ize Adjective Verb concrete concretize A word can contain both prefix and suffix.
E.g.
prearrangement .
This can be broken into: Prefix pre (before) Base arrange (verb) 73  ENG 720 English Methods Suffix ment (changes word class to noun) Vocabulary is the most sizeable and unmanageable component in second language learning.
You will need to encourage your students to explore all means to develop their vocabulary.
3.
4 Integration and Use of Acquired Words The way our memory works offers some insights into how we integrate and use words that we acquire.
Learning new words involves storing them first in our short-term memory, and later in the long-term memory.
We however do not have conscious control over this process.
There are some important clues to help you in the use of acquired words.
o Retention in short-term memory is ineffective if the number of chunks exceeds seven.
This therefore means that you should not teach more than this number.
Our long-term memory can however hold any amount of information.
o Our mental lexicon is highly organized and efficient.
Semantically related words are stored together.
o Frequently used words are easily retrieved.
o Forgetting is an inevitable process in human life, unless you use words you have learned regularly, there is the tendency that you will forget them.
Recycling is vital and ideally this should be done as frequently as possible.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Write five examples of prefixes.
2.
Write five examples of suffixes 4.
0 CONCLUSION Vocabulary development is crucial to language proficiency.
Your students need to adopt both conscious and incidental approach in the acquisition of vocabulary in order to build up a sizeable vocabulary.
You should therefore use different strategies to achieve this purpose.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the importance of vocabulary acquisition by learners if they are to develop proficiency in using a language.
We also discussed some techniques that learners could use to acquire a wide range 74  ENG 720 English Methods of vocabulary, such as contextual clues, synonyms, antonymys and affixation.
Finally, we looked at the role memory plays in word storage and retrieval and how this could aid your vocabulary teaching.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. a) Name two techniques learners can use in learning new words b) State two methods of word formation and give five examples of each.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Allen, V (1983).
Techniques in teaching vocabulary.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carter, R. & McCarthy, M (1988).
Vocabulary and language teaching.
London: Longman.
Coady, J.
(1997).
Vocabulary acquisition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Quirk, R. et al (1985).
A grammar of contemporary English.
New York: Longman Schmitt, N (2008).
Instructed second language vocabulary learning.
Language Teaching Research 12(3), 329 363 75  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 2 TEACHING GRAMMAR CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 Meaning of Grammar 3.
2 The Role of Grammar in Second Language Teaching 3.
3 Methods of Teaching Grammar 3.
3.
1 Deductive Method 3.
3.
2 Inductive Method 3.
3.
3 Eclectic Method 3.
4 Techniques for Teaching Grammatical Structures.
4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCYION Grammatical structures have played a central role in language teaching and learning.
The general goal of any systematic instruction in any language is to enable learners of the language, particularly in a second language situation to acquire knowledge of the structural patterns of the language.
This is to facilitate communication.
Thus, in this unit, the discussion will focus on what grammar is, its role in second language learning and the different methods and techniques of teaching grammatical structures.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the term grammar .
• state the role of grammar in second language learning.
• identify the features in the different methods of teaching grammar.
• construct suitable substitution tables/dialogues/pattern drills for teaching specific grammatical structures • write out the steps used in the different methods of teaching grammar.
76  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 Meaning of Grammar The word grammar has been variously defined.
One of the definitions listed in the American Heritage Dictionary of English Language (2002), states that grammar is a normative or prescriptive set of rules setting forth the current standard of usage for pedagogical reference purposes .
This definition seems to echo Gbenedio s (1996) view, that for the layman, grammar is seen as a set of normative rules that determine the correctness of our language use .
This means that for a sentence to be correct, it has to conform to some set rules.
Thus, grammar provides us with the structure we need in order to organize and put our messages and ideas across.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define grammar.
3.
2 The Role of Grammar in Second Language Teaching Grammar plays a definite role in language teaching.
The question you need to ask yourself is: How do I teach grammar?
In other words: How do I help my students learn the grammar they need to communicate effectively?
Most teachers of English as second language recognize the need for teaching the grammar of the language.
In Britain and North America, where English is the Mother Tongue, teachers have seen and accepted the need for adequate knowledge of the grammatical forms of the English language.
Grammar is to language what anatomy is to the human body.
Since grammar is the means by which we can understand how a language works, a definitive study of grammar is essential in language study, second or foreign language.
3.
3 Methods of Teaching Grammar Grammar can be taught in different ways: deductive grammar teaching, where rules are taught explicitly using grammar-translation method, inductive grammar teaching, where grammar rules are taught implicitly.
using audio-lingual method, and eclectic grammar teaching, where deductive and inductive approaches are used as the need arises.. 77  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
3.
1 Deductive Method The deductive method, also known as top down approach is one where the teacher explains the grammar rules to the students who learns these rules and then applys them in responding to exercises on grammar..
The principle behind this method is based on the rationale that learners need to understand the elements of the linguistic system of a language before putting them into practice.
With this understanding plus memorization and frequent use, learners are sure to internalize the structures.
The teacher plays a major role in this method.
For example to teach the use of the ending -d , -ed and - ied with verbs in the simple past tense (regular form) a typical lesson using this method will take the following steps: • Lesson Outline Step I: Start the lesson with a warm-up exercise to review students prior knowledge on the simple present tense.
Step II: State the objective of the lesson clearly by defining the rules and applying them to verbs with which the students are familiar.
There are three ways in which the simple past tense can be formed in the regular form: • Add -d to verbs ending with the vowel letter e dance danced refuse refused • Add -ed to verbs ending with consonants end ended attend attended • Add -ied to verbs ending with the letter y (delete y first) try tried bully bullied Step III: Give further illustrations with a number of examples.
Write the verbs in three columns, one for each rule.
Ask students to identify the rule used in the formation and state the reason.
Step IV: Let the students provide additional examples on their own.
78  ENG 720 English Methods Step V: Ask students to sum up what they have learned throughout the lesson.
Step VI: Give students an assignment to be turned in and discussed for the next session.
3.
3.
2 Inductive Method The inductive method is also known as bottom up approach and advocated for by the Audio-lingual methodologists, is based on the assumption that exposure to comprehensible language use will result in the internalization of the linguistic system.
This process may be conscious or unconscious or a combination of the two.
In this method learners are not taught rules directly but are left to discover the grammatical rules by themselves or induce the rules from their experience of using the language.
The role of the teacher is to guide the learners.
By guiding the learners, the teacher leads the learners to look for similarities and differences, and generalize their observations, form and test hypotheses and discover how the language works.
For example to teach the use of the ending -d , -ed and - ied with verbs in the simple past tense (regular form) a typical lesson using this method will take the following steps: • Lesson Outline Step I: Start the lesson with a warm-up exercise to review students prior knowledge on the simple present tense.
Step II: Continue the lesson by writing some relevant sentences on the board.
o The First World War ended in 1918. o He attended a party last week.
o They danced gracefully at the party.
o They refused the gift.
o Tolu tried to jump back.
o Adamu bullied all the little boys in his class.
Prompt the students to supply the present tense form of the verbs underlined in the sentences.
Present Past end ended attend attended 79  ENG 720 English Methods dance danced refuse refused try tried bully bullied Step III: Pose questions that are focused on the notion that the verbs used in the above sentences have the following endings -d , -ed and -ied Step IV: Having made the students understand the rules, let them relate what they found out in the lesson and give examples of their own.
Step V: Divide the class into several groups and ask them to verify the rules and give reasons for their verification.
Step VI: Give students an assignment to be turned in and discussed for the next session.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention one striking difference between the deductive and inductive methods of teaching grammar.
3.
3.
3 Eclectic Method This method combines what is best in both the deductive and inductive methods.
The teacher is expected to first give students examples of the grammatical structures to be learned.
After the students have analysed the structures to discover the underlying rules or patterns and have extensively practiced the structures, they are guided to form a generalization about the grammatical form they have worked with.
To further enhance learning, the teacher later states explicitly the rules and patterns or generalizations governing the grammatical structures to confirm what students have discovered on their own.
This method places a lot of emphasis on practice, which comprises of a sequence of activities broken into three stages: Exploration, Explanation and Expression.
To teach, for example, the use of the simple past tense ending -d , -ed and - ied of regular verbs, a typical lesson using this method will take the following steps: 80  ENG 720 English Methods • Lesson Outline Step I: Start the lesson with a warm-up exercise to review students prior knowledge of the simple present tense.
Stage 1: Exploration Step II: Write the following sentences on the board and ask students to state the grammatical patterns in the underlined verbs.
o The First World War ended in 1918. o He attended a party last week.
o They danced gracefully at the party.
o They refused the gift.
o Tolu tried to jump back.
o Adamu bullied all the little boys in his class.
o Draw students attention to the underlined verbs in the sentences.
Let them see the underlying rules.
Let them identify the different endings: -d , -ed and -ied .
Together with the class discuss the pattern, which can be observed.
Stage 2: Explanation Step III: Discuss the rules, which the students have identified in step II to make the connection between the examples and the explicit rules.
There are three ways in which the simple past tense can be formed in the regular form: o Add -d to verbs ending with the vowel letter e dance danced refuse refused o Add -ed to verbs ending with consonants end ended attend attended o Add -ied to verbs ending with the letter y (delete y first) Try tried Bully bullied Step IV: Give students more meaningful examples of how and in what situations the rules can be used.
81  ENG 720 English Methods Stage 3: Expression Step V: Divide students into pairs and give them tasks to tell their partners what they had done in the past .
Step VI: Give students an assignment to be turned in and discussed for the next session.
3.
4 Techniques for Teaching Grammatical Structures There are various techniques that you can use to teach your students grammatical structures.
These include substitution tables, dialogues and pattern drills.
v Substitution Table A substitution table is a format where sentences are set out in their simplest forms.
The table is planned in such a way that some of the words can be substituted with other words and you still maintain the same sentence pattern.
Its usefulness includes: - Quickest and easiest way of introducing new structures.
- Can be used to stamp out common errors.
- Very useful in teaching English tenses.
Here is an example to teach the present forms of the verb to be Sample A A B C D I traders She are a farmer He am teachers We clerk They is Your students can construct up to eighteen sentences from this table.
They can also add new phrases to column A and B and construct additional sentences.
Here is another sample.
Can you tell what grammartical structure is being taught by this table?
Sample B 1 2 3 4 You attended to by next Tuesday.
82  ENG 720 English Methods They examined by 30th December.
All the class promoted by the time we get home.
Some of the would have paid before Monday next week students been seen by the before midnight None of doctor before the next meeting.
them fed before we leave.
The tailor Your students can construct well over 200 sentences from this table.
Divide the class into groups and ask students to make sentences from the table.
They can also add phrases to columns 1, 3 and 4. v Dialogues Dialogues are used as a form of natural method of teaching a language.
The teacher acts as the model, while students imitate him/her.
Class activities such as debates can be organized to use dialogues.
Dialogues include question and answer chains.
Questions you ask should be ones that enable your students make sentences in the required patterns.
Sample Dialogue (Use of the verb form have) Efosa: I m sorry I m late.
Have you been here long?
Alero: No, only for a few minutes.
Efosa: What will you eat?
Alero: I haven t decided.
Have you ever eaten Amala and Ewedu ?
Efosa: No, I haven t. Is it good?
Alero: It s delicious.
I have had it several times.
Efosa: How about Edikangkon ?
Have you ever had it?
Alero: Actually, I did my National Youth Service (NYSC) at Uyo in Akwa- Ibom State.
I ate it a lot there Efosa: I didn t know that.
When was that?
83  ENG 720 English Methods Alero: Two years ago.
v Pattern Drills Pattern drills are designed to allow you to practice sentences and phrases you have taught your students.
There are several drill types.
o Repetitions students repeat after the teacher like a parrot.
o Substitution similar to substitution table format but not in a tabular form Example: James has gone to school.
Mary has gone to school.
She has gone to school.
o Expansion making the sentence longer.
Example: They have come.
(just) They have just come.
(Lagos) They have just come from Lagos.
(air) They have just come from Lagos by air.
o Replacement one word may be replaced with another word from the same class o Transformation changing from one form to another - Statement Question - Positive Negative - Direct Indirect - Active Passive SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Name and describe three types of pattern drills.
4.
0 CONCLUSION 5.
0 SUMMARY It is essential that second language learners be properly groomed in the grammatical structures of the target language to enable them communicate.
84  ENG 720 English Methods In this unit, we discussed what grammar is and its role in second language teaching.
We also discussed three methods of teaching grammatical structures and some techniques you can use in teaching grammar.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Name and describe with adequate illustrations three methods you can use to teach grammar.
b.
Which groups of methodologists use these methods ?
2) Which of these methods do you prefer and why 3) Write out a lesson outline using your preferred method to teach the past continuous tense of an irregular verb.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS American heritage dictionary of English language (2002).
4th Ed.
New York: Houghton Mufflin Company.
Boadi, L. A, Grieve, D. W, Nwankwo, B.O.
(1968).
Grammatical structure and its teaching.
Ibadan: African Universities Press Ltd. Carter, R; Hughes, R & McCarthy, M (2000).
Exploring grammar in context.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Celce-Murcia, M & Hilles, S (1988).
Techniques and resources in teaching grammar.
London: Oxford University Press.
Gbenedio, U.B.
(1996).
Teaching and learning English as a second language.
Benin: New Era Publication.
85  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 3 TEACHING READING COMPREHENSION AND SUMMARY SKILLS CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objective 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 Reading Comprehension 3.
1.
1 Factors that Affect reading Comprehension 3.
1.
2 Strategies for Reading and Comprehending a Text 3.
1.
3 Question Types for Reading Comprehension 3.
2 Summary Writing 3.
2.
1 Hints on Teaching Summarizing Skills 3.
2.
2 Summarization Strategies 3.
2.
3 The Summarizing Process 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 Reference/Further Reading 1.
0 INTRODUCTION The speed with which we read and comprehend what we are reading is very important.
You need to develop your students reading skills as these help them not only in comprehending texts but in summarizing.
Reading comprehension and summarizing skills are skills your students will need not only for English but also for other subjects.
In fact they are life skills.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define reading comprehension • state factors that affect reading comprehension • discuss the guidelines for analyzing written text.
• set different types of questions on comprehension passages.
• define summary writing • state different types of summarization strategies.
• describe the different steps in the summarizing process.
86  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 Reading Comprehension Reading comprehension can be defined as the level of understanding of a passage or text.
In other words, it is the ability to understand what we read.
Your students comprehension ability may be determined by their ability to: - recognize individual words in a passage or text, - group words into thought units, and - relate these thought units into meaningful sentences or paragraphs.
Your students being able to do the above will ultimately lead them to have a meaningful comprehension of a text at the following three distinct levels of comprehension : v Factual Level that is reading the lines.
Students may only be able to pick out the bare facts in the passage or text.
v Interpretative Level reading between the lines.
At this level your students can comprehend the meaning that is not expressed, but implied.
v Evaluative Level reading beyond the lines.
This involves the evaluation of what is read through mental activities such as judging the authenticity of the materials, associating what s/ he has read with his/her present/past experiences.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is reading comprehension?
2.
Describe how you will be able to judge some one as being able to comprehend.
3.
1.
1 Factors that Affect Reading Comprehension You will notice that not all your students can read at the same speed level or comprehend what they read effectively.
There is a need therefore for you to help your students develop their comprehension skills.
In order for you to do this well, you must understand the factors that could affect reading comprehension.
These factors include the following: 87  ENG 720 English Methods 1.
The kind of text used.
: If a student is not familiar with words, concepts and experiences contained in the selected passage or text, comprehension will be affected.
2.
Vocabulary: If there are too many difficult words and chunks in a passage or text that the students have not come across before or cannot infer their meaning from context, comprehension will be impaired.
3.
Sentence length and paragraph formation: Students reading comprehension is often impaired when the passage or text is filled with lengthy sentences and paragraphs.
4.
Limited intelligence: Generally, the intelligence level of your students can lead to their ability or inability to comprehend much.
5.
Lack of developmental reading skills: Reading comprehension skills are based on earlier stages of reading development, which include oral reading and reading speed/fluency.
Without developing these earlier skills, students most often continually focus on decoding letters and words instead of pursuing the progression to meaning and understanding.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Name and describe three factors that could affect reading comprehension and explain how you would deal with these.
3.
1.
2 Strategies for reading and Comprehending a Written Text There are useful strategies you can teach your students to aid their reading comprehension.
v First Reading Teach your students to have a general overview of the passage or text when they are given a passage to read.
Such an overview will help them focus attention on the text.
Teach them to do the following: - Take note of the title.
It may offer clue to the content and purpose.
- Read through the questions (if there are any).
- Take note of the introduction as it often creates the atmosphere and provides the setting for what is to follow.
- Take note of the conclusion.
This may usually tie in with the main purpose or arguments of the writer.
88  ENG 720 English Methods v Re-examine the text and analyse in more detail.
At this stage students are to take note of the following: - Theme(s), ideas and issues - Context - cultural, historical and situational .
These can affect the interpretation of the text.
- Audience professional/general/students - Purpose to entertain/inform/persuade.
- Style diction, imagery etc.
3.
1.
3 Question Types for Reading Comprehension • Literal/factual questions Answers to this type of questions are generally found in the passage.
Question formats include wh , such as who, what, why, when, etc • Technique questions This type examines the writer s style especially his/her use of language.
• Questions about the writer s intended audience general public, adults, teenagers, specific group, political, professional etc • Questions about the writer s purpose is it to entertain, amuse, inform, explain, criticize etc.
• Interpretative/Inferential questions demand that students make inferences beyond the written text.
• Sentence analysis questions This type requires students to identify sentence types, clauses, phrases and state their functions.
• Vocabulary questions giving meaning of words using contextual clues and giving the synonyms/antonyms of words.
3.
2 Summary Writing A summary is a shortened version of an original text.
It states the main ideas and important details of the text with the same text structure of the original.
It is a simplified condensed account of the original text.
3.
2.
1 Hints on Teaching Summarizing Skills Summarizing requires that your students comprehend, analyze and synthesize ideas in a passage or text.
This is not just copying or blind lifting of statements in the passage.
Students are expected to process the 89  ENG 720 English Methods text in one form, make judgments about the ideas and restate the text in a new form.
Your students should take note of the following: • Summaries should be brief.
Only main points are required.
• Straight to the point.
Eliminate all unnecessary information such as repetitions, explanations, descriptions and quotations.
• Use your own words.
This shows that you understand the text.
• A summary is a reported statement.
So it should be written in the past tense and in reported speech.
• Summary is different from a paraphrase.
o Paraphrase Paraphrasing is simply restating ideas in different words.
o Summary A summary is a shortened simplified version of an original text.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1. a) What is evaluative level of reading comprehension?
b) Mention three factors that can affect your students reading comprehension.
2.
List and describe four hints you should teach your students on summarizing 3.
2.
2 Summarization Strategies A summarizing strategy is a set of procedures that you teach your students to follow when doing a summary exercise.
The type of summarization strategy to adopt depends on the length of the text.
There are three types of summarization strategies that you can teach your students.
These are: v The Paragraph Summarization Strategy This strategy requires that you deal with only one paragraph at a time.
You read the paragraph and then ask some questions to find the main idea and supporting details.
90  ENG 720 English Methods v The Section Summarization Strategy This strategy focuses on students reading a multi-paragraph section that covers a topic.
This is the type you will find in summary sections of external examinations such as WAEC, NECO and NABTEB.
v The Multi-Section Summarization Strategy This type of summarization strategy is the type used in report writing, for example summarizing a prose text.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
State and describe three summarization strategies.
2.
List and describe the types of questions asked in the summary section of a WAEC paper of any year.
3.
2.
3 Summarization Process There are five distinct steps in the summarizing process: Step 1: Identifying the key points of the text.
In most English prose forms, the key points of a text passage can be found in the first sentence of each paragraph.
The final sentence of a text often contains valuable information and even at times the key points can also be found in the middle sentences.
Step 2: Paraphrasing key points at sentence level.
Every successful summary is both an interpretation and a paraphrase.
It is an interpretation because you must decide what parts of an original text are salient.
It is a paraphrase since the wording of the selected key portions almost invariably differs from the original.
Paraphrasing is an important part of the summarizing process because it allows you to adjust the text to the interests and reading level of a target audience.
Use of synonyms is essential in this step.
So the need to develop your students vocabulary comes to play here.
Step 3: Transforming sentence-level paraphrases into reported speech This is the simplest part of the summarizing process.
It involves a mechanical transformation of text passages into the third person, past tense 91  ENG 720 English Methods forms.
You can teach this by taking a wide range of sentences and transforming them into reported speech.
Step 4: Adding sequential markers.
Sequential markers indicate which part of a passage comes first, next and last.
Though short summaries may not need such markers, longer ones often do.
Sequential markers include: First Next Then In addition In the section After this Finally Lastly Moreover In conclusion Which follows Step 5: Creating an introductory sentence (Optional) Some extended summaries are complex enough to merit the addition of an introductory sentence at the head, which tells readers what the passage is about.
E.g.
: This is an article about , This passage reflects the opinion of , This story expresses the thoughts of .
4.
0 CONCLUSION Summarizing goes hand in hand with comprehension skills.
With adequate practice, both skills will aid you in your studies and in your career.
Being able to read and summarize would greatly aid you in teaching your students these very important skills 5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed two life skills: comprehension skills and summarizing skills.
In the comprehension skills we discussed the different levels of comprehension, factors that affect reading comprehension, analysis of the written text and type of questions to expect in comprehension passages.
For the summarizing skills we discussed hints for summary teaching, summarization strategies and the summarizing process.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Take an article from a newspaper of not more than a typed page single spacing and set three factual questions, and one question on the writer s purpose.
2.
Select the comprehension section of WAEC English Language paper of any year, write out each of the questions asked on the passage.
Describe with reason the question type.
92  ENG 720 English Methods 3. a)State three things your students should take note of when summarizing.
b) What is a section summarization strategy?
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Koda, K. (2005).
Insights into second language reading: A cross-linguistic approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Laye, V. (1979).
Teaching to read and understand.
In E. Ubahakwe (ed).
The teaching of English studies.
Ibadan: University Press Yorkey, M. (1970).
Study skills in English.
London: McGraw-Hill 93  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 4 TEACHING LITERATURE-IN-ENGLISH 1: PROSE CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 What is Literature?
3.
1.
1 Literature and Language Teaching 3.
2 Literature in ESL Classrooms 3.
2.
1 Objectives of Teaching Literature in Schools 3.
2.
2 Choice of Literature Texts 3.
3 Prose and the Approaches for Teaching It 3.
3.
1 Group-work Approach 3.
3.
2 Activity Oriented Approach 3.
3.
3 Teaching Foreign Prose 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Reading 1.
0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units we discussed the four basic language skills and some sub-skills all aimed at teaching you the procedures and techniques to use to teach your students to develop language competence.
In this unit and the next, we will be discussing the teaching of literature-in-English.
The exposure of students to literary and creative works of prose, poetry and drama is a very useful way of teaching not only literary skills but language skills.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 94  ENG 720 English Methods • state the importance of literature in language teaching.
• discuss the importance of teaching literature in secondary schools.
• discuss the approaches to teaching literature.
• identify what to look for in choosing literary texts.
• discuss steps in the teaching of prose .
3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 What is Literature?
Generally, all that provokes awe or exhilaration, tears or laughter is a likely material for literature.
Literature in essence is the life of man as it is filtered through the temperament of the writer either as it has really been lived in the past, or as created by the ingenuity of the writer.
3.
1.
1 Literature and Language Teaching The basis of the integration of literature in language teaching is to encourage students to read and to experience language in use.
The aid of literature in English language was identified as far back as 1966 with the Ford Foundation s report (Uwaifo, 1979).
Literature and language are intertwined because language is the medium through which messages in literary discourses are encoded.
The role of literature within language teaching in Nigeria changes considerably from primary to secondary schools especially at the senior secondary school level.
Whereas in the primary and junior secondary school levels, literature is often integrated with other components of language learning and teaching, at the senior secondary school level, literature is taught as a separate subject.
3.
2 Literature in ESL Classroom The purposes of teaching literature in the primary school level is to introduce pupils to literary reading in such a way that they can enjoy it and develop regular reading habits.
Experience with literature is stressed and creative methods are often used.
The more advanced the students are the more likely the teaching of literature is to show explicit traces of literary studies.
At the senior secondary school level, the study of literature often serves as preparatory for literary studies at the tertiary level 95  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
2.
1 Objectives of Teaching Literature in Schools Literature is taught for various purposes which include: • recording of human experiences • exploring of cultural values • creating emotional response from the reader • enabling people imagine situations/personalities they had never seen • creating pleasure • teaching morals ( e.g.
ills of the society) • improving language use • broadening students personal experiences • preparing students for pursuit of literary studies later in life.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State three objectives for teaching literature in schools.
3.
2.
2 Choice of Literary Texts There are some guidelines you must use when selecting a literary text for your class.
These include : 1.
Availability of the chosen text e.g.
a novel or a book of short stories 2.
Suitability of the language used in writing it.
3.
Familiarity with some features of the novel or short story.
4.
Contemporary nature of the text in terms of subject matter.
5.
Readability level of the text.
This has to do with how easy or difficult your students find the text.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List and discuss three criteria you will use in choosing literary texts for your students.
3.
3 Prose and the Approaches for Teaching It Prose is one of the types or genres of literature, which is straight forward and whose basic unit is the sentence.
Prose literature can be classified into literary and non-literary works.
Literary works include novels, short stories, 96  ENG 720 English Methods biographies; essays etc.
Non-literary works include scholarly and scientific books, articles, guidebooks, manuals and law reports.
APPROACHES TO TEACHING PROSE We are going to discuss two of such approaches, namely, using small groupings within a class and using a single class.
3.
3.
1 Small Groupings within a Class Approach You will find this approach very useful at primary and junior secondary school levels.
The ideal thing is to expose your students to as several texts as possible.
This approach works like this: o Organize your students into small groups with common interest.
Appoint a leader for each group who should lead the discussion after textual reading.
o Select an interesting reading text e.g.
short story or a novel.
o Each group is to read part of the text for example, a chapter or two chapters and then make a presentation of the parts/chapters read in form of a play or discussion.
Advantages: o It instills confidence in the students and so aids learning.
o Many portions of a text book or novel are covered in a short time.
o Since it is a variation from the traditional approach of every body reading the same thing,, it arouses interest.
3.
3.
2 A Single Class Approach This is an approach, which engages all the learners as a class.
You may use the following strategies when you adopt this approach: o choose a short story or novel and ask students to do the following o Let each student rewrite portions of the story the class has read.
o Each student is to provide alternative end to a story the class has read but whose ending the class feels is not suitable.
o Ask the class to rewrite sections of the story into a play.
The whole class can then dramatize it.
o Encourage students to make pictorial representation of scenes or sections found to be humorous.
97  ENG 720 English Methods o Encourage your students to weave new stories around existing characters, while at the same time retaining the characters individuality.
o Ask students to rewrite incidents they did not enjoy to suit their own expectations and taste.
You will find out that these activities will enhance your students understanding, aid retention of what they read.
This will encourage artistic tendencies in them.
3.
3.
4 Teaching Foreign Prose Foreign prose texts are written based on cultural, political and social backgrounds different from those of your students.
You will therefore , have to: o First give the background of the story.
o Select interesting passages in the novel or short story , especially those that give or describe details of the people s culture.
o Select sections of the novel that exemplify the beauty of the English language.
o Highlight areas of differences between your students cultures and the foreign cultures.
This is because, our experiences of the world is limited and it is in prose literature that we encounter people of other land thereby enlarging our experiences.
You can also make use of outlines to help draw your students attention to vital incidents.
o Use probing questions to draw students attention to the importance of utterances, actions and incidents especially when their limited experiences do not enable them to see such importance.
o You should not only highlight cultural differences, you should also point out cultural similarities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
What are the two broad classifications of prose literature?
2.
Name three approaches to teaching prose.
b.
Describe two of these 4.
0 CONCLUSION Literature is essential in language teaching.
At the junior secondary school level you should aim at exposing your students to a wide variety of reading materials.
At this stage exposure to pleasure and experience is what matters.
At the senior secondary school level you should aim at drawing out 98  ENG 720 English Methods students impression on plot, incidence, characterization, mood, motives and so on.
Prose at this stage is more intensive than extensive, as your students must be led to obtain the fullest possible response to each text.
5.
0 SUMMARY This unit took you through the importance of literature in language teaching, its objectives and choice of literature texts.
We also discussed different approaches to teaching prose literature.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. a) What criteria would guide your choice of a literary text for a junior secondary school class ?
b) How will you determine the suitability of a literary text for a JSS II class?
2.
Describe with illustrations any two approaches to teaching prose.
3.
Name and describe three issues you must consider when teaching your students a foreign prose.
4.
Classify prose literature and give one example for each classification.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Carter, R & Long, M. N. (1991).
Teaching literature.
Harlow: Longman Duff, A & Maley, A.
(1990).
Literature.
Oxford: Oxford University Press Larzar, G. (1991).
Literature and language teaching.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 99  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 5 TEACHING LITERATURE-IN-ENGLISH 2: DRAMA AND POETRY CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 What is Dramatic Literature?
3.
1.
1 Difficulties in Teaching Drama 3.
2 Approaches to Teaching Drama 3.
3 What is Poetry?
3.
3.
1 Poetic Devices and Poetry Teaching 3.
4 Approaches to Teaching Poetry 3.
4.
1 Teaching Poetry at Different Class Levels 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION This unit is a continuation of the discussions on the teaching of literature- in-English.
In this unit, our focus will be on the other two genres of literature: drama and poetry.
We will discuss their nature and teaching approaches.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • distinguish between drama and poetry.
• discuss two approaches of teaching drama • outline poetic devices in poetry • discuss an approach to teaching poetry 3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 What is Dramatic Literature?
Dramatic literature is any literary composition written in dialogue meant to be spoken through acting or dramatizing.
It is actually not meant to be read 100  ENG 720 English Methods as one would read prose and poetry.
Of the three genres of literature, drama, prose and poetry, none is closer to the people than drama.
Drama permeates man s activities; he is naturally being continually placed in situations that demand action.
Though poetry and drama have a lot in common, the same origin and literary composition, they are different in purposes to certain extent.
A poem can be read by a solitary person but a drama piece is usually read by more than one person since it is meant to be acted out.
Poetry originated from Heroic or Epic stories as well as satirical stories.
Tragic drama originated from Heroic stories while comedies originated from satirical stories.
The styles of writing of both literary genres are poetic.
3.
1.
1 Difficulties in Teaching Drama Drama presents problems of teaching you would not encounter in the teaching of other genres.
The difficulties of teaching drama arise from the fact that one cannot just read it for pleasure.
To enjoy drama and bring out its theme it ought to be acted out.
You can only do this if your students have been grounded very well in the area of drama production.
You will have to be familiar with certain theatrical elements listed below.
1.
Characterization 2.
Physical stage settings showing entrances and exits.
3.
Costumes to show either the period or characters 4.
Lighting effect to help in the interpretation of the mood of the play at different acts and scenes.
5.
The audience s reactions at any given time of production.
The question at this point is how you can manage all these in order to bring the playwright s ideas into the classroom.
This definitely requires a lot of work and calls for adequate preparation on your part.
You will have to: • read the play as a whole.
Then break the play into a number of lessons in a school term, paying attention to the logical presentation of the play beginning, middle and ending of a particular episode.
• look for relevant teaching aids both improvised and commercial ones.
You can even encourage your students to make some props and costumes to be used.
• create the setting of the play and use this to give the play its proper background.
101  ENG 720 English Methods Before you begin the teaching of a play you should identify the following and use appropriate questioning techniques to lead your students to do the same: - Writer of the play - Setting - Plot arrangement of incidents - Main and sub-themes - Characters and characterization SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Distinguish between poetry and drama.
3.
2 Approaches to Teaching Drama The teaching of drama entails the use of diverse approaches.
You will have to make your choice of the approaches to use since there is no best way drama can be taught.
There are various methods, but our focus will be on two of them.
These will be discussed below.
v Line-by-line Approach In this approach you will: - Assign your students different characters - Make them read out the dialogue and personify or imitate the characters assigned to them.
This method explores every speech and meanings of all literary devices used in the text.
v Dramatization Method This method involves actual acting or dramatization of the play.
Your students will be expected to speak the lines of the characters with conviction, accuracy and rhythm.
This demands a full knowledge and understanding of the text.
You can make your students dramatize different scenes in the classroom.
This is the most effective method of making a play interesting.
This method aids the possibilities of interpretation.
It encourages improvisation and creativity.
You can video record your students presentation and play it back for the class for criticism.
102  ENG 720 English Methods SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Illustrate how you will use the line-by-line method to teach a piece of drama to JSS I students?
3.
3 What is Poetry?
Poetry is an imaginative piece of literary work in verse form.
It is a literary mode that operates through the principles of imagery, sound and rhythm, with the aim of creating thought, feeling and beauty.
Wordsworth s well- known definition of poetry refers to it as emotions recollected in tranquility and Coleridge defined it as the best words in the best order.
Poetry centres on a few general characteristics.
It: - is drawn from real life experiences - makes comments on life.
- comprises the truth of the world and the truth of man s perception of that world.
Poetry has a definite role to play in society.
In addition to being a tool for intellectual development, for training in aesthetic appreciation, and for emotional growth, poetry is a preserver of our culture; as such its value should not be overlooked.
3.
3.
1 Poetic Devices and Poetry Teaching From experience you will find out that most of your students will shy away from the study of poetry.
The reason is not far fetched.
This is because of the belief that the language of poetry is difficult and unintelligible.
It is true that poetic diction is more condensed than the language of prose, but this is because the poet is more economical in his/her use of words.
If you are going to discuss poetry you need to learn the proper terminology (language).
You will need to know the forms of poetry, from haiku to sonnet and the techniques poets use to build their work.
If you do not feel comfortable with poetic devices and forms you can look for a good literary reference text to use.
You should teach a device in the context of a poem that aptly illustrates it.
Then draw students attention to other poems in which that device has been 103  ENG 720 English Methods used.
Through repeatedly drawing their attention to this your students would eventually consolidate their knowledge of that device.
3.
4 Approaches to Teaching Poetry Poetry is as diverse as life itself.
There are varieties of subject matter, type, form, mood and so on.
So also are there various approaches of teaching poetry.
However, we are going to discuss just one approach v Reading / Listening, Question and Answer Approach This approach is similar to what you do in loud reading and listening lessons.
You will read out the poem while your students listen.
The essence is on listening.
Your students are not expected to open to the page where the poem is written.
They should just listen to your reading and form their own impressions.
After reading the poem ask the students some leading questions, such as: - What is the poem about?
- Where did the whole incident in the poem take place?
- Which figures of speech are used by the poet?
- What mood is expressed in the poem?
After discussing these questions, allow the students to open to the poem while you read the poem again.
Pick out words from the poem and ask students for the explanation of these words.
Discuss the poem in full detail, the language, the movement of the lines for effect, the arrangement of words and other important aspects of the poem.
3.
4.
1 Teaching Poetry at Different Class Levels • Teaching Poetry at the Junior Secondary School Level You can use poetry to arouse and maintain the interest of your students, if your selections of poems are simple.
Poems you pick for JSS I should be simple narratives, songs and simple traditional poems which can be easily understood and enjoyed.
The simplicity of diction, subject matter and the 104  ENG 720 English Methods liveliness inherent in the lines of such poems can be quite appealing to young people.
At JSS II and III classes, poetry study should be more elaborate.
Ballads, lyrics and praise poems can be introduced.
• Teaching Poetry in the Senior Secondary School Level At this level a poem should be seen as an organic whole creation.
At this level you cannot afford not to be a master of the subject.
You should prepare a well-developed lesson plan and use it effectively.
You should highlight those essential internal characteristics that contribute to make a poem whole in your lesson plan.
o Poem type o Features of the poem o Background information on the setting of the poem o Poetic devices similes, metaphor, personification and so on o Imagery.
This is the essence of poetry.
It is the concentrated way in which a poet describes things.
It deals with the pictures conjured up in the reader s mind by the poet in an attempt to clarify his/her idea.
There are three types of imagery: - Mental imagery visual, auditory, tactile and gustatory - Symbolic imagery a word is used to symbolize deeper things.
For example words like desert could be used to symbolize desolation and loneliness.
- Metaphorical imagery this deals with analogies.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Choose a poem composed by a Nigerian and show how you will use Reading / Listening, Question and Answer Approach to teach it to SSS I class.
4.
0 CONCLUSION An important aspect of a child s education is the cultivation and appreciation of creativity.
This can be developed in the learners through the study of literature.
Hence our focus in this unit and the preceding one had been on the teaching of the three genres of literature; prose, drama and 105  ENG 720 English Methods poetry.
It is also hoped that this will deepen students sensitivity to language use.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the teaching of drama with reference to its meaning, relevance, difficulties encountered in its teaching and approaches to its teaching.
We also discussed the teaching of poetry where our focus was on its various definitions, poetic devices and approaches to its teaching.
We particularly discussed how poetry should be taught at the different secondary school classes.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Compare and contrast drama and poetry.
2.
List and describe five things you must identify before you begin to teach a play.
3.
List and describe five essential internal characteristics of a poem you will highlight in your lesson plan for a SS II class.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Carter, R & Long, M. N. (1991).
Teaching literature.
Harlow: Longman Duff, A & Maley, A.
(1990).
Literature.
Oxford: Oxford University Press Vendler, H. (1997).
Poems, poets, poetry.
Boston: Bedford/St Martins 106  ENG 720 English Methods MODULE 3:LANGUAGE TESTING and LESSON PLANNING Unit 1 Test Types, Functions/Uses, and Qualities of Language Tests Unit 2 Basic Steps in Language Test Construction Unit 3 Writing Scheme of Work and Lesson Plans UNIT 1 TEST TYPES, FUNCTI ONS/USES, AND QUALITIES OF LANGUAGE TESTS CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 Tests 3.
1.
1 Types of Language Tests 3.
1.
2 Functions/Uses of Test 3.
2 Qualities of a Good Language Teat 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION In the preceding units, we discussed the teaching of the four basic language skills and some language sub-skills and strategies.
The teaching of literature-in-English was also discussed.
However, language teaching will be incomplete if you do not know how to go about assessing and evaluating your students learning.
The goal of this unit is to discuss language testing and to teach you various procedures for testing your students.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state what a test is • name different types of tests • state functions/uses of tests • state the qualities of a good test.
107  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 What is a Test?
A test is any kind of device or procedure for measuring ability, achievement, interest, attitude or any other traits.
It is a specific task test takers (testees) are asked to perform.
A test is only one of many devices through which measurement data may be generated for evaluation purpose.
Test items can assess one or more objectives.
Items/questions of a similar kind may be grouped together to form subtests within a given test.
Language testing is a field of study under the umbrella of applied linguistics.
Its focus is on the assessment of learners knowledge, skills and abilities in a second or foreign language.
The earliest works in language assessment dates back to the 1950s with the pioneering work of Robert Lado (1961).
The earliest large-scale language assessment programme in the United States is the Test of English as Foreign Language (TOEFL) that was launched in 1961 by the Educational Testing Services, Princeton, New Jersey.
Tests designed by TOEFL are used to assess the English language ability of students seeking admission into U S and Canadian colleges and universities.
3.
1.
1 Types of Language Tests Test classification presents lots of topics for discussion and varies on the basis of the traits being measured..
Most often these classifications overlap.
Some of these classifications are listed below: 1.
Classification based on type of behaviour being measured.
Examples a) Ability tests measure speed, accuracy or both.
E.g.
o Achievement tests Achievement tests measure what has been learnt as a result of teaching.
It is used to indicate the degree of success in some past learning activity.
Achievement tests can be teacher made or standardized.
108  ENG 720 English Methods o Aptitude tests Aptitude tests measure some one s potential for learning or acquiring a specific skill /knowledge in the future.
Examples are, Verbal Aptitude Tests, Quantitative Aptitude Tests.
o Intelligence tests Intelligence tests commonly refer to a person s general potential to solve problems, think abstractly, adapt to changes independent of prior learning.
It measures learner s hereditary capacity to learn.
b) Personality tests.
These are tests that relate to overt and covert dispositions of the testee.
They measure typical behaviours such as traits, temperament , attitude and emotion.
2.
Classification based on the function or purpose of the test § Diagnostic test It is used to diagnose difficulties or problems students have learning.
The concern is to diagnose learning problems, determine the causes of learning problems and formulate a plan for remedial action.
§ Placement test It is concerned with determining learners entry performance.
The information obtained using such tests would be used to sort learners into appropriate learning groups according to learners academic performance.
For example, if a learner cannot learn the subjects in primary 5 because he cannot read, he may be stepped down to a remedial reading programme for some weeks or a term before proceeding to primary 5.
§ Formative tests These are used to ascertain learners progress during the course of instruction.
The purpose is to provide feedback to both teacher and students concerning the learning successes and failures of the students.
Information gathered is used by the students to improve their learning and by the teacher to find ways of modifying instruction to help students improve.
Examples of formative tests are the daily or weekly quizzes given to students.
109  ENG 720 English Methods § Summative tests These are typically given at the end of a course of instruction, for example, at the end of a term or semester.
The purpose is to determine the extent to which the learners have attained the instructional objectives set out for the subject, being studied.
The scores obtained by the students are used in assigning grades to them or in certifying them.
Examples of summative tests are end of term/ semester/ year tests, NECO, WASCE results.
3.
Classification on the basis of who designed and constructed the Test.
§ Standardized tests These are tests designed and administered by test specialists.
Standardized tests can be oral, essay or objective.
Recognized standardized tests in English are Test of English as a Foreign Language ( TOEFL) tests.
§ Teacher made tests These are classroom tests constructed by teachers to measure how well a group of students that have been taught the content of a specific unit or course/subject have performed.
4.
Classification based on the format of expected response.
a.
Oral tests requiring verbal response.
b.
Written tests requiring the use of paper and pen.
5.
Classification based on the format of the test.
There are two types, namely, objective and open-ended formats a.
Objective tests.
Examples - Multiple-choice - Matching items - True/False items - Fill-in-the-gap/Completion § Advantages: 110  ENG 720 English Methods 1) Covers large content area 2) Scoring is more reliable because bias is eliminated 3) Appropriate for measuring knowledge of facts 4) Comparability of students performance is achieved.
§ Disadvantages: 1) Takes much time to construct.
2) The result/outcome is concerned with the answer only and not the process the student used in arriving at the answer.. 3) Fails to measure students ability to analyse and evaluate.
b. Open-ended tests.
These are tests that allow the testee to express him/herself.
They may be long or short.
Examples in language testing are essay/composition writing, comprehension and summary writing.
§ Advantages: 1) A shorter time is required for setting the test.
2) It is appropriate for measuring comprehension skills, thinking skills and the ability to express oneself in writing 3) The test is concerned not only with the students answers but also with how the students arrived at the answers.. § Disadvantages: 1) Has low reliability, because only few questions are set out of the large area of content that might have been covered.
Essay tests do not allow you to set questions on all the topics taught.
2) Scoring is time consuming and subjective.
3) Scoring could be inconsistent or unreliable.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Which type of test can you use in detecting your students areas of language weakness?
3.
1.
2 Functions/Uses of Tests The following are the uses of tests.
You will observe though that these are very similar to classification and types of tests.
In fact classification, types and functions/uses overlap.
111  ENG 720 English Methods • Selection and placement • Consolidating and structuring learning • Evaluating teaching • Certifying/grading achievement or attainment • Determining learners readiness • Guiding and correction learning • Focusing learning • Motivating learning • Identifying specific weakness/difficulties so that an appropriate remedial programme can be planned.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List six uses of language tests.
3.
2 Qualities of a Good Language Test Test, as an instrument possesses some qualities, which are necessary before it can qualify as a test and usable.
A good language test should possess the following characteristics, which are interdependent.
These include: § Validity Validity is the extent to which a test measures what it is supposed to measure and the extent to which inferences and actions made on the basis of the test scores are appropriate and accurate.
A reading comprehension test that tests knowledge of grammar and vocabulary is not valid.
A reading comprehension test that tests students ability to infer, identify main ideas and evaluate is a valid test.
§ Reliability Reliability is the consistency with which a test measures the area being tested.
It describes the extent to which a test is dependable, stable and consistent when administered to the same individuals on different occasions when neither learning nor teaching has taken place after the first test.
This means that the same testees/ students would score the same or about the same marks each time the test is given.
Reliability also refers to two or more examiners awarding nearly the same scores on each test paper.
This is referred to as scorer reliability.
112  ENG 720 English Methods § Objectivity This is the extent to which a set of test answers given by an expert to a set of questions agrees with answers given by another expert on the same test questions.
What makes a test objective is that each question has one and only one correct answer.
For example: What is the synonym of beautiful?
a) lovely b) handsome c) fine d) ugly Options A, B and C are possible answers, thus question is not objective § Discrimination A good test should be able to make a distinction between good and poor learners.
It should show the slight differences between learners that have learnt from the instruction and those that have not.
§ Comprehensiveness A test with sufficient questions/ items that cover much of the content of the course (syllabus) that is, the subject matter, is said to be comprehensive.
§ Economy This refers to the ease with which a test can be administered and scored.
Thus, a test that is unduly lengthy or which contains tedious instructions would not be considered economic.
§ Practicality/Usability This has to do with the wide range of other factors that determine if a test is practical for widespread use.
These include convenience and interpretability of test scores.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List and describe qualities of a good language test.
113  ENG 720 English Methods 4.
0 CONCLUSION Knowing how to teach the different language skills and sub-skills is not enough for the second language teacher.
You need to be able to assess and evaluate your students learning.
This you can achieve through testing.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the different classifications of test types, their functions/uses and qualities of a good test.
In the next unit, you will learn how to construct test items / questions.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. a) Name and describe three classification of tests.
b) Describe three objective test types.
2.
What is a standardized test?
3.
List and describe three qualities of a good language test.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Allen, M; Noel, R. C; Rienzi, B. M & McMillin, D.T (2002).
Outcomes assessment handbook.
California State University, Institute of Teaching and Learning.
Long Beach, CA Gbenedio, U.B.
(1996).
Teaching and learning English as a second language.
Benin: New Era Publication.
Harris, D. P. (1969).
Testing English as a second language.
New York: McGraw Hill Lado, R. (1961).
Language testing.
London: Longman 114  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 2 BASIC STEPS IN LANGUAGE TEST CONSTRUCTION CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 Approaches to Language Test Construction 3.
1.1 Discrete-Point and Integrative Tests 3.2 Procedures to Language Test Construction 3.
2.
1 Test Planning Stage 3.
2.
2 Test Item Writing Stage 3.
3 Construction of Objective Tests 3.
3.
1 Guidelines for Constructing Multiple-Choice Items 3.
4 Construction and Evaluation of Essay Questions 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION The writing of any test is called test construction and the questions generated are called items.
Constructing test items might seem easy on the surface, but a lot of thought must go into the process to make the test good.
Generating test items requires you making decisions about the language content to cover, the approach to use, the format to use, for example, whether objective or essay, etc.
Your decisions will be guided by what you intend to use the test result for.
For instance, are you testing your students achievement of what you taught them, or are you testing them in order to know where to place them at the point of entry?
Are you testing your students knowledge of vocabulary, grammar, or are you testing their ability to speak and write in English?
2.
0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • distinguish between discrete-point tests and integrative tests.
• discuss the different stages in test construction 115  ENG 720 English Methods • discuss the guidelines for the construction of objective test items.
• prepare a marking scheme for essay questions.
3.
0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
1 APPROACHES to LANGUAGE TEST CONSTRUCTION 3.
1.
1 Discreet and Integrative Test Approaches The two main approaches used in constructing language tests, are discrete-point and integrative approaches.
The test items / questions produced by each approach are labeled by that approach.
Thus you have discreet point tests and integrative tests.
v Discrete- Point Approach This approach is based on the Audio- Lingual philosophy and method of teaching.
Just as for Audio lingual approach to teaching, discrete point approach is used when we want to test learners knowledge and use of discreet components/aspects of a language, e.g.
grammatical structures, vocabulary and sounds.
Go back to Unit 2 of this course material and refresh your mind on Audio lingual method of teaching.
This will help you to understand better the philosophy of discreet point method of testing.
Advantages of Discreet Point Tests Ø They usually cover a wider area of the subject matter taught than integrative tests do.
This is because, discreet point approach uses objective test formats which could be used to ask many questions in a given test.
Examples of such format include, multiple-choice, true/false, and completion formats.
Ø They are easy to mark/grade.
This is because the formats used, such as multiple choice requires very little effort on the part of the marker/ scorer.
Ø By focusing on specific aspects/components of a language, such as grammar, discreet point tests allow the teacher to easily find out how well grounded or knowledgeable a learner is in, for instance, vocabulary, grammar e.g.
tenses etc 116  ENG 720 English Methods Ø Because of their objective format, discreet point tests assure that scorers/markers score the same scripts in the same way.
This ensures rater reliability.
Disadvantages of Discreet Point Tests Ø A disadvantage of this approach is that it focuses on the knowledge of individual components ( vocabulary, grammar ) and skills ( reading, writing, listening or speaking ) rather than on the way such knowledge and skills are used to achieve communication.
Ø Another disadvantage is that discreet point tests take time to construct.
It will take you much time to write 50 or 100 multiple choice test items.
Ø Learners answering of questions on specific components of a language, regardless of their actual function in communication may not be of much value in determining a learner s communicative performance in a given language.
v Integrative Testing Approach Integrative tests are constructed with the intention of tapping the total communicative abilities of language learners.
This approach to testing is based on the philosophy of communicative methodologists.
Integrative tests, test skills that are involved in normal communication.
Examples of integrative tests are speaking in oral interviews, writing dictation exercises, responding to questions on listening and reading comprehension exercises, writing compositions and cloze test.
Integrative tests are pragmatic as they set tasks which make the learners to process sequences of elements in language that often conform to normal real life use of language in various contexts.
Advantages of Integrative Tests Ø Integrative tests assess learners communicative abilities.
Ø Integrative tests take less time to construct.
Disadvantages of Integrative Tests 117  ENG 720 English Methods - There is often the problem of rater/scorer reliability in the award of marks.
- Integrative tests take time in marking.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Using appropriate examples, distinguish between discrete point tests and integrative tests.
3.
2 Procedure to Language Test Construction Before you embark on test construction, there are certain key issues you need to consider for both discrete and integrative tests.
These constitute steps /stages in item writing and are discussed below.
3.
2.
1 Test Planning Stage There are certain things you should know and have at your fingertips for effective writing of questions/items for any test.
• One essential step in planning a test is to decide why you are giving the test.
Classroom assessments are generally focused on content that has been covered in the class, either in the immediate past or over a longer period of time.
Here the syllabus, scheme of work and notes of lessons are very useful, as they present a list of topics that have been covered and from these topics you can base your questions.
• The next step is deciding how much emphasis to place on each topic (check the amount of time devoted to each topic in class).
The more time you spent teaching a particular topic, the more emphasis you will give to this topic when you are preparing your test.
A helpful guide in deciding what to include in your test is to have a table of specification.
This is also called a test plan or test blueprint.
A Table of Specification/Test Blue Print is a two-way table that matches the content taught with the content to include in the test.
It contains an estimate of the percentage weighting to be 118  ENG 720 English Methods allocated to the topics covered during instruction.
A sample of a table of specification is included in this unit.
• We also have to take into account the types of thinking skills or levels of learning we wish to assess.
Bloom s taxonomy of educational objectives is a good source of determining the levels of learning to assess.
These levels of learning will in turn assist us to determine the types of questions to ask and the appropriate question formats to employ.
Below is a brief presentation of Bloom s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives to familiarize you with various levels of learning you could test.
Bloom s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives/ Learning Objectives ü Knowledge Remembering or recall of previously learned material/information ( e.g.
specific facts, terminologies and theories).
Examples of item formats to use: multiple choice, true/false, matching, fill in the blank, responding to wh- questions, such as why, when, what, where, and how ü Comprehension Ability to demonstrate the understanding of information, facts, principles, theories etc by explaining, interpreting or translating it.
Examples of question formats to use: multiple choice, true/false, matching, fill in the blank, open ended questions requiring students to write composition, respond to questions on reading comprehension and summary passages ü Application Ability to apply or use what is learned in new and concrete situations.
Examples are the application of rules, methods, concepts, principles, laws and theories.
Item formats to use: multiple choice, true/false, creating or doing something, e.g.
write composition, do summary of texts, write an application for a job, type a letter, create a database.
ü Analysis Ability to identify elements/ relationships in a piece of work e.g.
read a poem or novel and analyze it, analyze a work of art, music.
Examples of item formats to use: multiple choice, true/false, matching, fill in the blank, write answers to open ended questions 119  ENG 720 English Methods ü Synthesis Ability to put parts together to form a new whole.
Examples: production of a unique communication e.g.
a speech, writing a research proposal or a report on a project etc.
Examples of item formats: essay, report, project.
ü Evaluation- Ability to judge the value or worth of information/ material, for examples, statements, novel, poem, research report.
Examples of item formats: multiple choice, true/false, fill in the blank, writing essays, reports, and critiquing projects e.g.
research .
A SAMPLE OF TABLE OF SPECIFICATION A table of specification is a two way chart displaying a representative sample of topics covered and types of learning expected of learners to acquire and demonstrate.
The table of specification below is for a summative test on NOUN Access English.
COURSE TITLE : ENG 001 : ACCESS ENGLISH LEVELS OF LEARNING ( In percentages ) Knowledge Comprehension Application Analysis synthesis Evaluation Total Grammar usage 1 3 6 6 15 Grammar 10 usage 11 3 3 4 Lexis & structure 3 6 6 15 Listening, speaking & reading skills 4 5 5 6 5 25 Writing skills: summary, letters & essays 4 6 5 10 10 35 Total 9 23 27 10 16 15 100 120  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
2.
2 Test Item Writing Stage • Follow the table of specification strictly.
• Begin with simpler test items, and then proceed to more complex ones.
• Prepare a marking scheme as you write the questions.)
• Construct your test items well ahead of time for review and reframing of items.
• If possible let your colleagues or other experts review your items.
• Construct more than the required number of test items.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is a test blue print?
3.
3 Construction of Objective Tests Objective test questions are those in which the testee must select the one correct or best response from two or more alternatives.
Objective items may be administered in a variety of formats such as: § Multiple-choice § Matching § True/False § Fill-in-the-gap/Completion § However, research in the field of testing suggests that multiple-choice tests are the most reliable and valid of objective test formats.
Multiple-choice questions play an important role in testing and are among the most widely used of selection-type items.
The popularity of the multiple question stems from the fact that they can be designed to measure a variety of learning outcomes.
It takes a great deal of time, skill and adherence to a set of recognized rules for you to develop a good multiple-choice item.
§ Components of Multiple- Choice Item A standard multiple-choice item consists of two basic parts.
1) A problem (stem), which may be in form of a question or an incomplete statement.
121  ENG 720 English Methods 2) A list of suggested solutions (alternative answers).
The list of alternatives contains one correct or best alternative (answer/key) and a number of incorrect or inferior alternatives (distractors).
The purpose of the distractors is to appear as plausible solutions to the problem for those students who have not achieved the objective being measured by the test item.
Conversely, the distractors must appear as implausible solutions for those students who have achieved the objectives being tested.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the two parts of a Multiple-choice test item?
3.
3.
1 Guidelines for Constructing Multiple-Choice Items Here are some guidelines you should follow/adopt to enable you construct good objective test items.
These guidelines are specifically designed for the single- answer and best-answer varieties of multiple-choice items.
The rules are divided into two categories: A.
Rules for Developing the Stem 1) Present a single clearly formulated problem in the stem of the question.
The stem of the question is the main part of the question and should contain only information that is pertinent to the question or problem and should be worded so that any good examinee can understand what is expected of her/him to do.
2) State the stem of the item in simple, clear language.
The problem in the stem of a multiple-choice question should be stated clearly, using straightforward vocabulary and should be free of unnecessary complex wording and sentence structure.
3) If the same words or phrases are repeated in the options, write the stem to include the repetitious material.
4) State the stem of the item in positive form wherever possible.
Avoid using negatives such as NO, NOT, and EXCEPT.
If you most use a negative word, write it in capital letters and underline it, also place it near the end of the statement so that the test-taker will not miss it.
B.
Rules for Developing the Options/ Alternative Answers 1) Make all options grammatically consistent with the stem of the item and parallel in form.
Be sure to check the options against the wording in the stem to make sure they are grammatically consistent.
This will help to avoid easy elimination of options by the testees.
122  ENG 720 English Methods 2) Avoid giving clues to the correct answer by having word (s) in the stem that can easily be linked to the correct answer.
Below is an example of a stem for a multiple choice question with a word that easily leads to the correct answer.
Instruction : Complete the following sentence with one of the answer options lettered a, b, c and d. Question : The word used to describe a noun is called an .. Answer : (a) adjective (b) pronoun (c) conjunction (d) verb It is obvious that the testee will pick option (a) because the article an goes with the vowel a in adjective.
3) Be sure that the distractors or wrong answers can attract examinees that are lacking in knowledge about the concept the item is assessing.
Therefore, the incorrect answer choices should be logically consistent with the stem and should represent common errors made by weak students in a particular ability level.
4) Ensure that the length of the correct answer is about the same as those of the incorrect answers.
This will help to eliminate length as a clue.
5) Use the option none of the above sparingly.The none of the above option works better when the stem is asked as a question rather than as a sentence to be completed.
An incomplete sentence rarely works because none of the above seldom completes the stem grammatically.
Nevertheless, the use of the none of the above option should as much as possible be avoided.
6) Avoid the use of all of the above .
This option type makes it possible to answer the item on the basis of partial information.
7) Alphabetize the distractors and arrange numerical options in ascending order, eg.
A, b, c, d, or 1,2,3,4.
3.
4 Construction and Evaluation of Essay Questions: Composition, Comprehension and Summary Essay questions require that your students respond by writing one or more sentences according to the tasks demanded.
Examples of essay tests you could give your students include: continuous writing (composition), comprehension and summary tasks.
These three make up one paper in most public examinations conducted in Nigeria.
(NECO, WAEC, NABTEB).
123  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
4.
1 Guidelines for Writing Composition Questions 1) Ask questions that will require your students to demonstrate command of essential knowledge about the topic to write on.
2) Define the examinee s task as completely and specifically as possible.
3) Give directives about any special instructions, for example, the length required, the number of pages or the number of words, e.g.
400 words.
3.4.2 Guidelines for Correcting Essays: Preparing Marking Scheme Ø Before you start marking your students essay test, prepare a marking scheme.
A marking scheme is a set of criteria used in assessing students answers on given essay topics.
It provides general guidelines to reduce subjectivity and increase reliability in the marking.
Ø The answers you provide in the marking guide are mainly suggested answers.
During the marking of your students scripts, you may likely come across some answers not stated in the marking scheme which may also be correct.
Ø A marking scheme also specifies the marks obtainable.
In a marking scheme a slash (/) indicates alternative answers, any one such answer is counted as correct.
Brackets ( ) indicate optional information, the mark is awarded whether the part in the bracket is included or not.
3.4.3 Guidelines for Writing Reading Comprehension Questions 1) Use passages where you can ask question to test your students ability to : - Recall stated facts/information.
- Make inferences - Make judgment/evaluation - Make clausal/phrasal analysis - Explain word-class questions - Give synonyms/antonyms 124  ENG 720 English Methods - Explain figures of speech 2) Be specific by stating if answers are to be written in complete sentences, phrases or key words.
3.4.4 Guidelines for Writing Summary Questions 1) Pick passages where your students would be able to identify the main idea in each paragraph.
2) Make sure the number of points (main ideas) in the passage are equal to the number you request your students to write in the question.
3.4.5 Practical Exercises To Illustrate the Guidelines Discussed Above Sample Composition Question: Instruction- As part of the activities lined- up for the Democracy Day Celebration in your Local Government Area, a debate is being organized on the topic Multiplicity of parties has done more harm than good to Democracy in Nigeria.
As the Chief Speaker of your group prepare a speech for or against this topic.
Marking guide/ scheme for marking the above composition.
Recall our explanation of what a marking guide is.
We are now going to use what we discussed to illustrate how to mark this composition.
Compositions are generally marked under four sections, namely, content, organization, expression and mechanical accuracy, as shown below.
CONTENT (15marks) The candidate has been asked to prepare a speech for or against this topic.
This speech is to be delivered on the Democracy Day and the candidate is the Chief Speaker.
The candidate will explain the term multiplicity and take a stand for or against.
He will proffer three to four reasons to support his/her stand on this topic .
ORGANIZATION (10marks) This is a debate, therefore, all the usual vocatives of a debate are expected: Chairman, Guest of Honour, Co-debaters, the audience, ladies and gentlemen.
Goodday/morning etc My name is --------- I am here to 125  ENG 720 English Methods support/oppose the motion which says that ---------.
We expect an introductory paragraph and about three paragraphs where the candidate develops and explains his/her reasons for the stand taken.
There will be a paragraph containing a logical conclusion based on the arguments made in the body of the composition.
EXPRESSION (15marks) Formal language is expected here.
The candidate is expected to use a wide range of vocabulary as well as appropriate registers of politics and democracy aptly chosen for effectiveness.
MECHANICAL ACCURACY (10marks) Penalize candidates for mechanical errors: spelling mistakes, wrong tenses, wrong use of capital/small letters, wrong words etc.
deduct ½ mark for each error, for a maximum of twenty (20) errors.
Sample Comprehension Passage Instructions: Read the passage below and answer the questions at the end.
I was on top of one of my palm trees yesterday, tapping the tree and collecting the wine for the morning, when I saw two soldiers at the foot of the tree.
They made signs at me, so I concluded that they wanted my palmwine.
On descending from the tree I gave them some wine to sample as is customary.
Not only did they drain all the wine in the calabash, they said they wanted to conscript me into the army.
I asked them whether they wanted me or somebody else, and they said they had come for me.
I asked them whether an enemy sent them or they came on their own.
To cut it short, they said I was wasting their time, as they had to catch twenty men that day.
Only a foolish man willingly disobeys armed soldiers.
I told them I had something very important to say.
Say it, then one of them cut in impatiently, looking at his watch.
It was approaching midday by which time it was considered unsafe to drive around in a car for fear of enemy planes, which used to strafe vehicles on the highway.
126  ENG 720 English Methods Yes, what I want to say is simple I said, My first son; the boy who should have succeeded me when I died joined the army voluntarily and with my full backing.
He was a brilliant boy, always first in his class.
He was in his last year at school when the war began.
He was killed.
The two children who came after him are girls.
The next boy is still in primary school.
If he were old enough, I would have asked him to join the army, not minding the fact that my first son s head had already been sacrificed to the same war.
For no person who breathes will say that he has no part in this war.
But let me add this.
If this war has reached the stage when a man of my age is given a rifle by force and sent to the war front, then the time has come for you to blow the whistle.
.
Questions a) What does the narrator do for a living?
(Factual question) b) What did the soldiers come for?
(Factual question) c) Why did the narrator not have a substitute to give to the soldiers?
(Factual question) d) What does the narrator mean by the last statement he made?
(Inference question) e) Was the setting of the encounter with these solders, rural or urban?
Support your answer with evidence from the passage.
( inference question ) f) Was it wise for the narrator to speak to the solders the way he did?
( Evaluative question ) g) Replace each of the following words used in the passage with another that means the same thing.
i. descending ii.
sample iii.
drain iv.
strafe v. backing (Synonyms) Answers a) A wine tapper b) To force/ conscript him into the army c) He had two daughters and a son who was too young to join the army.
d) The war should be called off.
127  ENG 720 English Methods e) The setting was rural as evidenced by the occupation of the narrator etc f) Answer according to one s opinion/ judgment g) i getting down/climbing down ii taste/try out/test iii drink/sap/exhaust/consume iv bomb v support/approval/encouragement Sample Summary Passage Instructions: Read the passage below and answer the questions at the end.
Over the years, there has been this hue and cry by governments and public policy advisers against the phenomenon of the urban-rural drift.
Researches have been conducted on various aspects of this phenomenon, which have resulted in the identification of the various causes and consequences of it.
In addition prescriptions have been given for controlling the rural-urban drift.
Among the causes most often mentioned are population pressures in some rural areas resulting in dwindling farm lands, increasing school enrolments and the resultant rise in educational levels, which qualify many people for urban employment; higher wages in the urban centres relative to rural centers and the rather naïve one of the bright lights in the cities so much touted by early foreign sociologists.
The most often mentioned consequences of this rural-urban migration include depopulation of the rural areas leading to overcrowding of the cities and the resultant housing and sanitation problems.
Decline in the agricultural population resulting in less food crops being grown and high food prices in the cities and increasing urban unemployment.
The results of the phenomenon are seen largely as negative.
Measures to control the rural-urban drift include the establishment of essential amenities like water, electricity, hospitals, colleges and cinema houses, the location of employment generating establishments and the building of good interconnecting roads.
The sum total of these prescriptions in essence unwittingly or paradoxically, is for the rural areas to be transformed into urban centers.
This is so because to industrialize the rural areas would draw many more people out of agriculture than if industries were restricted to urban centers.
Questions a) In three sentences state the causes of rural-urban drift.
128  ENG 720 English Methods b) In three sentences state the consequences of rural- urban drift.
Answers a) The causes of rural-urban drift are: i. population explosion in some rural areas, ii.
increase in the number of children attending school, and iii.
the social life (bright lights) in the cities.
b) The consequences of rural-urban drift include: i. depopulation of rural areas, ii.
reduction in the number of people involved in agriculture, and iii.
urban unemployment.
4.
0 CONCLUSION The most important consideration in constructing language test items is the use for which it is intended.
Thus, for you to construct good, reliable and valid tests you should take note of the teaching and content objectives and the methodology of instruction.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, you were exposed to the distinction between discrete-point tests and integrative tests.
We also discussed some guidelines on the construction of objective and essay questions as well as how to prepare marking scheme for correcting essay answers.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIBNMENT 1) Select a newspaper article of about one typed page, single spacing, and construct two of each of these types of questions: factual, inferential and evaluative .
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alderson, J. C.; Clapham, C & Wall, D. (2001).
Language test construction and evaluation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
129  ENG 720 English Methods Harris, D. P. (1969).
Testing English as a second language.
New York: McGraw Hill Lado, R. (1961).
Language testing.
London: Longman McNamara, T. (2000).
Language testing.
Oxford: Oxford University Press 130  ENG 720 English Methods UNIT 3 WRITING SCHEME OF WORK AND LESSON PLANS CONTENTS 1.
0 Introduction 2.
0 Objectives 3.
0 Main Content 3.
1 Curriculum and Syllabus 3.
1.
1 Types of Syllabi 3.
2 What is a Scheme of Work?
3.
2.
1 Features of A Scheme of Work.
3.
3 What is a Lesson Plan?
3.
3.
1 Elements of a Lesson Plan 4.
0 Conclusion 5.
0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.
0 References/Further Readings 1.
0 INTRODUCTION This unit begins with an overview of the concepts; curriculum and syllabus.
In the Nigeria context, subject experts in collaboration with the Ministry of Education prepare the curriculum as well as the syllabus.
This is then made available to schools either federal or state.
Our focus in this unit will be on how to use the curriculum and syllabus to develop planning instruments for effective teaching.
These instruments are the scheme of work and lesson plans.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • distinguish between a curriculum and syllabus • distinguish between a teaching syllabus and an examination syllabus • describe the features of a scheme of work • describe the elements of a lesson plan • develop lesson plans for teaching language and literature topics • evaluate lesson plans 131  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
0 MAIN CONENT 3.
1 Curriculum and Syllabus In practice you do not have direct involvement in the preparation of these two planning instruments.
However, you need to be familiar with them as you will need them to develop your scheme of work and lesson plans.
Definition of Curriculum v A curriculum is the cornerstone of a school instructional programme and reflects the philosophical and psychological beliefs about what learners need to know and be able to do to succeed in school.
It sets the goals and objectives of learning a particular subject and outlines the content to teach as well as the methodologies and techniques of teaching and assessing students learning of the subject.
A well developed curriculum will specify the knowledge, skills, insights and attitudes that learners will be expected to acquire, develop and use.
These will constitute the goals and objectives of instruction.
The curriculum will also spell out the in class and out of class learning activities /learning experiences that learners will engage in during the process of learning and the teacher s activities- namely, the selection of content to teach, the methods and strategies that he/she would use to teach and assess the learners.
A good example of a curriculum manual is the National Curriculum for Junior/Senior Secondary Schools Volumes 1 and 2 : English Language Definition of Syllabus The syllabus is drawn from the curriculum.
The syllabus contains a list of topics in a given subject to teach the learners.
It acts as a guide for both you and your students.
It specifies the content, recommended text books and other learning materials that students will use to learn.
Sometimes, a syllabus could suggest teaching approaches and methods that teachers could use to teach and assess learners.
It is from the syllabus that the scheme of work is drawn.
132  ENG 720 English Methods 3.
1.
1 Types of Syllabus There are basically two types of syllabi.
These are: v Teaching Syllabus A teaching syllabus specifies how a particular subject should be analyzed or viewed for the purpose of teaching it.
It is usually based on a set of beliefs/philosophy which guides the teacher on the methods and strategies to employ.
v Examination Syllabus A language examination syllabus specifies the topics and contents of what your students will be assessed on.
Examination bodies prepare examination syllabi.
Most public examination bodies such as WAEC, NECO and NABTEB review their examination syllabus every three years.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Distinguish between a curriculum and a syllabus.
3.
2 What is a Scheme of Work?
A scheme of work is a sort of directory of the work to be done in a specified period of time usually in one term.
It serves the purpose of providing you with a pathway through a section of the syllabus.
Usually it is good to write or prepare monthly scheme of work in order to repeat aspects students do not understand.
Even in subjects like English language, weekly scheme of work is preferable.
3.
2.
1 Features of a Scheme of Work When you go on your supervised teaching practice, you will need to plan the whole work you will teach the class while you are there.
This plan known as the scheme of work must be based on the syllabus, which has already been developed by the Ministry of Education for use at either the federal or state levels.
To prepare your scheme of work you must look at the following: 133  ENG 720 English Methods • The list of topics and skills in the syllabus.
• The total time allocated for teaching in weeks and periods.
This will aid you in deciding how much time to allocate to learning each topic and list what topic or skill you will teach each week or period • You may need to prepare two different types of scheme of work: - A general one showing the topics you will teach during the whole term.
- A more detailed one to break down each topic into steps to be taught in each period or lesson.
There are several ways of writing a scheme of work, but the best way is to present it in a tabular form.
A typical scheme of work will have the following columns: Scheme of Work Format Week Period Topic Objectives Teacher s Students Teaching References Teaching activities activities Aids Strategies I 1 2 3 4 5 II 1 2 3 4 5 o Week: the week in the term; 1, 2, 3, etc o Period: the period in the week; 1, 2, 3, etc o Topic: the contents/skills to be learned o Objective: the basic objective(s) of learning each topic o Teacher s Activities: what the teacher will do o Students Activities: what the students will do.
o Teaching Aids: materials to aid teaching.
o Reference Books: the course book.
o Teaching Strategies: Repetition/Questioning/Summary etc 134  ENG 720 English Methods SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Where do you draw your scheme of work?
3.
3 What is a Lesson Plan?
A lesson plan is an elaboration of the scheme of work.
It separates the activities of the teacher from those of the students.
Lesson Note: A lesson note is a detailed version of the lesson plan.
It is usually the teacher s detailed notes where he/she puts everything he/she has to offer for a particular lesson.
It is usually in essay format.
It has the same preamble as the lesson plan.
However, the students activities and the teacher s activities are mixed up.
3.
3.
1 Elements of a Lesson Plan There are certain elements you should take note of when preparing your lesson plan.
• Topic: For each lesson whether it will last for one hour or three hours it is essential that you treat a main topic.
E.g.
Reading to identify main and detailed ideas • Objectives: the objectives will help you limit or specify the scope of the lesson.
The number of objectives will vary depending on the content of the lesson but probably range between two to five objectives.
• Teacher s Activities: these are the actions you will be taking during the course of the lesson.
• Students Activities: these are the activities students will be engaged in while learning.
They include cloze exercises, games, writing, speaking and so on.
• Evaluation: The purpose of evaluation is to check if students have attained the objectives of the lesson.
Evaluation can range from informal to formal.
A Lesson Plan for Teaching Poetry Class: JSS II No on Roll: 45 Age: 12 years Topic: Simile and Metaphor 135  ENG 720 English Methods Date: 9th October 2009 Time: 10.00 10.40 am Duration: 40 minutes Entry Behaviour: Students already know about figurative language Behavioural Objectives: By the end of this lesson the students should be able to: - identify similes and metaphors in poems.
- interpret similes and metaphors used in communication - Use similes and metaphors in oral and written communication.
v Presentation No of Lesson content Teacher s Students Activities Teaching Minutes Activities Aids/Materials 3 Revision of Teacher revises Students will revise previous use of figurative their knowledge by knowledge on language with answering the Figurative students.
teacher s questions language.
5 Introduction of The teacher asks Students listen and Pictures, Charts etc the new lesson general questions contribute if leading into the necessary.
topic.
6 Definition of Teacher displays Students read the Chart showing the simile a chart showing poem and identify poems.
the introductory the similes.
poems and defines simile.
6 Definition of The teacher Students identify Chart showing the metaphor.
defines metaphor.
metaphors in the poems.
poem 7 Changing The teacher leads S tudents change Charts, flash cards, strip similes to the discussion by similes to metaphors of papers etc.
metaphors and using prompting and vice versa metaphors to questions on following teacher s similes changing similes leading questions.
to metaphors and vice versa.
6 Revision of Teacher leads Students join in the Charts, flash cards etc points not students in discussion of such clarified discussing areas ideas, answering properly after not fully questions and the initial discussed or contributing introduction of understood generally.
the topic.
initially.
136  ENG 720 English Methods 5 Evaluation Teacher asks Students answer Chart or Blackboard questions on the teacher s questions.
summary of the following: questions 1.
Identification of simile.
2.
Identification of metaphor.
3.
Changing simile to metaphor and vice versa.. 2 Assignment The teacher gives Students take note of further the given assignment.
assignment.
Sample Poems Simile My Tree Jessie She lives with branches like arms Wide and long they grow She sings her song of the wind Leaves rustling like nails clicking Little flakes of bark peeling just like the skins of desert rocks She feels wrinkly like a rhino s skin She smells like flowers And in the dead of night she waits What Am I Sophie A small pink nose as soft as a rose A pair of beady eyes as black as the night Two tiny ears as smooth as a feather A long brown tail as twisty as a willow tree branch An oval little body the size of an egg Fine little whiskers as shiny as a star Small scuttling feet as fast as lighting What am I?
Who am I?
Can you guess?
137  ENG 720 English Methods Metaphor The Crab Catherine & Jelly The crab is A dancing pair of scissors Cutting up water all the time.
It s face is a red hot sun Burning the sand to dust.
It is a dancing teacher Waiting for it s students.
Dreams Langston Hughes Hold fast to dreams For if dreams die Life is a broken-winged bird That cannot fly.
Hold fast to dreams For when dreams go Life is a barren field Frozen with snow.
4.
0 CONCLUSION Adequate knowledge of the preparation of these planning instruments; curriculum, syllabus, scheme of work, lesson plans and lesson notes is of utmost importance to you.
It places you in a better stead to face teaching either during your supervised teaching practice or later in your career as a classroom teacher.
5.
0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the relevance of curriculum and syllabus in teaching and learning programmes.
We also discussed how to prepare the scheme of work and lesson plan.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Name the two broad classifications of teaching syllabus.
138  ENG 720 English Methods 2.
What two things will you bear in mind when preparing your scheme of work?
3.
What is a lesson plan?
Develop a lesson plan to teach students to evaluate and infer.
7.
0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dubin, F. & Olstitain, E. (1986).
Course design: Developing programmes and materials for language learning.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Krahnke, K. (1988).
Approaches to syllabus design for foreign language teaching.
New York: Prentice-Hill/Regents Nunan, D. (1988).
Syllabus design.
Oxford: Oxford University Press 139
