 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 810 COURSE TITLE: SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATIONEDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION EDU 810: SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 2 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION CONTENTS Introduction Course Aims Course Objectives Working Through this Course Course Materials Study Units Textbooks Assessment Assignment Final Examination and Grading Course marking scheme Course overview How to get the most from this course Tutors and tutorial Summary COURSE GUIDE Introduction The course will consist of twenty units, which gives the students basis knowledge of supervision in education of instruction in education.
The course spreads through area like as supervision and leadership, communication, community development, curriculum development, staff development etc.
which will expand the horizon of the students with fundamental principles that gives them a solid back group or the school system and ideal supervision.
Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: The course aims to give an understanding of supervision of instruction in education and how the supervisory principles use appropriate skills and styles in supervising the teacher in order to enhance a conducive atmosphere for learning and facilitate cordial relationship between the school and the community.
NOUN 3 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION This will be achieved by aiming to: 1.
Introduce students to the basic principles of supervision and school administration.
2.
Demonstrate how supervision and school administration impact is being felt by the entire community.
3.
Explain ho school system is being influenced by the structure of the community.
4.
Outline the roles of supervisory principles 5.
Give you how supervision promote staff development Course Objectives To achieve these aims, the course has overall objectives being synthesized from the specific objectives of each unit when are always included at the beginning of each unit when are always included at beginning of each unit.
It is imperative for you to check the objectives of each unit out the completion of each unit, then you can be sure that you have achieved them.
Bye and large the following pertinent objectives should be achieved at the end of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 1) Explain the various meaning of supervision.
2) Discuss the historical development of supervision in Nigeria 3) Describe the factors determine the characteristics of supervision.
4) Explain how the potential can be released 5) Define the concept “Power with Approach” to leadership.
6) State the barriers to communication.
7) Explain the responsibilities of supervisor.
8) Discuss the organization for curriculum development.
9) Enumerate the principles of in-service educational programme 10) Itemise the role of principal as instructional leader.
11) Discuss the basic principles of organization 12) List the activities that are applicable to a specific visit.
13) Identify the criteria to be followed by the supervising principal in the follow-up conference.
14) Describe the organization and operation of workshop.
15) Explain the teacher evaluation and appraisal techniques.
16) Discuss how to improve library services.
17) Enumerate steps in building a community relations programme 18) Identify the qualities of a profession.
19) List the principles for the evaluation of supervision NOUN 4 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 20) Describe the new directions in educational supervision.
Working through this course Before the completion of this course, you must have read the study units, text books and other materials prescribed.
Each unit also contain Tutor – Marked Assignment Question for which you need to have personal assessment on the course.
Assignments and class works will be given periodically and final examination will be conducted after the completion of the course.
The course will take you 10 weeks and time is allocated to each unit.
COURSE MATERIALS The major components of the course are: 1 Course outline 2 Course guide 3 Study units 4 Textbooks STUDY UNITS There are twenty study units in this course, they are as follows.
Unit 1: - The concept of instructional supervision Unit 2: - Functions of instructional supervision Unit 3: Evolution of school supervision/inspection Unit 4: Supervision for the release of human potential Unit 5: Supervision is leadership.
Unit 6: Supervision is communication Unit 7: Application of communication theory to supervisory practice Unit 8 : Supervision and curriculum development Unit 9 : Supervision and staff development Unit 10: The supervisory team Unit 11: Organizing the supervisory visits Unit 12: How to improve supervisory visits Unit 13: Supervisory follow-up conference Unit 14: Organizing a successful workshop Unit 15: Measuring teacher performance Unit 16: Use of instructional media and library facilities Unit 17: Building a community support programme Unit 18: Professional responsibility of the supervisor Unit 19: Evaluating a supervisory programme Unit 20 : The future of supervision NOUN 5 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Each unit consists of introduction, objectives, contents, summary, conclusion, suggested text books and self assessment exercise which direct you to work on exercises written at the end of each topic or sub-toipics.
These exercises will assist you in achieving the stated objectives of the individual units and of the course.
TEXTBOOKS There are two compulsory set books.
You should purchase them yourself.
Kimball Wiles and John Lovell (1975) .
Supervision for better schools .
Prentice – Hall, Inc Engleriood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Marks J.R.et al (1988).
Handbook of Educational supervision a guide for the practioner.
Allyn and Bacon, Inc. Boston Massachusetts.
ASSESMENT There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First are the assignments, second , there is a written examination in tackling the assignments; you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment.
It will constitute 40% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, final examination of two to three hours’ duration will be written and it will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
ASSIGNMENT There are four assignments in this course, which will be submitted as at when due, and counts for 10marks towards your total course mark.
The materials and the set books including the study units will help you in writing the assignment.
It is desirable if you can write a good assignment to demonstrate the knowledge you have acquired.
Other references or suggested text will also assist you.
Make sure the assignments get to your tutor on or before expiration date.
If you can not complete your assignment at the appointed time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due for discussion for possible extension.
Final Examination And Grading The final examination will be for two hours’ duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
It will consist questions which reflect the types of self-testing , practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have encountered previously.
It NOUN 6 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION would be better if you can constitute a discussion group of considerable number and practice or discuss the exercises written in each unit before the examination period.
Course Marking Scheme The following table shows the breaking down of the marks.
Assessment Marks 4 assignments Each counts for 10 marks Each = 40marks of course marks Final examination 60 marks overall course marks Total 100% of course marks COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of Works Week Assessment End of Unit Activity 1.
The concept of instructional supervision.
2.
Functions of instructional supervision 1 3.
Evaluation of school supervision/Inspection.
1 4 Supervision for the release of human potential 5 Supervision is leadership.
Assignment 6 Supervision is communication.
1 7 Application of comm..
Theory to supervisory practice.
1 Assignment 8 Supervision and curriculum development 9 How To Get The Most From This Course The course guide serves as substitute for University lecture under a distance learning programme.
The students can read at their own pace and understand as if they are N O UN 7 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION listening to a lecturer.
The study units serve a guide as to when a student will read.
Each unit follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction which acquaint you to the topic, next is the objective of the unit which allows you to know when you have completed the unit and guide your study.
The main body of the unit called content guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either set books or from a readings section.
Practical exercises are given at the end of topic which if practiced will enhance your understanding.
Tutor – marked assignment questions are interspersed throughout the units and answers are given inform of a kit at the end of the unit.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you have questions bothering your mind contact your tutor through e-mail or phone or any means he or she will be willing to assist you .
In addition to this : a) Read the course guide thoroughly b) Read the course outline very well c) Organize a study schedule with the help of course overview d) Try to adhere strictly to your schedule e) Work through the unit and use it to guide your reading f) Review the objectives for each unit to confirm that you have achieved them if you are not satisfied consult your tutor.
g) When you are satisfied with a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
h) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives.
Tutor and Tutorials There are 20 hours of tutorials (twenty 1 hour sessions) provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times, and location of these tutorials, together with the name of phone number of your tutor as soon as your are allocated a tutorial group Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked and turned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
Try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
Prepare your NOUN 8 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION question before attending the tutorials.
You will learn a lot from oparticipating in discussions actively.
Summary At the end of this course, you will be able to answer these king of questions after being equipped with the basic knowledge of supervision.
1.0 What is supervision?
is there any difference between supervision and inspection ?
2.0 Narrate the history of school inspection in Nigeria.
3.0 Who is a leader ?
And what is leadership ?
4.0 Discuss at least three different communication methods through customary channel.
5.0 Distinguish between workshop and teacher’s meeting?
6.0 What is the effect of evaluation on staff development 7.0 Explain the roles or principals as an instructional leader 8.0 Explain the basic principles of organization for supervision.
9.0 List the basic principles of supervisory visit.
10.0 State the factors influencing the conduct of a successful conference 11.0 State the basic principles of supervisory activities 12.0 Discuss various ways of improving library services.
13.0 Enumerate the basic principles of community relation’s programme 14.0 What are the requirements for professional status?
15.0 Explain the evidence of an effective supervisory programme.
Note that the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above listed questions.
You should try to apply your practical experience to some other questions that may arise.
NOUN 9 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION EDU 810: SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer Dr. Mobolaji Ogunsanya Department of Educational Management University of Ibadan Unit Writer Dr. Mobolaji Ogunsanya Department of Educational Management University of Ibadan Programme Leader Course Coordinator NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 10 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 1 The Concept of Instructional Supervision.
Table of Content: 1 Definition of Supervision.
2 Meaning of Supervision 3 Principles of Supervision 1.0 Introduction The concept of supervision has been given different meanings at different times in history in response to a wide variety of forces, which impact on the educational system.
However, the structure of a school, to a vary large extent, determines the main features of supervision change so also do the principles of supervision.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1) Define the concept of supervision 2) Explain the various meanings of supervision 3) State the principles of supervision.
3.0 The Content Definition of supervision The concept, supervision is often referred to as instructional supervision in order to reflect the content in which the supervision is undertaken.
Very often too, supervision is used interchangeably with inspection or school inspection.
Yet some literature makes certain distinctions between Inspection and Supervision.
Inspection belongs to the British tradition while supervision originated from the American tradition.
Inspection activities focused on school administration and finding out what was not done right by the teachers?
On the other hand, supervision in NOUN 11 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION American tradition was land of help or assistance to a professional colleague, the teacher in the process of teaching.
Over the years, however, the two terms tended to these reached a meeting point in their operational depictions and application.
Yet, one can still see traces of the original differences between the two terms.
Inspection can be define as a process involving regular visits to school to check that everything is satisfactory and that roles are being obeyed by the principal teachers and students, so, you can now see from this definition where the emphasis of inspection was defined as a process, facilitated by a supervisor, through which the teachers help such other, counsel each other, plan with each other and talk with each other about how to improve the teaching learning situation n the school.
What is supervision?
Is there any difference between supervision and inspection?
Discuss.
* Supervision is an assistance or hand of help given to a professional colleague, the teacher in the process of teaching, it is synonymous to inspection.
3.0 The Meaning of Supervision Supervision seems to mean different things to different people.
The principal teacher , student and parents at supervision prom the angle at which each relates with the supervision.
Wait a minute to reflect on what supervision means to each one of them.
However, supervision continues to evolve in theory practice and meaning.
The evolution was influenced by certain forces and changes, which include secure and technology, knowledge explosion, population explosion, demands for educational reform and some others.
However, the meaning of supervision differs from one person to another person.
Hence, to a teacher or a subordinate who is being supervised, supervision may mean a challenge to his personality, to another teacher, supervision may mean an avenue for personal recognition to a principal it may mean an inquisition.
What does it mean to you?
Supervision takes place in educational organization which is a social system with a number of interacting sub- systems.
These sub-systems are the teaching sub-system, the school management sub-system, the instructional supervision sub-system and the counseling sub- system and the coo-curriculum sub-system.
Supervision is a professional, continuous and cooperative exercise that covers all aspects of the life of a school.
Hence, the instructional supervision sub- systems of the school and influences them.
The main purpose of influencing the other NOUN 12 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION sub-systems is to ensure that there is Improvement in the learning situation and the quality of learning in the school.
But beyond these formal sub-systems is the informal support sub-system, which provides a great deal of assistance to the formal.
Supervisory system in varying ways.
For example, teachers help each other , student also help each other , teachers help students, and students help teachers, they exchange suggest or discuss ideas, experiences, resources materials etc.
however, supervision is carried out by persons designated to do so.
They are known by various names , both within and outside the school system which include supervisor, inspector, superintendent, principal, vice principal, Head of Department etc.
Supervision does not mean an inquisition or fault finding, rather supervision means guidance, assistance, sharing of ideas to all those involved in the process of teaching and learning.
It is also means the facilitation or creation and continuous improvement of a conductive learning and teaching environment.
The supervision is curriculum development, it is communication it is leadership and it is about helping the teacher and the learner to realize their full potentials in their respective careers.
3.2 The Principles of Supervision There are a number of general principles, which guide the practice of supervision as well as discussions about it.
You will need to learn and re- learn these principles as key points to your quicker understanding of subsequent units in this course.
You can use the principles to observe, analyze, explain and evaluate supervisory practices in a school.
So, you should hold firmly to the principles.
They are stated as follow: - There should be short-term, medium-term and long term planning for supervision.
- Supervision is a sub-system of the school organization.
- Supervision is a dynamic and cooperative enterprise in the school system.
- All teachers have a right and the need for supervision - Supervision should be conducted regularly to meet the individual needs of the teachers and other personnel.
- Supervision should help to clarity educational objectives and goals for the principal and the teacher.
- It is the responsibility of the class teacher to ensure that his class receives adequate supervision regularly - It is equally the responsibility of the principal to ensure that his school receives adequate supervision regularly.
- Supervision should help to improve the attitudes and relationship of all school personnel in order to facilitate the realization of school goals and objectives.
NOUN 1 3 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION - Supervision should assist in the organization and implementation of curriculum programmes for the learners.
- Supervision should help the school to develop good report with the neighboring communities.
- Supervision should help to interpret or clarify government policies.
- Supervision must be adequately provided for in the school annual budget.
- Supervision can be improved through educational research.
- Supervision should help teachers supply the latest research findings on - education relevant to their teaching.
The ultimate goal of supervision is to achieve an improvement in the quality - of learning by the learners.
Supervision from within and outside the school complement each other and - are both necessary.
Supervision from outside is strengthened a defective where supervision within the school is regularly carried out.
State ten of the principles of supervision.
*You are expected to read and perhaps memories at least ten out of the above listed principles of supervision 4.0 Conclusion This unit provides a basic knowledge of the definition, meaning and principles of supervision.
You must have a full grasp of the concept of supervision as a prerequisite to your understanding of the remaining units in this course.
Read this units as many times as it may take you to understand its content before you go to the next unit.
5.0 Summary Supervision and inspection are words that are sometimes used interchangeably and at some other times used to connote different meanings.
Nowadays, supervision has a more popular usage than inspection.
Supervision is defined as a process, facilitated by a supervision, through which the teachers help each other, counsel each other, plan with each other, and talk with each other about how to improve the teaching-learning situation in the school.
Supervision means so many things in the school system.
It is leadership, it is communication, it is curriculum development, it is human capital development and a dynamic cooperative enterprise.
Eighteen N O UN 14 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION principles of supervision are listed in this unit.
They all indicate very clearly that school cannot run efficiently, that teachers may not be able to realize their full potentials and that effective learning may not take place if adequate supervision is not provided.
The principles also show that all teachers have a right and the need for supervision.
6.0 References John, T.L (1977) “A perspective for viewing instructional supervisory Behaviour.
Washington, D.C.A.S.C.D pp 12-27 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Question Identify eight sub-systems of a school organization.
What is the important of supervision.
N O U N  15 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 2 Evolution of Supervision Table of Content: 1.
Development of Administrative Supervision 2.
The use of scientific Management Principles of Supervision\ 3.
Development of Person-Oriented Supervision 4.
Historical Development of Supervision in Nigeria 1.0 Introduction: Supervision, if interpreted in the broadest sense, has a low historical origin, perhaps dating back to when man began to love together in groups.
As a matter of course, the need for the management of human affairs living in group automatically requires elements of supervision, no matter how crudely it was practiced at that time.
But the theory and practice of supervision in recorded history has a relatively receipt origin.
It is extremely beneficial and refreshing to look back at the history of supervision.
By so doing, we shall be able to learn from the past mistakes, failures and successes .
In addition, it provides a basic for the development of new ideas, understandings and practices for the future.
Hence, you will learn in this unit about the evolution of supervision in a chronological order from the eighteenth century to the present day.
Do you think there are other reasons why you must study the history of supervision ?
Write them down.
• It provides perspective for analysis and understanding of the preset • It provides a basis for the development of new ideas and understandings and practices for the future.
• It promotes objectivity in evaluation.
NOUN 16 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, the learner should be able to: - Explain how administrative supervision is practiced.
- Explain the use of scientific management principles in supervision - Discuss the major differences between person – oriented supervision and the two earlier approaches to supervision.
- Narrate the history of supervision in Nigeria.
3.0 The Content Administrative Supervision.
The literature is replete with accounts of how administrative supervision dominated supervisory practices between early eighteen century and end of nineteenth century.
Supervision was concerned as an administrative duty aimed at ensuring that teachers do their jobs.
What the supervisors generally do is to observe the teachers, evaluate the performance of the teachers and take appropriate action.
Their activities involved inspecting, checking , telling , rating and monitoring.
Hence, layman who were non-professionals and untrained carried out supervision.
The use of on-professionals as supervisors at that time should not come as a surprise.
It was a reflection of the assumptions underlying the practice of supervision at that time.
The assumptions of the supervisors were: - that supervision does not require any special professional competence - that it is not the responsibility of supervisors to develop the teachers.
- that it is not the duty of supervisors to improve teaching - that teachers are expected to solve their problems by themselves - that teaching is not a discipline that has its own body of knowledge and - methodology, which could be learnt or taught.
that concern should be for the job and not the feelings, emotions, attitudes - and moral of teachers.
that teachers alone are accountable for the performance of their students.
With increase in the number of schools and teachers, one of the teachers in each school was designated as building principal to perform only managerial functions.
Further increases in schools and school population led to the replacement N O  UN 17 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION of lay supervisors with superintendents who were given additional responsibility for improving teaching and quality f instruction.
3.1 Evaluation of Educational Outcomes Educational organizations are set up by the society to meet its needs it is imperative that both the society and educational institutions are constantly aware of the extent to which their news are being met.
This is done through a systematic programme of evaluation of educational outcomes.
This evaluation can be carried out by supervisors so designated prom within or prom outside the educational institution.
This evaluation is an integral part of the functions of supervisors.
3.2 History of Supervision in Nigeria The introduction of Western education in Nigeria started with establishment of the first primary school by the missionaries at Badagry, Nigeria in 1842.
Hence, the three main approaches to supervision discussed so far in this unit were also practiced in the field of education in Nigeria initially; the missionaries were supervising their own schools using the administrative supervision approach prevalent at the time, a situation where the catedirts were also teachers and the layman in the church served as supervisors or inspectors.
It was with the appointment of Red Metcalf Sunter as Wer Majesty’s Inspector of schools of the West African settlements in 1882 that government started to demonstrate commitment to educational standards and school inspection.
The appointment of Henry Carr in 1889 as the just indigenous Inspector of schools for Lagos Colony further confirmed governments concern for the quality of education in Nigeria .
During the first quarter of the twentieth century, inspectorate service got an unprecedented borst with the appointment of a Director of education and three zonal inspectors pf schools in order to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of school inspection.
The expansion and restructuring of the inspectorate service.
This development was no doubt influenced by the prevailing scientific management approach to supervision.
The requonalization of education by the McPherson constitution gave rise to the establishment of Western Region Inspectorate service which was able to expand its scope of activities and make considerable impact on the educational standards of the region.
Also, the establishment of the federal inspectorate service in 1973, independent of the Federal Ministry of Education made significant impact on the quality of instruction in schools.
Throughout the period that the independence lasted, supervision faced the greatest challenge with the takeover of all educational institutions in the country by the Federal Government in 1975, since the government now became the accuser and the judge in its own case.
This challenge was confounded by government’s unprecedented expansion of enrolments without a corresponding increase in the facilities all over the country.
Consequently, supervision of instruction became weak and ineffective and gradually degenerated to its present state of paralysis.
This NOUN 18 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION notwithstanding, the modern supervisor in Nigeria is regarded as a professional colleague a democrat, a humanist, a facilitator, a friend and a counselor.
4.0 Conclusion The functions of supervision discussed above pose a great challenge to the educational system.
The challenge is how to put in place a virile, effective and enduring system of supervision.
It is only then that supervision can be regarded as a catalyst to the improvement of the quality of the learning environment and instruction for the learner the other hand, the absence of a strong system of supervision poses a serious threat to the survival of the educational system.
5.0 Summary There are seven major functions of supervision discussed in the unit.
Try to remember as many of them as possible.
They are: - Goal development - Programme development - Coordination - Motivation - Problem Solving - Professional Development - Evaluation of Educational Outcomes.
The proper working of this function requires that a firmly established structure which is well staffed and well equipped is put in place for the effective supervision of schools.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Question Summaries the history of supervision in Nigeria.
7.0 Reference/Recommended Books Wiles, K.& Lovell, J.T (1975) .
Supervision for better schools,, New Jersey, Preutice – Hall Inc. pp 328 Sergwuanni, T.J & Starratt, R.T (1971) .
Emerging patterns of supervision: human perspectives, new York, McGraw – Hill.
N O U N 19 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION UNIT 3 Unit Title: Functions of Instructional Supervision Table of Content 1.
Characteristics of Supervision 2.
Functions of Supervision 16.0 Introduction The purpose of setting up a school is to provide a link or both the teacher and the learner in order that teaching and learning can take place.
But teaching and learning can only take place effectively and efficiently if adequate system of supervision of the teaching/learning process is firmly established.
Since the ultimate goal of supervision is to bring about improvements in the learning situation and the learner, it is very important that you have a correct understanding of the main features and functions of supervision right from the beginning of our discussions in this course.
This understanding will enable you to develop appreciation and cooperative attitudes for the professional roles played by different individuals in the scheme of school supervision.
2.
0 Objectives At the end of the unit, learners should be able to: - Explain the factors, which determine the characteristics of supervision.
- Discuss the functions of supervision.
3.0 The Content You have learnt about the definitions and principles of supervision among other things in unit 1 of this course.
You may wish to have a quick look at the content of that unit once again in order to refresh your memory and be able to relate it to what we shall be discussing in this unit.
Let us begin our discussion with the functions of supervision.
These functions spell out the various activities, which are undertaken in the process of supervision as well as the role of the supervisor in the process.
The functions can be categorized into seven as listed below (Wiles & Loveel, 1975): NOUN 20 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 1.
Goal development 2.
Programme development 3.
Control and coordination 4.
Motivation 5.
Problem solving 6.
Professional development 7.
Evaluation of educational outcomes.
Before you read further, go back to read the seven functions again.
Then pause a little to reflect on each one of them.
At this point, try to see whether you will remember where you had come across any of the functions or who, among education personnel you have observed performing similar functions in the school system.
Perhaps you want to recollect the name of a school principal.
Now as we go along discussing each of the functions take careful notes of the differences and similarities between what you already know and what is contained on this course.
3.0.1 Goal Development The most important function of supervision is to ensure that teachers and supervisions work together cooperatively in developing the goals of the school organization.
It should be noted that the school goals are generated from the goals of society.
Goal development as a function of supervision is a continuous process which requires regular examination, evaluate modification and changing (if need be) of the goals of the teaching/learning process through the cooperative efforts of both the teachers and the supervisors.
The regularity of concern for goal development is a measure of the sensitivity and responsiveness of the supervision scheme to the dynamism of the societal goals as well as clear indicator of the degree of effectiveness of the supervision system.
3.0.2 Programme Development The development of curricula and co-curricula activities in a primary responsibility of the teachers.
The role of supervision in the matter is to provide appropriate complementary technical and professional services and support.
The number and types of programmes developed for the teaching/learning process at the level of either an educational sub-system or individual school or classroom are determined by the earlier developed for the teaching/learning process.
So changes in these goals are expected to lead appropriate.
Changes, facilitated by the supervisory system, in the programmes developed.
3.0.3 Control and Coordination NOUN 21 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Education is a system made up of many inter-related, interdependent and interacting units.
Each unit has its own goals to achieve and at the same time contribute to the realization of the overall goals of the system or sub-system.
It is a basic function of supervision to facilitate the proper coordination of the various units.
Effective coordination requires the establishment of a comprehensive system of communication among the units in order to strengthen the system of supervision and improve the quality of instruction for the learner.
3.0.4 Motivation Teachers and learners are always confronted with a variety of problem of varying degree of difficulty.
These problems may be related to inputs into the educational organization, anticipated learning outcomes, curricula and co-curricula programmes and actual learning.
It may be possible for the teacher to solve some of these problems immediately by himself, many , many other problems may take days or weeks to resolve and require the assistance of the supervisor.
In all cases, the supervisory system put in place should be that readily facilitates the resolution of emerging problems.
3.0.6 Professional Development Teachers are professionals.
They are trained, but the needs, problems and aspirations of the society which owns the education system as well as the society’s expectations from the teachers keep changing.
Teachers as custodians of the education of the society must also change and reflect these changes in technology, the development of goals, learning engagements and learning environment of educational organization.
For this to happen, teachers must be exposed to a continuous, comprehensive and systematic programme of in-service training to enable them cope with these change of course, it is the function of supervision to initiate , support coordinate and facilitate the realization of the programme of professional development for teachers and supervisors.
As the school system continued to expand, additional professionals were appointed as general supervisors under the leadership of the superintendent.
The organization of supervision at that time was such that a highly centralized system of supervision was in practice.
In conclusion, the assumption throughout the period of administration supervision was that teachers were passive and had to do whatever they were told to do.
Write out the roles of the teacher and administrative supervisor and the latters assumptions about the former in tabular form as indicated below: NOUN 22 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Assumptions about the teacher Roles of the Supervisor Role of the Teacher 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 3.1 Application of Scientific Management in Supervision The principles of scientific management dominated the management of organizations including educational institutions.
The scientific management principles also operate under the assumption that workers (teachers) were a passive tool which could be manipulated to achieve organizational goals.
So, both the administrative supervision and the scientific management approach to supervision operate under the same premise.
But the major difference is that scientific methods were used to maximize the efficiency of workers.
The scientific management principles prescribe the use of time and methods study to determine the best method of doing a job, provide workers with an incentive to do the job and the use of experts (supervisions) to determine the conditions of the job to b done.
It is primary duty of the supervisor to make sure that the workers (teachers) do the job in accordance with the methods and under the conditions prescribed by the supervisor.
Generally, supervisors were to do their job by telling, showing, enforcing, rating and rewarding etc the teachers who were expected to perform with maximum efficiency.
Because the main interest of the supervisor was to ensure that teachers did their jobs, he had little concern for the feelings, attitudes, emotions and morale of the teachers.
How would you personally react to a supervisor who regards you as a passive instrument for manipulation and shows no concern for your feelings, motivation, attitudes and emotions?
List twenty-one word reactions.
Discuss the implications of your reactions on the learner with one or more of your colleagues.
* Such supervisor has no good human relation, autocratic leader impatience, NOUN 23 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION unpredictable, unapproachable, and easily irritated person.
3.2 Development of Person Oriented Supervision You will recall that the administrative supervision and the scientific management approach to supervisor had at least one thing in common.
That is, the little regard they had for the feelings, attitudes, emotions and morale of the teachers.
By the second quarter of the twentieth century a large concern for workers needs and feelings had been established.
This development grew out of the realization that workers have personal goals and needs which often influence their needs and expects workers to work towards the realization of these goals.
However, conflicts often arise when personal goals of the workers are at various with the goals of the organization.
This situation also occurs very frequently in educational organizations especially with regard to time-tabling.
The work of the supervisor in this matter is to prevent conflict arising and when it does, he ensures that the conflict is properly managed without hurting the feelings and interests of the teachers concerned.
In other words, a middle way has to be found such that both the teacher and the organization are satisfied with the resolution on management of the conflicts.
As a matter of fact, the study of leadership behaviour, leadership styles, social groups, group processes, etc provided a sound theoretical basic for the thinking at that time and had profound effect on the practice of instructional supervision.
Come other scientific research which had a very powerful and highly significant impact on the system of supervision was the Hawthorne studies conducted by Elbon Mayo and his colleagues in 1933 Two major findings of this study are relevant to our discussion in this unit.
One is that the relationship which worker have with their supervisors greatly influence their job performance.
The other is that the informal social system which workers form in their places of work has considerable influence on the setting of performance, democratic and human relations tenets were brought into the practice of supervision.
Consequently, the title of supervisor was replaced by Resource person, Coordinator, helping teacher, or consultant.
They were often on call waiting for request for services from teachers.
But problems soon developed when it became clear that supervisors were much more interested in being democratic and friendly with the teachers rather than in helping and solve their problems.
In addition, many principals were inexperienced, curtained and unwilling to accept responsibility for academic leadership, furthermore, the vague definition of the roles, responsibility for academic leadership, furthermore, the vague definition of the roles responsibility and authorities of both the supervisor and the principal often created conflict between the NOUN 24 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION two of them.
Teachers were no longer requesting for the services of supervisor.
Later on, it became clear that the use of democratic and human relations approached to supervision does not provide all the answers to the problems of supervision in schools.
State the differences between supervision which used democratic and human relations approaches and supervision which employed the use of administrative and scientific management principles.
* Supervision which employed democratic and human relations approaches enjoy the maximum cooperation of the teacher and promote cordial relationship than supervision which employed administrative and scientific management principles who sees teacher as robot or machine that need no incentive.
4.0 Conclusion Instructional supervision is an organizational system which seeks to influence the teacher-student behaviour system.
Therefore the nature of teaching and learning would have important implications for the nature of supervision.
5.0 Summary Supervision takes different forms, one of its is democratic and human relations approaches and another one use administrative and scientific management principles but instructional supervisory behaviour occurs within the context of an organizational structure which consist of inter-dependent parts that exist for the purpose of contributing to the overall goals of the organization 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Question Explain the process of supervision 7.0 References Lovell, J.T (1967).
“A perspective for viewing instructional supervisory behaviour” in supervision.
Perspectives and propositions ed.
W.H Lucio Washington, D.C Association for supervision and curriculum development.
Lucio, W.H (1979) .Supervision: a synthesis of thought and action.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
NOUN 25 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 4 Unit Title: The Realizations of human potentials Table of Content 1.
Developing adequate self-concept 2.
Releasing human potential 1.0 Introduction: In this unit you will learn about the skills, the talents and the attributes that every human being is endowed with, how these endowments could be developed and how they could be utilized.
You will notice that you have the abilities to do certain things very well and do some other things not so well.
You will also remember that there are quite a large number of things you think you do not possess the abilities to do but which you can do only if you open up yourself to relevant experiences.
In other words, your attitudes and experiences could limit the development of the abilities which you have.
The sum total of the abilities you have so well and those you have not so well as well as those you think you do not have at all imply that human potential is tremendous, inestimable and inexhaustible You can never know all the potentials you have and so you can never make use of all the potentials you have .
But you can develop those potentials or ability you need from time to time.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the meaning of self-concept and how to develop it 2.
Explain how to release human potential.
3.0 The Content 3.1 Developing Adequate Self Concept NOUN 26 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION A supervisor must have adequate self concept.
This will go a long way to determine the quality of his supervision, it may even help to make or may the entire supervisory practices with school, when a supervisor has adequate self-concept, it means that he has confidence in himself and his abilities.
This also implies that he has confidence in his abilities, to help other , to solve problems, to cope with challenges and the situation, to develop confidence in other, to grow and to develop professionally and to provide effective leadership.
How do you know a supervisor who has confidence in himself?
He is one who is sure of himself, he does not possess the habit of belittling others or running down others, he does not deliberately hurt others in order to boost his own ego.
He does not feel a constant need for having other people tell than how valuable, worthy or important he is.
He does not have a feeling of insecurity or have to build up a feeling of superiority or have to himself that they are better than some other person or have a constantly be on guard.
He is not afraid that someone is after his job.
If the supervisor can eliminate all these negative feelings, his feeling of adequacy will increase.
As his self-confidence increases, he also helps to increase the self confidence of the teachers.
He relates with the teachers as colleagues and as partners in progress and not as a boss.
So, he thinks with them and consults them on what the teachers should teach and how it should be taught.
This is how it should be.
This attitude of the supervisor creates a good rapport between the supervisor and the teachers on the one hand and a friendly working environment on the other hand.
Some supervisors operate under false assumptions which clearly indicate that such supervisors have low self concept .
One of these assumptions is for a supervisor to think that they should know more about every subject on the school timetable than each of the subject teacher.
This is obviously impossible but the supervisor goes ahead to establish a dictatorial behaviour system which creates tension , hostility and undermines the quality of supervision .
The second assumption is that a supervisor should act the role of a supervisor by establishing a stereotype the why a supervisor should act.
This is wrong because the assumption leads them to live a lyre or pretences instead of being themselves.
It also leads supervisors to assume a personality, manner of behaviour and a dignity that are alien to them.
What manner of supervision do you think this supervisor will give?
Definitely, a supervision that emanates from a false personality.
How do you know a supervisor who has confidence in himself?
* He is sure of himself, he does not belittle others, he is not self centered, and he does not deliberately hurt others.
3.2 Supervisory Action to Release Human Potential Human potential can be released in a conducive atmosphere.
The supervisors have two basic sources of power that can be used, the supervisor has the authority because of his position in the organization to influence the behaviour of NOUN 27 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION organizational members and it is this source of power that makes it possible for the supervisor to all meetings, provide materials, provide consultants, release teachers from normal duties and support their attendance at professional meetings.
Secondly, the esteem given to the supervisors is another source of power if they value his competence and trust his motives that they will value his suggestions, ideas, and desires, thereby increase the supervisor’s power in the group; on the other hand, the supervisor can earn his esteem through interactions but this only gives him/ her little chance to influence persons in the informal organization.
The following elements are used by the supervisor to create a conducive environment in order to release human potential.
Sense of belonging: - Every teacher wants to feel that they belong to the group with which they work.
This desire is one of the most important determinants of an individual productivity.
The desires to be accepted or to remain a part of the group is more powerful in conditioning the amount of work a person will do than is even his take home pay.
Availability of stimuli: It is imperative for an individual to set goals and look for the elements in his environment that will enable him the more at his speed in the direction he desires.
That is, an individual will find a stimulus to excite him and release his potential; the setting must contain many challenges and opportunities.
Encouragement to explore:- It is important for a person who is in an official leadership role to try to make some judgments about readiness for changes in the members of the staff.
He must not pretend they are all alike.
He recognizes there are differences and tries to be as accurate as possible in his assessment of these differences; he does not rate them, but used them to give himself guidance in planning his strategy to help people grow.
Individual Interpretations valued:- Potential is released if the individual is encouraged to develop his own judgments.
Teachers are professionally trained and their education has prepared them to make professional judgements, not to be robots following a prescheduled routine.
Heterogeneous staff sought:- If a heterogeneous community is more conducive to change, and it seems to be , the supervisor should seek teachers with different education, experiences and ways of looking at the educative process staff growth will occur through interaction and the potential of both supervisor and teachers will be released if the difference is valued and used.
Communication process:- The only way the potential of people is released is through communication and through interaction.
An individual’s potential as he interacts NOUN 28 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION with people in such a way that his vision in increased, his horizon expand, and his present limitation of thought challenges.
Help with personal problems:- People will grow intellectually and professionally through the interaction involved in solving educational problems if they are not too deeply troubled with personal problems.
A person’s potential for growth is not released if he is under emotional tension.
Actions by supervisors to reduce tension contribute to the release of human potential.
4.0 Conclusion: The supervisor should not expect to assist all people in releasing their potential.
The supervisor is only one of many interested in releasing the potential of the people.
If the supervisor thinks releasing potential is his exclusive responsibility and sole right, then he is doomed to failure.
Although it is important for the supervisor to build a structure and have a strategy for releasing the potential of people , the cornerstone of both goals must be his recognition that the major portion of assistance will come from one teacher to another.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have looked at how adequate self concept will be developed in supervisor in order to determine the quality of supervision, ability to face challenges, self confidence and to develop self confidence in others and not to belittling or running down others , some elements used by the supervisor to create conducive environment in order to release human potential are discussed, this include (i) sense of belonging (ii) availability of stimuli (iii) encouragement to explore (iv) individual interpretations valued (v) Hetenegeneous staff sought (vi) communication process and (vii) Help with personal problems.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Question.
Explain the elements used by the supervisor to create a conducive atmosphere in order to release human potential.
7.0 References Hahn , C.P (1971).
“ Collection of data for utilization in curriculum planning of the U.S.A. Force Academy.
In leadership and interpersonal behaviour , eds, L. Petrulle and B.M Bass.
New York Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Loinberger, H.F and C.M Milton (1967) .Social structure and diffusion of farm information.
Columbia, Missour, Agricultural experiment station, Research Bulletin 621.
NOUN 29 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Savage, R (1977) .
“A study of teacher satisfaction and attitudes” unpublished Doctor’s Dissertation.
Auburn, Alabama.
Auburn University Units 5 Unit Title: Supervision is leadership Table of Content i The Nature of Leadership ii The Power with Approach” To Leadership iii The Supervisor’s Role in the Group iv Leadership pitfalls 1.0 Introduction: Leadership behaviour is defined as behaviour on the part of one individual, which influences the behaviour of other individuals.
Leadership behaviour is assumed to be one important element of instructional supervisory behaviour.
As a supervisor begins to work in the organizational behaviour system it would be helpful to have a functional concepts of leadership, a clear picture of the influence position he wishes to attain and an explicit view of the way he plans to use this position to influence the behaviour of others in the organization.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Explain the nature of leadership - Define the concept “power with Approach” to leadership.
- Enumerate supervisor’s role in the group - State leadership pitfalls.
3.0 The Content The Nature of Leadership – Some people see a leader as an eloquent speaker, a person of superior intellect, or a servant of a man.
Other beliefs held by some people as: a person who is a leader in some situations will be a leader in all situations will, some people are born leaders and others are not leadership is restricted to a few people, leadership is a prestige position, a leader is a person who can influence other NOUN 30 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION people to accept his goals.
Pause, whom do you think a leader is ?
Based on your own opinion, what is leadership think on this; perhaps you have different view who is a leader ?
Reflect on this .
3.1 Leadership style:- A great number of studies were conducted to explore the relationship between certain styles of leadership and group achievement and group climate.
The style of leadership defined variously as democratic indirect, initiating structure and consideration is more likely to be associated with “Superior” group achievement and group maintenance.
Using the method of factor analysis, initiating structure and consideration has been identified behaviour as two critical dimensions of leadership description of democratic leadership as it was operationally defined as leadership behaviour characterized by high initiation of structure and high consideration.
Have a minute of more to think on other styles related to this and their applicability to supervision.
Leadership approach styles have led to a different approach to the study of leadership.
The following conclusions have been reached.
(i) Leadership is a group role.
(ii) Leadership depends upon the frequency of interaction.
(iii) Leadership is widespread and diffused.
(iv) Leadership qualities and follower ship qualities are interchangeable and (v) Leadership shifts from situation to situation.
Based on your own experience, who is a leader?
And what is leadership?
* A leader is a person who can influence other people while leadership connotes follow ship and prestige position 3.2 The “Power With “Approach to Leadership From your previous knowledge of leadership it could be observed that leadership is a dynamic phenomenon under the group approach to leadership, a leader is not personal authority.
His chief purpose is to develop group power that will enable the staff to accomplish its goal.
He does not conceive of his power as something apart from the group.
He is concerned with developing the type of working relationships that will give him power “with” the group.
The “Power With” supervisor begins by assisting the group members to plan together.
As problem arise in the organization of the group and in the steps taken to reach goals, the supervisor expands his effort in thinking of ways in which the group N OUN 31 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION to accept his opinion.
The chief questions for the group to answer become what is the job?
How can we do it better?
In answering these questions, the members of the group find that they are taking orders from the situation rather than from the supervisor.
When an organization operates to lead.
Any contribution to the attainment of group goals is accepted a leadership.
Under the ‘Power over’ situation wants people to give unquestioning support to his policy.
To question is to challenge, and a challenger must be subdued.
The supervisor makes the decisions and tells the staff what to do.
In a “Power Over situation, the leader is forced to see that no one else is gaining too muh power.
If someone in the group becomes too powerful, the leader’s authority will be jeopardized.
Differentiate between ‘Power With and Power Over’ approach to leadership.
*The former indicates democratic leader while the latter indicates leader.
3.3 The Supervisor’s Role In The Group The study of leadership based on interaction theories has emphasized leadership behaviour as the performance of needed group functions.
It is the performance of those acts, which help the may be termed ‘group functions’.
Leadership consists of such actions by group members as those which aid in setting group goals, moving the group toward its goals, improving the quality of the interactions among the members, building the cohesiveness of the group, or making resources available to the group.
The functions of leadership are attempting to discover what actions are required by groups under various conditions if they are to achieve their objectives and how different members take part in these actions.
Leadership behaviour will vary among group members according to the demands of the situation, the expectations of followers, and the competence and esteem of group members.
The supervisor would participate along with other group members in carrying out needed functions.
The official leader has a special responsibility to be sensitive to the group’s functional needs and to see that they are carried out.
You may wish to know more about the supervisor’s role in the group to enhance your own contributions, some of the other roles include (i) identification of problem (ii) generation of ideas (iii) implementation of action and (iv) innovation.
Perhaps with the above roles or supervisor’s responsibilities you can think of other roles what of (i) enrichment of the group thinking (ii) building the security and self confidence of the group NOUN 32 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION (iii) increasing the unity of the group (iv) encouraging diversity and the experimental approach (v) help the group to see dearly the boundaries of its authority (vi) increasing interaction and sharing of experience etc.
(Summarize in four sentences the roles of a supervisor ) • He/She should be innovative • He/She should be able to encourage diversity are experimental approach.
• He/She should be able to facilitate coordinal relationship and interaction.
He/She should be enriching group thinking.
3.4 Leadership Pitfalls A pitfall in supervisory leadership comes in not recognizing the necessity for exerting initiative.
But initiative should not be designed to control.
It should be exerted to help people develop an organization through which they can make decisions that are to be implemented.
Another pitfall is not having an organization sufficiently defined and described so that people know the functions that are performed by different individuals; know the channels through which to get a problem considered, know the procedures is made action will be taken to implement it.
One other pitfall is not moving in on a problem when it arise.
Pretending that a problem will go away if it ignored doesn’t make it ago away.
If a vital problem is ignored by official leadership, feeling begin.
How can you related this to leadership pitfalls probably you may want to know more pitfalls before you deduce well.
I will like to present to you as summarized below (i) Lack of emphasis on what is right instead of who (ii) Problem of using the authority of the official position to hold the group together until decisions are reached (iii) Failure to exercise executive authority to carry out policy (iv) Failure to distinguish clearly between policies.
Forming procedures and executive action etc .Now you can add our own pitfalls.
What are the pitfalls of a leader?
Nigeria as a case study.
• Inexperience • Mismanagement • Low level of education • Misuse of authority • Self-Centered N O UN 33 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 4.0 Conclusion Leadership is any contribution to the establishment and attainment of group purposes.
It may be exercised by the supervisor or by any member of the staff.
It may be official or merged from the group.
Official leadership is appointed by some authority outside the group or elected from within the group by the group.
Supervisors are official leaders who are almost always appointed by an authority outside the group in which the supervisor works.
A group and leadership are mutually dependent.
Neither exists without the other.
A person cannot be a leader apart from a group.
Neither can a group develop without leadership.
4.0 Summary People have different perceptions to the concept leaders and leadership , a leader is a person of superior intellect and there is no strong positive correlations exist between intelligence and leadership unless the trait gives the individual is leadership behaviour that is characterized as high initiation of structure and high consideration .
The “power with” supervisor does not allow his position to interfere with the opportunity for others to assume responsibility for others to assume responsibility while a power over supervisor controls through fear or through respect.
People must either be afraid that they will be punished for not carrying out the wishes of the leader or they must respect the leader so mush that they will not think of disobeying his wishes.
5.0 Reference Happin , A W (1966) Theory and research in administration.
New York, Macmillan Marks, A,J.P Gulford and P.R Merrified (1959) A study of militancy leadership in relation to selected intellectual factors’ Los Angeles: Psychological laboratory of the university of souther.
Bass, B .M (1960) Leadership, Psychology and organizational behaviour.
New York: Harper and Row.
Hackma, R.C and R.G Moon (1950) “Are leaders and followers identified by similar criteria ?
American psychology 5 (312) Tutor - Marked Assignment Question Explain the supervisory responsibilities.
N O UN 34 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 6 SUPERVISON IS COMMUNICATION Table of Content i.
The Nature of Communication ii.
The Role of Emotions in Communication iii.
Extra Communication Tasks of the Supervisor 1.0 Introduction: Communication has deep significance for human organizations since individuals make specialized contributions to the achievement of the overall goals of the organization.
The degree of coordination ability to use specialized expertise of members, and degree of group unity are at least partly a function of the quality of communication.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should able to: i.
Discuss the nature of communication.
ii.
Explain the role of emotions in communication iii.
State the barriers to communication iv.
Explain extra communication of the supervisor.
2.0 The Content The nature of communication: Communication is the means of transmitting information, emotions, values and insights.
As far as group development is concerned, communication is necessary if a group is to be formed.
Group cohesiveness depends upon common goals, so it is common and to identity the areas of difference that should be studied further.
Communication is more than talk.
It is an attempt by the individuals involved to share their own feelings, purposes, and knowledge, and to understand others feelings.
N OUN 35 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Gestures, facial expression, posture, space arrangements and time enter into the interaction between two people two people, communication is a two way process.
As more individuals are involved, the processes multiply.
Communication is the process by which one human being can to a degree know what another thinks, feels or believes.
It is the means by which an individual’s need for others can be satisfied.
It is the source of all growth except body building, and the key to human relatedness .
Most concepts of communication include a sender, receiver, message, channels, medium and effort.
3.1 The Role of Emotions In Communication The emotional element of a situation affects the quality of the communication.
Emotional disturbance of individuals and lack of trust among members of the group restrict the communication.
Emotional disturbance decrease the range of facts that a person considers significant if a person is deeply disturbed, only the facts that seem to him to bear upon his problem are important.
He is unwilling to take the time to consider other ideas until his disturbance is decreased.
People hear what they want to hear.
The human organism block out comments and actions that are destructive and seek to preserve its own feeling of adequate and competency wait a minute; ruminate on what aspects of emotion that disturbs you greatly is there any effective communication at this period?
/ Do you realize that you may be carried away if you emotionally imbalance?
Have you ever witness this?
Well let me add this before you conclude with the answers to the question.
Nothing that a supervisor does will increase the communication if there is no trust between the people involved.
The degree of trust determines the types of problems individuals are willing to examine; people do not reveal themselves to people they fear or people they do not trust.
With people who are not trusted, a person will only share the thinking he wants to other person to hear pause, and flash back do you have someone you fear to communicate with ?
Now listen, emotions are either an asset to successful communication or they represent the primary with which a supervisor must be concerned.
3.2 Barriers To Communication Having known what communication is what do you think are the hindrance for its effectiveness?
Perhaps you may like to add your own to the following barriers to communication and use of its to evaluate effective communication.
- People use symbols on words that have different meanings - Members of the group have different value - Emphasis on status NOUN 36 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION - Conflict in interest - Making decisions by the majority vote rather than seeking consensus.
- Attempt to keep feeling out of the discussion - Use of words to prevent thinking - Vested interest - Feelings of superiority List the barriers to communication you are expected to memories while listing any of the above barriers to communication.
3.3 Extra Communication Tasks Of the Supervisor As an individual with a special responsibility for increasing communication, the supervisor adds another dimension to the model.
He is a sender and a receiver, but he is also a facilitator.
As a supervisor, he should: Encourage people to know and value each other.
He provides opportunities for social interaction.
He helps people to become informed about the backgrounds and achievements of others.
Provide the physical arrangements that contribute to better communication;- When conference and meetings are planned, he makes sure that the location is the best available and that the furniture is arranged in a manner that encourages maximum interaction.
Seek to identify areas of agreement and areas of disagreement: - Areas of disagreement are just important to a group as the areas of agreement good communication does not result in consensus on all phases of a problem cannot usually be reached.
Seek to develop a permissive atmosphere :- permissiveness , as used by psychologist, means person freedom to express a point of view or an idea without fear of recrimination because it is in opposition to one held by someone with power or authority.
Reflect to the group what we think the group has said;- He may say , This is what I have heard you say’ or Is this what you said?
This action helps the group summarizes and move to the next point.
Possibly you may have another ways of asking the question let me give you an example.
The supervisor can make an application of an ideas and say.
“Is this what you meant” what is your own opinion to this?
A supervisor has a better chance of being effective if he remembers that NOUN 37 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION communication is a process in which people attempt to share personal feelings and ideas and to understand the other person’s feeling and ideas.
Explain the extra communication tasks of the supervisory you may like to revisit the above-explained points or add your own view to it and re-learn them to answer the question.
3.0 Conclusion The work of the supervisor is to influence teaching behaviour in such a way as to improve the quality of learning for students.
This can be achieved by working directly with teachers in the planning for teaching, the description, analysis and evaluation of teaching, and in the development and implementation of new approaches to teaching based on the evaluation.
4.0 Summary With out dept communication, the people remain am organization without loyalty to each or to a set purposes.
Each person is really alone.
Each is controlled by the organizational structure that gives power to the person sitting at the crossing of the channels used for transmitting information.
The emotional element can be positive, if the people attending a meeting have had many experience together, trust and like each other, and enjoy their interaction, communication will be open and honest.
If the participants expect to learn from each other, they share their fears, concerns, hopes and insight.
A person can be more effective in communication if he organizes some of the most common difficulties people encounter on seeking to understand each other.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Question Explain at least five Barriers to communication.
Five out of the listed barriers should be explained.
7.0 Reference/Suggested Readings Elkin, F.G Halpern, and A Cooper (19629 “Leadership in a student mob.
Canadian journal of psychology 16: 199 – 201.
Sergiovannu, T.J (1967) “factors which affect satisfaction and dissatisfaction of teacher” Journal of Educational Adminstration, 5: 66-82 NOUN 38 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Kelly E.C and Rasey, M.I (1952) Education and the nature of man .
New York: Harperand Brothus.
Hall, E.T (1959) .The silent language .Garden city, New York Doubleday.
NOUN 39 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 7 Application of Communication Theory of Supervisory Practices Table of Content;- i. Communication through customary channels ii.
Organization and Operation of A meeting and Workshop 1.0 Introduction As a school system groups larger, the problems of communication become more and more acute.
when all staff members know each other and see each other frequently , communication may become distorted, but difficulties can be solved if the individuals involved make the effort.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Discuss communication through customary channels ii.
Explain the responsibilities of supervisor in organizing meetings and workshops 17.0 The Content As typical communication method through customary channels include curriculum bulletins, policy bulletins, bulletin, administrative and supervisory staff meetings, teachers meeting and reports.
Curriculum bulletins are prepared by the central office staff and distributed to the entire staff.
Few persons read them and those who de-find little meaning in them unless they had a part in producing them.
Curriculum bulletins are used primarily for communication among supervisors in different school system who wish to exchange information and by new teachers in a system who feel the need to become informed about the organization to which they belong.
NOUN 40 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Policy bulletins are no more effective as communication channels.
Decisions are made somewhere concerning the distribution of policy bulletins.
Some are restricted to administrators and supervisory group informed, the information may or may not be spread throughout the teaching force and the peripheral membership of teachers in the group is emphasized.
Other policy bulletins are made available to the entire staff.
Supervisory staff meeting is not always pretty when viewed in terms of communication and group development theories.
Sometimes they are occasions when the highest official talks.
The meeting leader suffers a case of communication isolation.
People don’t tell him what they think or show him how they react to his statements or proposals.
Teachers’ meetings in large school systems are typically poor attempts at communication.
Teachers are informed that they must assemble to hear someone they do not know talk about a topic they have not selected.
They go with resentments.
They listen with resistance pause what other things have you experienced that will happen to the teachers?
Let me give you two or more.
They forget without remorse, they have no opportunity to evaluate likewise no opportunity to talk back or ask for further clarification.
Can you now see the needs for the teachers to have a part in planning?
Probably the worst form of communication in any system is a report.
No matter how beautiful prepared and expensively printed, it is like a burial: everyone receives a copy and lays it away.
Seldom it is read unless the recipient want to see if he has been given credit for a contribution he made.
3.1 Oranisation And Operation Of A Meeting Since many meetings are planned and conducted by supervisors it is important that they know how a meeting can be conducted to facilitate communication.
The most skilled leader obtains agreement on the desired solution; his contributions consist of summarizing, encouraging analysis, supplying information, sharing ideas, and preventing hurt feelings.
Hence the following are the leader’s responsibilities in any meeting.
- Creation of atmosphere that is easy, yet businesslike.
He must be friendly, exhibit a sincere welcome to all group members, and accept their comments and participation listen are these always occur in any of the meeting you have attended?
Now listen to more.
- Guiding the flow of discussion that is to make sure that all who have comments or questions are recognized and refer questions to the proper source in the group for an answer what of this.
NOUN 41 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION - Classification of questions, many times, a question will be in such abstract from or will be so long or unwisely that the discussion will be hampered by it.
In such case the leader must step in.
, he may ask the questioner to define certain words used or to state the question another way.
Perhaps the chairman of any the meeting you have attended perform different roles which roles ?
Does he or she summaries the discussions?
Does he or she keep the group on the topic or keeping order in the discussions?
Well reflect on these.
3.1.1 Organization And Operation Of A Workshop The purpose of a workshop is to give the participant a chance to work on their problem with the assistance of a staff of resource people.
Participants and staff members work on a peer relationship pause and think can you really differentiate between workshop and meeting?
What type of workshop have you attended?
Listen to this: The form of the workshop that evolved in a system depends on the schedule of the staff and on the availability of time.
Some school systems have established a two to five-week workshop in the summer; others have attempted to approximate a workshop programme by weekly meetings held throughout the school year.
There are many ways of getting a workshop started in a local school system.
One is to have staff members attend out-of-town workshops held under the sponsorship of a university or a national organization, or to attend workshops in other school systems.
Another method is to get a small group of the staff together, not all status leaders and discuss the workshop idea.
When it has been decided that a workshop will be held, it is desirable to choose part of the staff from the leaders on the local system, such a choice will guarantee to the teachers that the approach will be a practical one and that it will have the support of these leaders.
However, no staff member should be chosen who is not enthusiastic both about working in the workshop and about the workshop technique.
The ideal situation is, of course ,to have total school staff in a workshop, with all the official leaders filling their customary roles.
In addition to the local staff members, outside consultants should be provided.
They will increase the variety of ideas and will give teachers in the system a feeling that the workshop is a different experience from the ordinary teacher’s meeting.
i.
Distinguish Between Workshop and Teachers’ meeting.
ii.
Enumerate the responsibilities of any chairman of the meeting.
*A workshop is to give the participant a chance to work on their problem with the assistance of staff or resource persons while Teachers’ meeting is organized to deliberate on important issues in order to arrive at NOUN 42 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION a decision.
The chairman of the meeting should coordinate the meeting , listen to others’ opinion etc.
4.0 Conclusion In the organization of the workshop, most staffs have found it desirable to plan a time for the total workshop group to meet together.
This phase of the program, including presentations by special authorities and sharing of the products of the work group, gives the group of feel of unity.
5.0 Summary Meeting should have a central purpose that all participants recognize.
Although a portion of the meeting may be used for announcements and the exploration of new ideas, most of the time should be devoted to seeking consensus on the central question.
Meeting should not close without reaching conclusion.
These conclusions may be decisions to accept proposals or to refer them back to a committee for further study of a specific nature.
The workshop has certain definite characteristics.
It is a place where teachers go to work on their own problems or the problem of their school.
The work is based on the problems of the individuals enrolled.
All participants in the workshop follow individual programmes.
6.0 References/Suggested Reading Mecearly , L.E (1908) “communications in a large secondary school” NASSP BULLETIN, 52 – 48 - 61 Hare , A.P (1952) “ A study of interaction and consensus in different sized group” American sociological Review 17: 261 - 267 NOUN 43 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION UNIT 8 Supervision and Curriculum Development Table of Content; i.
Definition of Curriculum ii.
The Organization for curriculum Development Ii The community power structure and curriculum development.
1.0 Introduction: The assumption that supervision is curriculum demands not only a definition of curriculum, but a consideration of its as an important function of instructional supervisory behaviour.
A brief conceptualization of curriculum organization for curriculum development and community power structure are very essential.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: I Define Curriculum ii.
Discuss the organization for curriculum development ii.
Explain curriculum power structure and curriculum development 3.0 The Content The school curriculum is composed of all experiences that the individual receives under the school’s guidance.
Our dynamic society requires that these experiences be organized and presented efficiently.
If teachers are to keep peace with these changes and perform to the best of their abilities, the supervision of instruction must be democratic in nature.
Curriculum can be defined as engagement opportunities provided by the school that is why curriculum is seen as learner’s engagement with various aspects of the NOUN 44 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION environment, which have been planned under the direction of school.
The assumption here is that engagements can be observed and to some extent controlled.
The curriculum is taken to be a set of intentions about opportunities for engagement of persons- to – be-educated with other persons and with things (all barriers of information, processes,, techniques and values) in certain arrangement of time and space.
You may pause, and think about another appropriate definition of curriculum since there are many definitions of curriculum wait a minute read this.
Curriculum can be the instructional materials that are approved and supplied by the school system, the beliefs about the educational process that represent the consensus for the teaching staff, the engagement opportunities that the teacher organizes for pupils and many others.
Do you have any other definition?
Summaries in three sentences the definition of curriculum.
• Curriculum is defined as all the activities that take place in the school under the coordination of the teachers.
• Curriculum is an engagement opportunity • Curriculum is an engagement opportunities provided by the school Curriculum is composed of all experiences that the individual receives under the school’s guidance 3.1 The Organization For Curriculum Development The curriculum council should establish the framework within which local schools operate.
It should recommend to the board of education those changes in policy that affect system-wide curriculum and instruction, including the development and evaluation of system-wide goals.
It should have responsibility for recommending innovations that the council believes should be tried out in the schools.
The curriculum council serves as the nucleus for the formation of curriculum policy, but it will be relatively useless without an organization for initiating and implementry Curriculum decisions at the building level.
Each school in the system needs an extension of the curriculum council.
It may be called what the system prefers, but there should be a curriculum committee in each building which is responsible for interpreting the system structure of goals and curriculum policies and developing and evaluating the local school structure of educational goals and curriculum policies for consideration by the school.
NOUN 45 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION The executive officer of the curriculum council should be the assistant superintendent for curriculum and instruction.
All proposals for innovation from outside the system come to him directly, though the board of education of from the superintendent.
The supervisory staff works with him and keeps him informed of new curriculum developments within and without the system.
The supervisory staff carries the primary responsibility for the development and implementation of curriculum policy.
Its members are a source of information and initiation.
As individual supervisor become aware of demonstrations that are available in other school systems, they should visit them and bring back to the local system descriptions of practices that should be considered there.
Executive action by a staff member may consist of locating teachers or schools that wish to experiment with a hypothesis, serving as consultant to the teachers and administrators who are experimenting, assisting in evaluating an innovation, conducting in-service education related to a project, and preparing a report of recommendations growing out of a specific demonstration.
What are the roles of the following in the organization for curriculum development?
- Curriculum council (formation of curriculum policy) - Executive officer (He/She deputize the superintendent by coordinating all the proposals for innovation - Superintendent (He gives directions to executive officer on the proposals - For innovation on curriculum and instruction.)
- Supervisory staff (Carries the primary responsibility for the development and implementation of curriculum policy) 3.2 The Community Power Structure And Curriculum Development The school system has been described as a sub-system of a larger community system.
As a sub-system the school receives financial support, goal, specification and some control over activities.
Therefore , the changes that may be made in a school programme are limited by the beliefs and decisions of the community power structure.
All communities have a power structure which can be classified into monopolistic, competitive or fragmented pluralistic.
A monopolistic power structure is characterized by a unitary system of dominance over community decision-making.
A competitive power structure exists within a community power structure, and lack of knowledge about its existence or shape may lead to unexpected and unnecessary difficulties for educational leaders attempting curriculum improvement.
N O U N  46 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION The knowledge that a community power structure exists and operates does not decrease the need for informing and involving the rest of the community.
The power structure will be affected and influenced by the way the community sees and supports the school.
A school cannot move too far ahead of the community.
If it does, its programme will be criticized, and as soon as the community gathers it forces, action will be taken to eliminate the phases of the school programme the community does not accept or understand.
It is essential that a school programme include a public relations activity that keeps all community members informed of what is going on the school.
Keeping the community informed includes such customary activities as columns in the local newspapers, radio program annual reports to parents open meetings of the board of education, open-house days to classes.
Fathers’ clubs and P.T.A meetings.
4.0 Conclusions.
Planning with the community does not in any way relived the school staff of the responsibility of formulating policy for the school.
In the final analysis, the school administration and staff must take responsibility for major curriculum changes.
And the challenges again becomes one of working with the power structure.
It should not be assumed that the power structure does not want curriculum change.
The members may want and support it.
They may be pushing the educational leadership to get moving.
N O U N  47 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 9 Supervision and Staff Development Table of Content i.
Staff Development Training.
ii.
The place of Evaluation is staff Iii Selection of new personnel iii.
Principles of the programme for in-service education V Beneficial Techniques for Supervision 1.0 Introduction Staff development is a continuous and comprehensive process, which utilizes human learning in services selecting additional staff members with appropriate competence, reassignment of staff members and replacement of staff members.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the lesson you should be able to: i.
Define staff development of evaluation training ii Explain the position of evaluation in staff development ii.
List the selection process of appointing new personnel iii.
Enumerate the principles of in-service educational programme.
iv.
State the techniques for supervision.
2.0 The Content Professional growth is promoted through the kind of organization that encourages members to exert leadership by stating their problems, by devising N O UN 48 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION ways of seeking solutions, by participating in decision-making and by accepting responsibility for the outcome.
Teacher growth is promoted when teachers exchange ideas and when they are encouraged to test the hypotheses they establish.
All activities that led to the growth of a teacher’s potentials are encompassing in staff-development training which is not something that is provided by the official leader for other members of the staff, He must participate too .
many principals have made the mistake of assuming that it is their job to provide staff development training for others.
Such an assumption makes clear to the staff that the principal considers himself better than they .
If the principal see himself as a teacher he will also grow with them.
Staff-development training must not be carelessly handled as the teachers get clues from evaluation which exposes their weakness and hence gain more experience in-fact community dynamism are clues to the human development.
The changes that occur in the school demand for technically skilled people and provide opportunities to cultivate new skills.
The staff-development training will be more profitable if it is centred on improving the school programme.
Staff development should not be confined to experiences that provoked only academic growth.
There is need for further advancement in academic learning than in other abilities that make the success of the school programme possible.
Growth is ability to work with others, improved skill in democratic processes, the development of social skill, and the rounding out of the individual as a social being may all be areas in which teachers need more help.
As an instructor , have you participated in and development programme ?
If yes, what forms does it take ?
Perhaps the following ndevelopment programme forms might interest you or remind you of yours.
Reading , attending conferences, presenting papers in seminars/ workshop and visiting tourist attracted places.
Well, yours has not been mentioned now listen, is yours in form of study committees, clinics, participation in the evaluation of the school programme, forums in which teachers parents and pupils exchange ideas etc.
think on your own experience.
Summarise the purpose of staff development training and how it can be nahced.
• To enhance productivity • To create job interest • To promote the skills in them • To develop the teachers academically • It can be enhanced if it is not carelessly handled and confirm to experiences that provoke only academic growth.
NOUN 49 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 3.1 The Place of Evaluation Is Staff Development Evaluation of teaching must be a part of an entire school programme it must not be applied to teaching alone.
Teachers cannot be expected to participate wholeheartedly in the evaluation of teaching unless if follows or goes concurrently with the school’s goals, administrative procedures, and supervisory techniques.
Everyone’s participation in the evaluation process insures validity as far as purposes are concerned.
Unless group activities and procedures are subjected to constant evaluation, the chances of individual improvement are greatly decreased.
The principal must devote a large portion of his effort to helping the group improves its processes.
Evaluation includes the work of the individual as well as the group.
Each person should explicate his professional goals and ways of achieving them and discuss them with his coordinator.
Then, as work proceeds towards the goals, evidence should be gathered and used as a basis for self-evaluation, peer evaluation and coordinator evaluation.
This makes it possible for each person to maintain professional and personal integrity because he is using a process to improve his ability in doing the things he values.
What are the effects of evaluation on staff development?
• It leads to an improvement • It is used to measure the achievement of goals or objectives • It serves as medium of correction or right positioning of things • It is used to determined the potentials of the teacher etc.
Do you realize that evaluation is a parameter for controlling that bridges the gap between goal setting and goal achievement?
How do you justify this statement in relation to staff development?
Perhaps it might help you to get answer to the above question.
3.2 Selection of New Personnel The appointment of additional staff is an opportunity to strengthen the group.
It is a means of surveying the skills and abilities of the group and to secure types of leadership that are lacking and needed.
Selection of new personnel is a concern of the school district and of the staff of a school.
Candidates who have successfully passed the screening tests will be selected.
Pause and think about the processes NOUN 50 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION involved before you are appointed at your present work place.
Is the processes you undertook similar to the one I’m going to summarise below: i You apply for the post ii You are short listed iii.
You did oral and paper and panel test.
Perhaps due to your personality you are called for interview or due to a merit.
V Letter of appointment were given in batches.
The first category of people given appointment letter to before you did not possess the competencies and right qualifications.
How do you fell?
Who are the people involved in the selection of new personnel during the time you are seeking for appointment ?
Ideally the selection and employment of a new staff member should not be the job of the personnel office and the principal alone.
Because teaching is an occupation in which staff members must work in close cooperation with other teachers, it is important that t the members of a school staff have a part in determining what additions should be made to the group.
One criterion that most facilities or schools will establish is that the new teacher must believe in a cooperative approach to problems and must have a willingness to consider all viewpoints in arriving at final solutions.
If a new staff member does not have this point of view, he will be unhappy, unsatisfactory member of a staff that works cooperatively.
Enumerate the selection process involved in the appointment of new staff.
• Writing application • Short listing • Written or oral interview Appointment letter 3.3 Principles of the Programme for In-Service Education In-service education includes all activities of school personnel that contribute to their continued professional growth and competence.
The following are the basic principles: - The in-service education programme emerges from recognized needs of the school and community - All school personnel need in-service education - Proper supervision is an effective means of accelerating the in-service professional growth of personnel - Improving the quality of instruction is the immediate and long-range objective of in-service education.
NOUN 5 1 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION - In-service education leads to a continuous process of re-examination and revision of the educational program.
Additionally, it encourages participants to attain self-realization through competence, accomplishment and security.
- In-service education has become an increasing concern of state agencies - colleges and universities, school boards, school administrators and teachers.
Supervisors should create an atmosphere that will stimulate a desire on the part of teachers for in-service growth.
The in-service programme is one is which both supervisors and teachers growth grows in improving the learning situation of education, wait a minute have you ever observed these principles?
Let me give you more principles of - in-service programme, which have become apparent.
Professional development cannot be adequately served by teaching - experience alone.
Although it is reasonable to expect a teacher to guide his own future development, it is the obligation of the school system to stimulate advancement by providing opportunities for in-service growth.
Now , relate these to your idea about the principles of in-service educational programme.
State at least FIVE principles by in-service education programme.
* You are expected to re-read and highlight five out of the above listed principles.
3.4 Beneficial Techniques For Supervision Supervision is planning for all-around improvement of school factors that seem to affect seriously the teacher-learning process, especially the school building and its equipment, the materials of instruction, the organization and management of the school, the curriculum, the methods of teaching and the personality of the teacher.
The most beneficial techniques for supervision include : - NOUN - -  because usually it is the Faculty meeting – m ajor means of communication within a school.
these faculty Supervisory visits: Visits generally should be followed by conferences.
The meetings include supervisor should study the total learning situation, giving attention to curriculum meetings all institutes, factors that affect student growth.
workshops, study groups etc.
A Professional bulletin: Unfortunately, most professional bulletins are prepared faculty meeting by people engaged in supervision.
If they were teacher-prepared, they might offers many opportunities in a programme of in- service education 52 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION have more meaning.
These bulletins constitute effective communication media and may include announcements, summaries of research, and analyses of presentations at professional association meetings, acknowledgements, and developments in various subject matter fields.
- Professional libraries: A convenient source of information is the school professional library.
Teacher contributions could become a part of this repository of information.
The professional library provides not only a - source of information but also is an incentive for personal satisfaction.
Materials centre or curriculum laboratories: Curriculum laboratories supply instructional guides, sample materials of instructional technology, and textbooks.
What other methods do you think it can be used for supervision you can pause and think on this but mean while have these.
(i) Teacher assignment.
(ii) Demonstration teaching (iii) Curriculum development (iv) Development of instructional guides (v) Excursions (vi) Workshops and institutes etc, now re-read them and synthesize.
Enumerates at least FIVE different techniques for supervision.
• Supervisory visits • Faculty meeting • Professional bulletins • Professional libraries • Curriculum laboratories • Workshops 4.0 Conclusion Staff Development Programmes may take many forms; it is not always getting together for common experiences.
Reading, attending conferences, or other types of individual experiences can be growth experiences.
Some principals find that t the best contribution they can make to teacher growth is to take the place of a teacher who is attending conferences or visiting some other school.
Others have found that their most helpful contribution consists of making readily accessible to teachers professional material that contains suggestions and ideas.
5.0 Summary Staff development programme must provide as its first step experiences that will enable people to relieve themselves of the emotional tensions that hinder NOUN 53 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION constructive work, for this purpose, the programme may include recreation, dramatics, and arts and crafts as well as more formalized education.
As facilities and organizational structures become more open and as teachers cooperate more and more in planning, actualizing and evaluating teaching, evaluation of team and individual effectiveness will become more implicit in the total process.
Certainly, the process will contribute to the professional and personal development of the staff.
Concerning the selection of new personnel, if the principal anticipates vacancies , it is desirable to the type of staff member needed.
.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Question What are the beneficial techniques for supervision?
7.0 References/Suggested Readings Barr, A.S et al (1978) Supervision New York Appleton – Century-Crafts Chapters 1 and IV Chester, T.M (1971).Educational Supervision New York.
MeGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc pp297.
Goodlad, J (1969).
In an address delivered in comectiant in 1969 – M.Francis Klein and Associates .
Behind the classroom door Worthingon, ohio: Charhes A Jones.
Allen, D.W (1971).
In service teacher training a modest proposal in improving in- service education, ed L.J Rubin Boston NOUN 54 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 10 Unit Title: The Supervisory Team Table of Content: i.
The Work of the Institutional Supervisory Team ii.
The Principal as Instructional Leader iii.
The Curriculum and Instructional Staff iv.
Possible Structures for Instructional Supervision 1.0 Introduction The school is the basis action agency for the development and activation of learning opportunities for student; teachers are the primary agents in the process.
The school instructional supervisory team is an important part of that process.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (i) State the work of the instructional supervisory team (ii) Explain the role of principal as instructional leader (iii) Itemize the roles curriculum and instruction staff (iv) Explain the structures for instructional supervision 3.0 The Content The work of the instructional supervisory team – The tasks of the school instructional supervisory team are quite similar to those of the central office team.
For example, (i) participation in and coordination of the continuous development and evaluation of educational goals at the local level.
(ii) Provision for the psychological and technical support system for teachers ;(iii) experimentation , development and supervision of new programmes (iv) intersharing of educational ideas with other schools in the district (v) continuing education for the professional staff (vi)curriculum design and coordination of various specialized sub-system in the school so as to maintain balance and common directions in the programme.
(vii) N O UN 55 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION selection, procurement allocation, and deployment of materials and equipment of instruction.
(viii) education planning (ix) manpower planning (x) selection, induction, and utilization are all proposed as tasks of the local school instructional supervisory team.
Enumerate the works of the instructional supervisory team.
• Manpower planning • Education planning • Continuing education for the professional staff.
3.1 Principals As Instructional Leader The principal is primarily concerned with the overall goals of the school.
The school organization is a dynamic web of interdependent parts that are assumed to contribute to the realization of the overall goals.
In order to realize these goals the principal has to take into consideration factors that can enhance the achievement of goals for example if the school always win quiz and debate competition, the principal can recruit new personnel specializing on this to train the students at the detriment of other school premiers that may be left undone, students who are participating in this may be pulled out of classes and be trained in a special place outside or within the school environment all theses involves sacrifices on the parts of the school, principal and the students, wait a minute, have you ever witnessed this type of situation before ?
Perhaps yours may not be on school quiz and debates it may be on sport concentrations that were given to it are detrimental to other extra-curricular activities.
At this stage what do you thin is the role of the principal ?
Now listen to this.
The principal is a central factor in the communication network.
He must communicate school needs to the central office and promote good inter-personal communication between the teacher-teacher, teacher-administrator, teacher- curriculum specialists these are expedient to the actualization of learning activities for students.
Another major task of the principal is to provide leadership in identifying and utilization of appropriate personnel to provide adequate system of psychological and technological support for teachers and to participate in the process.
Since the goals and means of achieving there are always changing the principals have to make available facilities, open curriculum new programme etc, to facilitate new understanding and skills of the teacher.
Explain the roles of principals as an instructional leader.
• He must communicate school needs to the central office • He must recruit new personnel specializing on this to train the students • He should make available facilities.
NOUN 56 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 3.2 The Curriculum and Instruction Staff The curriculum and instruction staff are to pull together definable interdependent parts of programme toward the achievement of certain goals the following are the possible defined role of the curriculum and instruction staff.
- To involve the team in the development of goals and behavioral objectives for students that is consistent with the expectations of the school.
- To involve the deem in developing a plan for the evaluation of the achievement of student goals together with the actualization of the plan.
- To facilitate the provision of the psychological and technological support systems for the team - To facilitate the communication and actualization of team expectations of the system and system expectations of the team .
- To participate in the process of helping and being helped by team members and to facilitate the process of team members helping each other.
- To involve the team in designing and developing plans for the actualization of engagement opportunities for students in order to achieve the goals and operational objectives.
- To participate in the process of helping and being help by team members and to facilitate the process.
Pause, what can you say about these roles ?
Are they not too narrow ?
Listen to this, the curriculum and instruction staff roles should elude coordination of content departments, athletic, guidance services, teaching resource centers, laboratories etc.
Likewise, they are to design, implement, and evaluate progrmmes I cooperation with other specialists.
Now what do you think their roles should be.
Itemise the roles of curriculum and instruction staff * Try to read and recall the above listed roles of curriculum and instruction staff.
N O U N  57 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 3.3 Possible Structures For Instructional Supervision The effectiveness of any system of instructional supervision is at least partly a function of the organization structure.
School has its own identity, needs, priorities and human capabilities.
It is assumed that all the people in the school, including children, teachers, consultants, coordinators, custodians and administrators are important and therefore, their needs are important.
Needs for belonging, affections, stability of structure, change, recognition and achievement are recognized and an effort is made to provide a working environment in which those needs can be satisfied.
Since all the people in school have the potentials for making a contribution to the improvement of schools, therefore they are important human resources, Every effort is made to provide a broad base of human involvement in problem solving and decision – making activities.
There is also a broad base of human competence with focus on utilization of the competence in school improvement.
The need for coordination and control is recognized and utilized, but organizational members have a say in the development and continuous evaluation of that t control system.
The system of instructional supervision is built on the notion that it is an organizationally sponsored behaviour system that interacts with teaching behaviour for the purpose of improving the quality of learning for students.
Instructional Leadership team Teacher Planning Team Student Learning Centers Instructional Resources Centre Curriculum Development Design 58 NOUN EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION The above figure is a conceptual scheme for visualizing instructional supervision in this school.
It shows clearly the “student learning centre” as the focus of the Instructional supervisory behaviour system.
The four support systems are identified as the “teacher planning team” “instructional leadership development and design centre” each of the sub-systems is shown to have its own identity and interdependent with the student centre.
The student learning centers are where the action is; that is , engagement opportunities for students are utilized .
The “teacher planning team” for each learning center is composed of a teacher-team leader, and some other teachers.
The team leader has the responsibility to involve the team in cooperative planning, teaching and evaluation.
Objectives of learning are defined, programme are designed, implemented and evaluated on a cooperative basis.
The “instructional leadership team” is made of the principal , student learning center team leaders, coordinators, and special consultants.
The instructional leadership responsibilities of the principal have already been defined.
It is through the instructional leadership team that the principal can implement his role.
Objectives for school can be hammered out.
The “curriculum development and design center is where the progrmme of engagement opportunities for students is along and tested.
Each learning center is represented along with the various other sub-systems in the school.
The instructional resources center is primary a service center to the student learning centers.
Materials and equipments are developed, collected and made available according to the needs of the learning centers.
The function of the center is not just to make materials and equipment available, but rather to involve students and teachers in the process of development.
With the aid of diagram, discuss the possible structures for instructional supervision.
4.0 Conclusion The content, methodology and materials and resources of teaching must constantly change along with the changing needs of students and new developments in knowledge and technology.
A broad technological and spsychologial support system is provided for the teaching behaviour system.
Coordinators and consultants with special skills and knowledge are available to teachers at the local school level.
Other specialists are utilized from the school district instructional team, institutions of higher education, local community, and other local schools.
NOUN 59 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 5.0 Summary The supervisory team has the advantage in the provision of services and consultations and in developing sentitivity to the needs of teachers.
Since these local instructional leaders are in close contact with members of the local school faculty and instructional personnel at the bringing together personnel with needs and special competence to provide service.
The school is a dynamic system of interacting parts that fit together to achieve certain common goals.
The instructional supervisory behaviour system ineracts with the teaching behaviour system to improve the probability for goals realization.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Question Explain vividly at least FIVE works if instructional supervisory team.
7.0 Reference/Suggested Readings Mill, V (1965).
The public admistration of American School systems.
Ne York : Macmillan.
Kimball, W.and John T.L (1975) Supervision for Better Schools .
Prentice – hall; Inc. Englewood Cliffs, New Jessey.
NOUN 60 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 11 Organizing The Supervisory Programme Table of Content: I Basic Principles of Organization Ii Implementation of Supervisory Programme Iii Basic aspects of supervisory planning 1.0 Introduction The organizational plan for supervision must clearly define the responsibilities functions and relationship of the professional staff.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i.
Discuss the basic principles of organization ii.
Explain the organization and implementation of supervisory programme Iii Enumerate the basic aspects of supervisory planning.
3.0 The Content Basic principles of organization for supervisory school supervision in modern organization is directed towards the improvement of the total teaching-learning process which subsumes the total setting rather than toward the more limited aim of improving teachers in service.
Modern supervision directs attention toward the fundamentals of education and the improvement of learning.
N O U N 61 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Teaching – learning situation is the focus of supervision with the groups and individuals working to improve the total complex.
The teacher in this type of supervision becomes a cooperating member of a group dedicated to the improvement of instruction.
Before this dedication can be translated into action leading to positive results, the prime requisite of planning must receive consideration.
3.0 Planning, Coordination, Stimulation and Growth In supervision, there should be planning, coordination, stimulation and growth of teachers.
The student should be encouraged to excise his talents towards a richer and more intelligent participation in the society and the world in which he lives.
Instruction and instructional procedures can be improved.
If supervision is organized, both as a creative art and as a science it must be organized to : - Help the professional staff see more clearly the goals of education - Help teachers see the problems and needs of children and youth.
- Provide effective democratic leadership in promoting the professional improvement of the school and its activities in fostering harmonious ad - cooperative staff relations.
Build strong group morale and unify teachers into an effective team working - to achieve the same general goals.
Assist new teachers in the diagnosis and remediation of learning difficulties.
Wait a minute; do you realize that a programme of supervision must be a programme of educational improvement?
Think on what should be the classifications of such kind f supervision perhaps I have an idea.
Now read this: - it should be creative - it should be constructive - its should be preventive - it should be corrective etc You can bow think and add your own characteristics of a good supervision .
Explain the basic principles of organization for supervisor.
What is the importance of planning to a supervisor?
• Assist the staff to see more clearly the goals of education.
• Help the staff or teachers to the problems and needs of the student • Build a strong morale and unify the staff • Assist the staff especially new teachers in diagnosis learning difficulties 3.1 Organization and Implementation of a Supervisory Programme  NOUN 62 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION The supervisory principal should be familiar with four basic general principles of organization, which are : - The learning situation for students can be improved by the proper administrative organization of personnel engaged in supervisory services.
- Organization for supervision should be based on a generally accepted philosophy of education for the school system - The governing board, as a policy–making body, has full authority over the supervisory programme and should delegate responsibility and authority for administration of the programme to the superintendent.
- The school’s organization for supervision should be appraised continuously and revised in the light of the appraisal.
3.1.1 Principles of External Organization The generally accepted principles of external organization are essentially as follows: - Authority is centralized in the legally appointed person at the head - The teacher should be responsible directly to the principal for the instructional programme within the classroom.
- The lines and channels through which delegated authority and responsibility flow should be defined sharply and unambiguously.
- Staff officers are instructional experts and consultants.
They are thus - differentiated from the line officer, but they have no executive power.
Enumerate the principles of organization.
- Read and recall the principles enumerated above.
3.2 Basic Aspects of Supervisory Planning - Foresight and planning are essential part of management if not the whole of management.
Foresight here means to assess the future and make provision for it and forecasting itself in action already.
Hence, the basic aspect of planning is as follows : - The process of fact interpretation - Determining a line of action to be taken in light of all date available and of objectives sought.
- Detailing the steps to be taken in keeping with the action determined.
NOUN 6 3 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION - Making provisions to carry through the plan to a successful conclusion - Establishing and maintaining a system of evaluation to see how close performance comes to plans.
Pause and think, what do you think planning requires having known its importance from the previous title and now its principles?
I have an idea, read this: planning requires a lot of supervisory foresight and high degrees of constructive analysis.
Wait a minute and meditate is it true?
But certainly, ability and willingness to plan are an essential of supervisory leadership, if a supervisor is not willing to plan ahead to facilitate and improve instruction he/she does not deserve the confidence of the educators with whom he/she works.
Briefly explain what planning entails.
* Planning entails setting up of goals and objectives and looking for ways of achieving them.
It can be realized through forecasting 4.0 Conclusion A school is organized that it may be administered, it is administered that instruction may take place.
The supervisor’s major responsibility is to lead teachers to the steady, continuous and progressive improvement of the curriculum.
5.0 Summary The basic principles of organization for the supervisor is to enhance teaching learning process, to promote the ability of accepting responsibilities, to improve learning and the total complex and to enhance more instructions.
The general principles of organization are in two phases.
(i) principles of external organization and (ii) principles of internal organization all are to promote supervisory efficiency.
6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment Question What are the basic aspect of planning?
7.0 References/Suggested Readings William, H.B el al (1955) .
Supervision 3rd ed New York Appleton-Century – Crofts.
Ordeway, T (1951).
The Art of administration New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company N O UN 64 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Hubert Wilbur (1958).
Current Problems in the supervision of instruction.
New York Johnson Publishing company PP 172-173.
Unit 12 HOW TO IMPROVE SUPERVISION VISITS i.
Principle and purpose of supervision visit ii.
Planning for classroom visitation iii.
Techniques in visitation iv.
Observable things during visitation v. Observation mechanism 1.0 Introduction The supervising principles must give considerable thought to classroom visitation for supervisory purposes.
It is expedient to analyze this important function of the supervisor and purpose a model for the supervisory visit that will help the supervisory with the encompassing goal of any modern supervisory programme.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 5 State the basis criteria and purposes of supervisory visit.
6 List the activities that are applicable to a specific visit 3.
Enumerate the techniques in visitation 4.
Sate the observable things during the visit of a supervisor 5.
Explain with the aid of a format the duration and frequency of supervisory visits.
3.0 The Content Principles and purposes of supervisory visits.
- supervisory visit is still considered as a part of the programme of supervision .
Classroom visitation successfully fulfills many needs when performed by someone who is aware of the responsibilities.
In terms of general values, consider first the theory that teaching is not a staymated routine function, but rather it is ever capable of improvement.
As the creative teacher seeks to improve skills, it becomes obvious that tone cannot examine it in a truly objective fashion.
The need for having a competent instructional leader NOUN 65 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION constructively evaluate but not inspect the performance of the teacher is recognized as essential to the acceptance of the supervisory visit and its corollary.
Teachers want supervision that is well planned, constructive, and democratically applied .
If these expectations are to be realize , the following criteria should be met.
The chief purpose of supervisory visits should be the improvement of learning they should be inspirational and instructive rather than inspectional and repressive.
Supervisory visits should afford each teacher a definite and concrete basis for improvement.
The principal, not the staff specialist-consultant, should be responsible for rating teachers.
The principals is responsible for what transpires in the classroom.
He/She is responsible for the improvement of instruction in all areas at all levels.
The principals first concern should be for the safely, welfare, and development of the staff.
The principal should help the teachers use various measures of self-evaluation.
Teachers should feel free to discuss their problems and to make suggestion.
The principal must respect the opinions and points of view of the professional staff.
List the basic principles of supervisory visits * It should be well planned * It should have a focus * There must be a definite purpose or objective * Objectively in rating the teacher is essential 3.1 Planning For Classroom Visitation The primary duty of a supervisor or supervising principal is the improvement of instruction.
If he/she is going to perform this function effectively he/her must become proficient in the used of modern techniques for supervisory visits and conferences.
Careful planning by the supervisor should precede a classroom visit.
The supervisor might select activities that are applicable to a specific visit from the following lists.
NOUN 66 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 1.
The supervisor will know the purpose of the visit and will insure that the teacher clearly understands the purpose.
2.
The supervisor will know as much as possible about the teaching-learning situation prior to the visit.
3.
The supervisor will discuss with the teacher the area of the instructional program with which the teacher has requested help prior to the visit.
4.
The supervisor will review all available pertinent materials, including records of previous visits and follow-up conference that might pertain to the proposed visit.
5.
The supervisor will refer to any pertinent professional material.
3.1 Techniques In Visitation The supervising principal must conducts him/herself in the classroom visitation in away that the teacher and the class will be affected.
In conducting the visit, the supervising principal; should.
1 Have arranged the time of the visit with the teacher during the pre visit conference 2 Enter the classroom quietly and avoid drawing unnecessary attention to him/herself.
3 Smile, to let the teacher and the class know that he/she is glad to be there.
Pause, flash back is these realistic?
Or you are supervised?
Does your supervisor possess these characteristics?
Perhaps He or She possesses some and not all.
You can add your own to this.
Meanwhile, is your supervisor try to become a temporary part of the class?
You think it is not necessary, how then can he/she supervisor without creating unnecessary attention?
What of his /her dressing should it be too attractive?
Think on all those.
In your best opinion, enumerate the realistic techniques in visitation.
3.3 Observable things during the Visit.
The supervising principal should prepare in advances for the observation by completing a listing of points to be observed.
The following outlines proved helpful.
1.
Do the students participate in the selection and/or formulation of classroom Standards of conduct.
Is self control encouraged?
NOUN 67 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 2.
Do students recognize the reasons for their being corrected?
Is disciplinary action considered a form of constructive criticism?
3.
Is the teacher’s attitude friendly and accepting?
4.
Is the teacher’s voice well modulated and of sufficient volume?
5.
Does the teacher’s have leadership, is he/she confident, positive and consistent?
Wait a minute; think on these, have you observed any, read more.
- What is the teacher trying to accomplish?
- Does the teacher know the subject matter?
Is the teacher well prepared?
Does he/she have adequate lesion plans what of instructional technology aids?
Is the teacher well organized?
Does he/she have a definite place to write assignments?
Are assignment clear, reasonable, pertinent and varied.
VISITATION RECORD Name of Staff Member---------------------------------------------------------------------- Making Visits:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Name of Teacher Visited:------------------------------------------------------------------- School Where Teacher Employed:---------------------------------------------------------- Graduate and /or Subjects being taught:---------------------------------------------------- Pre-visitation interview:------------------------------------------------------------------------ Post-visitation conference:-------------------------------------------------------------------- Observation Criteria Superio Good Average Needs Impr.
r General appearance and poise Room appearance and physical condition Teaching materials and procedures Student-teacher relation Interest and activity of student Attitude toward teaching Classroom management Command of language: effective communication Chalkboard ability Comments and suggestions resulting from visit: NOUN 68 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION OBSERVATION REPORT School -------------------------------------- Teacher----------------------------------------Grade-------------------Date------------------ Subject observed-----------------------------------Time-------------------------------------- 1.
STUDENTS: (a) Attitude-----------------------------(d) Effort------------------------------ (b) Attention----------------------------(e) Seating---------------------------- (c) Discipline----------------------------(f) Number in room---------------- 2.
TEACHER: (a) Preparation------------------------- (e) Speech----------------------------- (b) Fellowship plan---------------------(f) Voice quality--------------------- (c) Response of students---------------(g) Appearance---------------------- 3.
LESSON: (a) Topic----------------------------------(c) Student participation---------- (b) Technique --------------------------- (d) Use of instructional aids------ 4 ROOM (a) Topic------------------------------------(d) Ventilation---------------------- (b) Writing aids posted------------------(e) Lighting------------------------ (c ) Environment--------------------------(f) General appearance-------- 5.
OVERALL EVALUATION (a) Strong points----------------------------(d) Additional suggestions----- (b) Weak points----------------------------- Follow-up conference held: No ------------ Yes ------------ Date ------------------- Observer’s signature---------- NOUN 69 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 3.4 Observation Mechanism 3.4.1 Duration and Frequency The duration of the supervisory visit will be determined both by the type of teaching-learning situation being observed and by the type of visit, whether it is the standard or survey variety and whether it is scheduled.
Establishing the purpose for the visit in advance enables the principal to gauge the length of the visit accordingly.
If the teaching-learning situation happens to be a lesson in a course, the principal may want to be in the classroom for a full hour.
If the teacher took this initiative by inviting the principal to visit, or if the principal had informed the teacher of an intention to visit, the principal will be expected to remain until the lesson is completed.
In the preplanning session with the teacher, the duration of the principal’s visit should be discussed .
Certainly the principal will be in a better position to discuss the lesson the lesson intelligently in the follow-up conference if the total lesson has been observed.
Supervisory visit and Follow-up conference programming form.
6.
Preparation for the visit: (a) Obtain information, check previous notes ------------------------- (b) Conference and results-------------------------------------------------- (c) Contact---------------------------------------------------------------------- 7.
The Classroom visit: (a) Time allotment-------------------------------------------------------------- (Check teacher’s daily programme) (b) Method ----------------------------------------------------------------------- (c) Planned objective----------------------------------------------------------- (d) Other-------------------------------------------------------------------------- 8.
Analysis of the observed performance: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 9.
The follow-up conference (a) Preceding activities -------------------------------------------------------- (b) When ------------------------------------------------------------------------- (c) Where ------------------------------------------------------------------------ NOUN 70 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION (d) What discussed ------------------------------------------------------------- (e) Written report -------------------------------------------------------------- (f) Plans/material to bring --------------------------------------------------- (g) Teacher’s reactions -------------------------------------------------------- (h) Closing ----------------------------------------------------------------------- The frequency of supervisory visits will depend on (i) the purpose of the visit and (ii) who initiates the visit.
If the supervising principal is observing a teacher who has requested help with a specific area of the instructional programme, the principal may want to contemplate on return visit within a short time following the initial observation in order to gather more data or to demonstrate a teaching technique , Enumerate the observable things during visitation and factors influencing durations and frequency of visitation • Students’ participate in the selection and formulation of classroom standards.
• Students’ realizes the reasons for being corrected.
• Whether the teacher’s attitude friendly or accepting ?
etc and duration and frequency of visitation is determined by the type of teaching-learning situation.
4.0 Conclusion The frequency of supervisory visits should be a function of an effective programme.
The need for a regular program of visitation, commenting that perhaps fear of supervision occurs because visits are infrequent and improperly handled.
5.0 Summary When the headmaster contemplated visiting a classroom in colonial days the visit was an inspectional tour, and the conference following the visit was fraught with negative , destructive connotations since that time, there have been numerous modifications with regard to the supervisory visit and follow-up conference.
The acknowledged purpose of these visits and conferences is the improvement of the instructional program.
Despite this shift from focus on the teacher toward an emphasis on the total teaching-learning fear a visit by the principal, often with good reason.
6.0 Tutor _ Marked Assignment Question Enumerate the activities of the supervisor when planning for classroom visitation.
NOUN 71 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 7.0 References/Suggested Reading Monte, S. N (1960) “ Are classroom visits worthwhile” .
The clearing house xxv.
41.
Edwin, H.R (1963).
Supervision in the Elementary School Bostin Hougton Mifflin , L. K. (1961) Supervision in Action Washington , D.C .
Association for supervision and Curriculum Development pp 56.
Harold Spears (1963) .
Improving the supervision of Instruction Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice – hall Inc. pp 62.
NOUN 72 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 13 Unit Title: Supervisory follow-up Conferences i.
Principles and purposes of supervisory conferences.
ii.
How to conduct a successful conference iii.
The supervisor and the orientation interview.
1.0 Introduction.
Most specialists in supervision suggest that the principal have some kind of follow- up conference shortly after classroom visitation here we present specific suggestions on how the supervisory principal can improve the supervisory conference.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
List the criteria to be followed by the conference.
2.
Discuss how a successful conference can be conducted.
3.
Explain with the aid of conference report from the orientation interview.
3.0 The Content Principles and purposes of supervisory conferences.
Five criteria to be followed by the supervisory principles in the formal follow-up conference are as follows : 1. the principal should establish rapport with the teacher at the beginning of the conferences.
2.
The principal should include a general commendation of the lesson as a whole and specific approval of a specific aspect of the lesson.
3.
The principal should commend the teacher on his/her skill.
4 The principal should help further the teachers confidence in him/her work.
5.
The principal should include constructive suggestions where by the teacher’s good work can be further improved.
The goal of a follow-up conference between a supervision and a teacher NOUN 73 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION is cooperative planning not the imposition of a plan on the teacher.
A conference is an attempt to reach a union of minds and purposes.
The individual conference probably is the important supervisory technique for us in the specific improvement of instruction.
If correctly employed, it gives each teacher the specially help needed to become proficient in self-analysis, self- appraisal, and self improvement.
As a form of personal interview, the individual conference provides an excellent opportunity for the two participants to define the subject to be discussed, to agree on the education point of view, to recognize the need for improvement and to solve the problem cooperatively.
What are the purposes of supervisory conferences ?
• To build in teacher confidence • To increase the teachers’ skills • For teachers’ improvement.
3.1 How To Conduct A Successful Conference.
Preparing for the supervisory conference is just as important as preparing for a supervisory visit.
Great knowledge, skill, and understanding are required to carry on a successful conference.
It will be to the advantage of the principal to have every available resource within reach.
Some of the following suggested activities may apply more to one specific type of conferences than to another.
The principal should select those that will help in a particular situation.
1.
Recall the purpose of the conference 2 .
Review all records pertinent to this conference.
3.
Develop tentative hypotheses by anticipating probable conclusions and recommendations.
4.
Note possible courses of action.
5. Review and assemble additional professional materials that will help the teacher.
6.
Assemble instructional materials that the teacher may use and evaluate.
Pause, have your notice any of these ?
Or have you attended conference where the organizer took into considerations these activities ?
Don’t jump into answer yet read this: - The principal will check with the custodian to learn if the room is ready he/she will.
- Remind all participants of the conference time and place plan to provide simple refreshments.
Now what is your answer ?.
NOUN 74 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 3.1.1 The Principal’s Action And Reactions During A Conference The principal is responsible for the success of the conference .
As the instructional leader of the school, the principal should testify certain personal qualities, and professional abilities if he/she is to establish rapport with staff members and if he/she is to maintain a superior instructional prepare within the school.
Hence the principal should : 1.
Be friendly 2.
Listen carefully 3.
Offer suggestions.
4.
Keep adequate records of plans and suggestions.
5.
Make certain that some course of action has been decided on.
Wait a minute, think, what other characteristics or qualities principal should possess ?
Does it have to resemble the general qualities of a good teacher ?
Now let me add more .
- A good principal should invite participation from all present.
- Sumarise findings, conclusion, and decision and - Provide for adequate evaluation.
Enumerates the characteristics of principal’s actions and reactions.
• Friendliness • Good record keeper • Careful listener etc.
3.2 The Supervisor and The Orientation Interview In some large school systems, the employment and assignment, phases of the personnel process may be completed without the participation of the supervisory principal such as an unenlightened personnel practice places the principal in the position of having to discover the new employee’s interest, experiences, educational and other personal data through an exploratory interview.
It is important that the supervising principal remember that this first interview with the beginning teacher establishes a pattern for future relations.
CONFERENCE REPORT FORM Date:_______________________________________________________________ N O UN 75 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Name of Teacher: ____________________________________________________ Grade: _____________________________________________________________ Subject: ____________________________________________________________ Time: from ______________________________________To_________________ Good points of the lesson: ______________________________________________ ___________________________________________________________________ Physical and learning environment : ______________________________________ ___________________________________________________________________ Detailed, specific suggestions for improvement: ____________________________ ___________________________________________________________________ Questions: __________________________________________________________ ___________________________________________________________________ Statement: __________________________________________________________ ___________________________________________________________________ At the time of the initial interview, the new employees should be told about the important of phases of his/her work, specific assignment will be the location of various offices and facilities in the school, and anything else that a new employee should know.
Perhaps the principal may be very busy, he/she has to let the new teacher aware of the need of orientation interview and has such teacher over to his or her assistant or head of department.
In your own opinion what do you think is the important of orientation interview?
• It gives the new staff sense of belonging • It creates job interest • It motivates the new staff • It is used to avoid costly mistakes 4.0 Conclusion It is important that an adequate record of the supervisory conference be maintained for further reference to serve as a vehicle for planning future supervisory visits and follow-up conferences.
Hence to enhance supervisory conferences there is need for adequate follow-up activities.
5.0 Summary The supervisory conference is a difficult activity because of the personal element involved.
Misgivings are faced by both the principal and the teacher, regardless of the amount of experience each has had.
The principal wonders if the teacher will understand the professional purposes and if his/her assistance will be thorough and clear.
New and experienced teachers alike panic at the thought of an individual conference.
They will wonder what is wrong with their work, was the lesson really all right?
If not, will they be given a chance to improve?
NOUN 76 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Question State at least FIVE factors influencing the conduct of it a successfully conference.
7.0 References George, C. K. (1965) .
The principal at work.
Revised edition.
Boston Ginn and Company.
Bingham, W. V (1966).
The Three functions of the interview in Employment .
The management review xv: 36 Spriegel, W. R. et al (1957).
Element of supervision.
New York John Wiley and Sons.
Inc .
PP.
62-63.
Roethlisberger, E. J.
(1939).
Management and the worker.
Cambridge: Havard University Press.
N O U N  77 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION UNIT 14 Organizing a successful workshop Table of content: i.
Organization and Operation of a workshop ii.
How to conduct workshops.
1.0 Introduction Workshops constitute one means of stimulating professional growth.
The purposes of a workshop is to give the participants a chance to work on their problems with the assistance of a staff of resource people.
Participants and staff members work on a peer relationship.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the organization and operation of workshop 2.
Explain how to conduct a successful workshop, characteristics, types and limitations of workshops.
3.0 The content Organisation and operation of a workshop The form of the workshop that evolves in a system depends on the schedule of the staff and on the availability of time.
Some school system has established a two to five week workshop others have attempted to approximate workshop program by weekly meetings held throughout the school year.
There are many ways of getting a workshop stated in a local school system.
One is to have staff members attend out-of-town workshops, held under the sponsorship of the school or a national organization, or to attend workshops in other school systems.
The reports of their outside experience serve to stimulate the interest of other staff members.
Another method is to get a small group of the staff together, not all status NOUN 78 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION leaders, and discuss the workshop idea.
Out of such meetings may grow the nucleus of a workshop.
Any movement into a workshop plan should be made with the understanding that it is done on an experimental basis and that it will be evaluate by the staff, the community, and the board of education.
It has proved wise in some schools to include members of the community and members of the board of education in the workshop as a way of insuring that an accurate evaluation of the workshop reaches these groups.
When such persons attend the workshop, the program often becomes more dynamic, and the results are far-reaching.
When it has been decided that a workshop will be held, it is desirable to choose part of the staff from the leaders in the local system.
Such a choice will guarantee to the teachers that the approach will be a practical one and that it will have the support of these leaders.
A misguided or disgruntled staff member can do much to disrupt the workshop activity.
The ideal situation is, of course, to have the total school staff in a workshop, with all official leaders filling their customary roles.
Wait a minute; think on other factors that can enhance effective organization and operation of a workshop, perhaps it may be different from the above.
Don’t you think that there is need for outside consultants to be provided and variety of ideas which will give the teaches the feeling that the workshop is a different experience from the ordinary teachers’ meeting.
Provision should also be made for evaluation process.
Because evaluation is a continuous process in which all members of the group participate.
Hence, evaluation committee should be inaugurated and their responsibility is to recommend evaluation procedures to the total group and of organizing and carrying out the evaluation procedures the workshop group accepts.
Summarise the factors influencing effective organization of workshop.
• There must be an adequate planning • Exposure of the organizer is very important • Proper selection of partakers • Outside consultation of the experts etc.
3.1 How To Conduct Workshop 3.1.1 Workshop Characteristics Workshops tend to have rather clearly defined and recognized purposes.
These purposes usually are related directly to problems and emerging out of the teachers’ NOUN 79 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION daily work.
Workshops are planned, organized, and conducted by teachers and principals.
A broadly representative membership is attracted to workshop.
They are not delimited to the faculty of one school or even of one school system.
The exchange of new ideas is, therefore, facilitated.
Workshops attract people who have a special interest in the subject matter, a special contribution to make , or a special problem with which they need assistance.
The success of the workshop depends on the quality of the collective effort of the group.
Workshop usually are conducted with greater informality and with stronger emphasis on promoting good human relations than are formal meetings.
Workshop tends to be fairly brief lasting six to eight weeks in one two-hour sessions.
Materials often are supplies at the workshop, although at times the teachers bring their own supplies from their individual schools.
Outside preparation, which is shared with the participating members often is required.
Enumaerate the characteristics of a workshop.
• A clearly defined purpose • Well planned, organized and conducted • Promoter of good human relation • Availability of material needed.
3.1.2 Types of Workshops There are many different kinds of workshops, in an art workshop, probably most of the time would be spent is actual participation, learning the skills and techniques of art activities.
In Mathematics workshop, move emphasis would be placed on analyzing and selecting appropriate learning experiences, devising instructional technology material and methods of content presentation, and evaluating current and new programmes.
Workshops may supplement the backgrounds of teachers and bring the educator up-to-date with respect to advances in research in subject matter and in instructional techniques.
The supervisor must make provisions for the wide variance in teachers’ interest , needs and capacities when planning the workshop.
He/she should personally as teacher have qualities as a teacher, as a person, into the subject matter of the workshop.
Even though workshops are made available through teacher’s requests , it NOUN 80 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION is up to the supervisor to stimulate interest in the interchange of new ideas, mutual problems and competent solutions.
3.1.3 Limitations of Workshops The following are the limitations and dangers to workshop procedure.
- Too little preparation for the job at hand, little understanding of the meaning of group interaction, and inadequate skill in group techniques.
- A tendency to underestimate the potentials of the group, individually and collectively.
- Inability to stimulate and challenge participants to critical thinking.
- Lack of personal qualities which would attract and hold the confidence of associates, lack of tact and patience in dealing with participants - Lack of flexibility and too much domination.
- Insufficient sensitivity to individual needs ; lack of concern for setting up and maintaining a congenial climate, emotional, physical and intellectual for the group.
- Contempt of inadequate attempts made by members to solve problems.
- Lack of foresight, intuition, and planning.
Pause, we may have endless limitations you may peradventures add your own limitations to this .
Let me give you more.
- Failure to plan for getting the workshop under way expeditiously.
- Inability to control aggressive participants etc.
List at least SEVEN limitations of workshops.
- Poor preparation - Underestimation of potentials - Lack of flexibility - Insufficient sensitivity to different needs 4.0 Conclusion In the organization of the workshop, most staffs have found it desirable to plan a time for the total workshop group to meet together.
This phase of the programme, including presentations by special authorities and sharing of the products of the work groups, give the groups a feeling of unity.
NOUN 81 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 5.0 Summary The workshop has certain definite characteristics.
It is a place where teachers go to work on their own problems of their school.
The work is based on the problems of the individuals enrolled.
All participants in the workshop follow individual programmes.
A plan of operation, organized to provide the types of experiences that will enable the members to fulfill their own goals, is developed after the participants arrive.
It is a flexible plan.
It may be changed many times during a workshop.
6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment Question Explain the characteristics of a good workshop.
7.0 Reference/Suggested Readings Thomas.
H.B and Joseph, J (1952) .
Improving instruction through supervision.
New York: The Macmillian Comapy pp 452.
James R.M (1954) The workshops as an in-service education procedure.
Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University pp 67 – 68 NOUN 82 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 15 Measuring teacher Performance Table of Content: i.
Basic Principles ii.
Teacher Evaluation and Approval iii.
Appraisal task functions of the supervising principal.
1.0 Introduction teachers performance can be measured based on their activities.
Teachers must employ the most effective instructional techniques for the improvement of teaching and for this goal to be realized, those who directed the efforts of others in the field of education continuously must evaluate the effectiveness of teaching and must be aware of the results of modern research and current, up-to-date, best practice that might present implications concerning the methods and techniques of those whom they supervise.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
State the basic principles.
2.
Explain the teacher evaluation and Apprasial technique.
3.
Discuss the appraisal task functions of the supervising principal.
3.0 The Content Basic Principles.
The several supervisory techniques are not applicable to all teachers, nor are they effective to the same degree.
It is necessary for the supervisors to be aware of all applicable techniques.
The supervising principal has a responsibility to prove leadership and to apply in practice the following basic principles.
NOUN 83 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 1.
Teaching methods can be improved through adequate and appropriate supervision.
2.
All certificated personnel have degrees of responsibility for improving classroom method and should function as a supervisory team.
3.
Supervisory personnel should practice effective democratic methods in supervision if they expect teachers to used such methods in the classroom.
4.
Good supervision promotes methods that bring about a classroom climate of satisfaction and accomplishment.
5.
Supervision should provide help for individual teachers and a general methodology improvement programme.
6.
Supervision of methods should include preplanning, observation and a follow-up conference .
7.
Wise supervision should include freedom for teacher initiative in classroom experimentation of methods.
8.
Effective supervision provides for a cooperative programme of continuous and improvement of all methods used.
State the basic principles of supervisory activities.
• As listed above read and re-call.
3.1 Teacher Evaluations and Appraisal 3.1.1 How the Principal Should Initiate the Evaluation Programme The principal should be able to identify good and poor teaching and able to assist individuals in making their own evaluation of instruction.
He/she should be able to make positive recommendations for improvement or to enlist the aid of those who can help.
Through observation and participation, the principal should keep in close touch with classroom activities in order to be better able to help each individual.
3.1.2 The Principal and Teacher Appraisal There are various types of teacher appraisal forms.
Some of these forms are based on the supervisory principals’ expectations that list, for the most part, desirable qualities.
Rating scales, observation forms, the predictive appraisal of teacher training institutions, student opinion, and other diagnostic techniques are used.
An evaluation procedure should be used with teachers, rather than on teachers.
Evaluation must be viewed as a cooperative attempt to solve a professional problem.
NOUN 84 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Discussion of the items on evaluation forms can server as an effective stimulus to desirable classroom results.
An evaluation scale could be used well by teachers for self-evaluation and subsequent conferences with the supervising principal.
Teachers must be encouraged to use whatever self-appraisal techniques are suitable.
If teacher feel that the results of evaluation will be used against them, they will be willing to reveal weakness and problems.
They will be eager to participate in evaluations, however that strengthens their own professional status.
3.1.3 A First Step in Teacher Appraisal One of the first steps in teacher appraisal is to accept criteria for effective teaching.
Administrators and staff members should be responsible for selecting these criteria via a cooperative process .
In fact, cooperative planning and joint effort are the key to any successful evaluation programme.
Evaluation should be purposeful.
Too often it is considered as an end in itself.
True evaluation is for improvement and growth through analysis of individuals strengthens and weakness, and thus it should be the basis for guidance and constructive criticism.
What are the purpose of teacher evaluation and appraisal ?
• To increase their morale • To enhance productivity • To promote them • To motivate them • To measure performance against standard.
3.2 Appraisal Task Functions of Supervising Principal.
The following are the appraisal and improvement task functions of the supervising principal: Evaluating the data related to the educational products in terms of the accepted goals of education and the objective of instruction.
i) Determining cooperatively critical analysis of goals.
j) Selecting the means of appraisal and applying them k) Analyzing the data so as to discover strength and weakness in the product.
NOUN 85 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Conducting a critical analysis of the entire teaching learning situation so as to determine the antecedents of satisfactory and unsatisfactory student growth as reflected in observation behavioral changes and operationally defined capabilities.
a) Studying the course of study and the curriculum in operation.
b) Studying the materials of instruction, the equipment and the socio- physical environment of learning and development.
c) Studying the factors present in the learner, which may be investigated.
Improving the entire teaching-learning situation.
a) Improving the course of study and the curriculum-in-operation b) Improving the materials of instruction the equipment and the socio-physical environment and development.
c) Improving those factors as may be present in the learner, which may affect his development and achievement, which may be attacked in the school situation.
Evaluating the objectives, methods , and outcomes of supervision.
a) Discovering and applying the techniques of evaluation .
b) Evaluating the results of given supervisory programmes including the factors which may tend to limit the success of those programmes.
c) Evaluating and improving the performance of all who compose the supervisory team.
4.0 Conclusion The plan of supervision for any school system will depend upon those factors or school organization, teacher training and educational objectives, which prevail in that system.
These factors are dynamic rather than static.
It is therefore, to be expected that continuous modification mist be made in the organizations charged with the responsibility for the improvement of teaching , as well as in the techniques.
5.0 Summary For a successful evaluation programme, the principal must accept responsibility for acquainting the teachers with what is expected to them and what appraisal techniques are being used.
Teachers must think in terms of the constructive concept of evaluation and must consider it a source of help.
The principal must avoid giving the impression that the evaluation is the final verdict on the teacher’s work and worth.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Question NOUN 86 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION What are the improvement task functions of the supervising principal.
7.0 References/Suggested Readings Enrest, O.M (1969) Organization and Administration of supervision .
Chicago: public school publishing company pp 37.
Barr.
A.S el al (1968).
Supervision .
new York: Appleton and Company, pp 3.
Edwin, H.R (1963).
Supervision in the Elementary School Boston: Houphton Mifflin Company pp 15 NOUN 87 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 16 Use of Instructional Media and Library Facilities Table of Content: i.
How to evaluate and improve the instructional media center ii.
How to improve the use of instructional materials iii.
How to improve library services 1.0 Introduction We live in a world in which exponential expansion of knowledge and scientific breakthroughs are commonplace.
Each day our professors and teachers are faced not only with the problem of transmitting the new knowledge , but also with the awesome responsibility of guaranteeing that the young people in their trust actually understand it all.
The educational problems are so complex, and the needs so intense, that we no longer dare allow the teacher to work alone and unaided.
2.0 Objectives At he end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain how to evaluate and improve the instructional media center.
2.
State how to improve the use of instructional materials 3.
Discuss how to improve library services.
3.0 The Content How to evaluate and improve the instructional media center.
Many large school systems and colleges have an instructional technology and media center or learning center or audio-visual center that provides services to student, teachers and classrooms.
In some very large schools and colleges, an instructional media center has been developed in the individual school unit.
According to modern concepts of instructional media like films, film-strips, audio tapes and discs , exhibits NOUN 88 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION , slides, specimens, objects, pictures, maps, blobs, charts, recordings, television, teaching machines and others.
One programmed study and its control room, which is the heart of the instructional media center should be made available.
In advanced countries, center for learning and instructional resources is a true instructional systems center that combines a number of misprints and standard traditional print media formats and includes staff and instructional development; instructional systems development, electronic information retrieval and distribution, personalized learning and other facilities and laboratories as well as audio-visual instructional technology functions.
Such centers originally were developed to support and accommodate the self- contained classroom model.
Their scope and instructional patterns have evolved, resulting in a consortium of several specialties.
With the emphasis on instructional systems, the evaluation may well quicken in the coming years.
Summaries in three sentences different ways to improve instructional media center.
• Availability of materials • Well ventilated room to keep the materials • Availability of specialist who will handle the materials 3.1 How to Improve the Use of Instructional Materials The following practices lead to the improvement in the use of instructional materials.
1.
The supervisory principal should work continuously with teachers in providing and improving instructional materials.
2.
The teacher should continuously evaluate instructional materials in the light of student programmes.
3.
Consultant services should assist and instruct principals and teachers in the correct use of special materials, audio-visual equipment, and new devices.
4.
The librarian should catalogue and provide care for all materials stored in the library and serve as consultant regarding their selection and use .
5.
Purchases should be made in quality possible, either through the system office or a central purchasing service in the intermediate unit officer.
6.
The supervisory principal should provide a workroom where teachers can construct and adapt their own instructional materials.
7.
Free and inexpensive materials should be obtained from commercial , civic and services organizations.
NOUN 89 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION State at least five ways of improving instructional materials.
* Read and recall from the above listed ways of improving instructional materials.
3.1.1 How to Select Instructional Materials The choice of materials and resources should be based on the purposes, maturity, and background of the group.
Too often books and other materials for the classroom are selected based another students to be taught.
A particular book may appear to be “teachable” it may have an attractive format, or the teacher may find that other teachers are using it.
Objective becomes empty statements when textbook selection is based on such criteria.
3.2 How to Improve Library Services The need for good library services in a modern school is recognized by effective principals.
School that have superior library services usually seem to have a superior educational programme.
The nature and scope of library service can serve a partial index to the character and quality of curriculum and instruction In some schools it is quite impossible to keep all accumulated materials.
The central library may be the only place in the school together all materials required by the instructional program.
The library serves as distribution center for books and for the materials of instructional technology.
In a big colleges and schools, instructional technology centers and libraries may be combined in a larger instructional media complex, each school could not afford professional; specialist, the supervising principal must make sure that the proper types of teaching must also be provided.
The supervising principal also should help teachers by giving them a list of available materials.
Discuss various ways of improving library services • Availability of facilities • Professional specialist should oversee the library • Availability of spacious room etc.` 4.0 Conclusion There is need for the teachers to employ sophisticated technology so that the student will be able to explore, learn, evaluate and master the prodigious quantities of evolving knowledge.
The paths, through which these objectives can be realized may range from using a combination of media for mass instruction to select media for small group and individual instruction such as the reading center, computer assisted NOUN 90 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION learning and computer managed instruction ,,audio assisted learning, and other individual response systems.
5.0 Summary.
The selection and organization of materials and resources for instruction are school wide problems that the entire staff should consider.
Teachers, principals and specialist – consultants cooperatively should establish definite policies for selecting various instructional materials and equipment and should enumerate thee steps to take in acquiring them.
There are no short cuts to the wise section of books, films and other materials.
6.0 Reference/Suggested Readings Ford, L.L (1971) .
Audio – Visual programmes in action Ann Arbor Michigan Audio-Visual Association, rev ed.
Pp 18 – 19 Minor, G.J (1960) Curriculum Principles and Social Trends.
New York.
The Macmillaan Company p 561.
Markel, M.S (1964) .
Good frames and Bad (New York Johnn Wiley and Sons, Inc p 275.
Lawerence, M.S (1968).
Computer Assisted Instruction .
Detroit.
American Data Processing , Inc. p 25 NOUN 91 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 17 Building a Community Support Programme Table of Content i. Definitions and functions ii Basic principles of community relations programme iii Building a community relations program iv Evaluation of the community relation programme.
1.0 Introduction Our society is so dynamic and there is need for a sophisticated way of renewing the interest of the people to schools activities.
To develop to the highest potentials, the citizens in a community must cooperate by forming a working partnership with the school personnel’s' in initiating supervisory programme that strengthen the schools.
The supervising principal need to obtain an increased community support for the educational programme and for the programme of school supervision in particular 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define community relations 2.
State the basic principles of community relations programme 3.
Enumerate steps in building a community relations programe 4.
Discuss the evaluation of the community relations programme 3.0 The Content Community Relations Defined.
Community relations is the unity and harmony of cooperation and understanding between any group and the publics it serves.
Any organization effected by the will N O UN 92 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION of these public groups gives some considerations to public attitude and understanding.
The community relations or public relations of any institution are the sum total of all the impressions created by the institution and by the various persons connected with it.
A strong supervisory programme can exist only when it has community support.
3.0 The Content The substance of any programme for improved community relations is a continuous dialogue with the public who are involved concerning the achievement status, objectives and desires of the schools.
In essence, the entire community cooperation and understanding is sought and the relationship of the supervisory principles with the community the existence of any programme rather community relations should seek to inform the public educational programme and plans concerning the programme as they exist.
Public education is an area of public concern since the funds and students ar gotten from the public , the school then owns public proper accountability of its stewardship.
Infact community understanding is very important where there is going to be a change in the school’s educational programme due to a rapid technological change.
Define community relation and what are its importance.
* Community relations is the unity and harmony of cooperation and understanding between any group and public it serves.
It is very important to facilitate cordial relationship between the community and the school 3.1 Basic Principles of Community Relations Programme.
The following basic principles apply to the tasks of planning, organizing, implementing, evaluating and improving the supervision of the prgramme for community relations.
NOUN 93 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 1.
The school is founded on the goodwill of people who support it.
The min purpose of the community relations programme must not be gaining financial support for the schools.
2.
The key to sustain community support of supervision is the instructional program that is responsive to the changing needs of the community.
3.
In planning a successful community relations programme, the principal must be well acquainted with all aspects of the local community.
4.
The principal knows that parents react to what they think the supervisory programme is rather than to what is actually is.
5.
In developing support for the supervisory programme, the teacher-supervisor relationship is the facial point.
6.
The student is the key to effective communication between he or she is the vital link between the home and the school.
7 The projection of a positive attitude by the school team is an indispensable factor in gaining support for the supervisory programme.
State at least Five basic principles of community relations programme.
* The above is for your personal digestion, digest it and recall it.
3.1.1 The School As A Reflection of the Community Each school is a mirror of the community.
The school’s curriculum reflects what the citizens desire for their children.
If the citizen do not participate in the school’s life, them the activities within its walks are static and unchallenging.
Community relations such harmony between any groups and the publics served.
The supervising principlal enhances this harmony by (i) informing (ii) rallying support (iii) developing an awareness of the importance of education in a democracy (4) Developing the partnership between parents and the school (5) integrating the programe for community relations (6) evauating the status of the programme and (7) correcting existing misunderstandings.
If well planned, such a programme will be truthful, unselfish, intrinsic in the instructional programme, positive, continuous, comprehensive, interesting and sensitive the needs and desires of the school patrons.
Do you see a school as a reflection of community.
NOUN 94 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION * The school is a mirror of the community activities are influenced by the structure of the community, hence community promotes cordial relationship between the school and the citizens.
3.2 Building a Community Relation Programm.
The major steps in the building of a community relation programme is to follows.
1.
A competent person should be employed to organize and direct the public relations work.
2.
The public relations director should be used in a counseling capacity.
3.
The public involved should be located and defined.
4.
The needs of the school should be examined.
5.
All public relations activities should be coordinated.
6.
The efforts of the schools and the institutions of higher education should be coordinated.
7.
All possible sources of adequate funds and personnel should be examined.
3.2.1 Steps Taken To Create Awareness and Interest To create am interest that eventually will lead to community participation in educational activities, a supervising principal should proceed through four basic steps.
1.
The supervising principal should publicized and support the local parents’ association.
2.
The supervising principal should know the desires of the school and community.
He/She should form a joint parents – community information committee.
This joint group would represent better home- school coordination, it would involve both professional people and civic leaders contributing.
3.
The supervising principal should utilize student help .
Students provide the community with living proof of the merit of the educational programme.
4.
The supervising principal should encourage attendance at board meetings.
By introducing lay citizens to the benefits gained from attending school board meetings , the supervising principal will have a group with greater understanding of the many problems confronting the schools.
Once these four areas are explored, they should provide a breeding ground for many new approaches aimed at inducing a high level of positive citizen participation.
NOUN 95 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 3.3 Evaluation of The Community Relations Programme The following set of criteria that may be employed to evaluate factors influencing the community relations programme.
The governing board should develop and constantly improve the educational programme, provide adequate personnel for staffing the school program, provide and maintain a two adequate financial resources, maintain a two way contact with the adult community and the schools and choose the chief executive and work harmoniously with him.
Due deliberation should precede and policy decision.
Schools should have an open board press policy.
Supervising principals must be wise listeners and confine answers to questions to the stated board policy and professional levels.
Potential value of all local professional associations should be tapped.
Economical use of funds and assurance of value received are major responsibilities.
4.0 Conclusion The publics or members of the community are suspicious of new instructional programmes.
Most adults view education in terms of what they experienced in their youth.
An innovation may be considered frill, and therefore unnecessary.
The main goal of supervision is improving the quality of education.
5.0 Summary Information must be geared to the several publics that are the intended receivers.
This means that both the wording and the instruments used must be aimed at reaching these public.
Good publicity will not substitute for poor public relations good public relation involves the ability to take criticism, admit faults, and rectify shortcomings.
The best road to travel in community relations is one paved by the achievement of excellence in the instructional program.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Questions What are the steps to be taken to encourage community participation 7.0 References/Suggested Readings Jeffeoson N.E (1969).
The Teacher and School Administration.
Boston: Houghton Mafflin company.
P 250 NOUN 96 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Robert E Wilson, (1960).
The modern school superintendent: His principles and practices.
New York: Harper and Brothers.
Pp.422.
Howard, s (1960) Handbook of public relations.
New York McGraw – Hill Book Company, Inc p 739 Emery stopps et al (1979) .
Handbook of Educational Administration.
Boston: Allen an dBacon, INC; p 524 NOUN 97 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 18 Professional Responsibilities of the Supervisor Table of Content i.
Requirements for Professional Status ii.
Qualities of a profession iii.
The Educator’s responsibilities iv.
Ethics for the supervisor in handling personal matters.
1.0 Introduction The professional responsibilities call attention to the need for identifying current practices and for defining the term professional.
Theology, law and medicine have been considered learned professions and in themselves involve many educational activities.
A true profession has a well-defined body of established factual material that can be verified by research.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the requirements for professional status 2.
List the qualities of a profession 3.
Explain the educator’s responsibilities 4.
Stat the ethics for the supervisor in handling personnel matters.
3.0 The Content NOUN 98 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Requirements for professional status.
Many professions have been found to undergo misuse of position, untrue claims and practices and forays into the mystical.
However, a good profession can meet the tests of truth, serious research and scholarly study.
Education recently as advance with active study and research hence, there is sociological, psychological and physiological foundations of education and educators have become increasingly articulate in writing for publication.
The professional workers who follow a calling have engaged in a rigorous progamme of preparation their preparation goes beyond the requirement of the first academic degree.
After meeting the minimum standards for administration to practice of the profession, one continues to study.
By engaging in research, attending meetings and conventions where colleagues present their research findings, and by other means, one increases a grasp of the subject matter and enhances the quality of practice.
The professional keeps abreast of developments in the field.
The physician, the attorney, or the engineer who does not read professional journals or study important new book written by colleagues, will fall behind and loss effectiveness, as well as patients or clients.
The professional person must accept responsibility for his/her decisions even wrong ones and a professional that violates the ethical code is subject to disciplinary action or even expulsion by the action of peers in the profession.
The professional must be prepared to work independently, and should be able to decide, inform judgment and how best to proceed in the always complex and constantly changing situations in the classroom.
What are the requirements for professional status?
* He should possess minimum educational qualification * He should keep abreast of developments in the field * He should have responsibility etc.
3.1 Qualities of a Profession NOUN 99 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION The following may be considered as a set of criteria for determining whether professional status has been earned, based on present qualities of professionals.
A profession possesses.
1.
A craft that is comparatively conservative in practice 2.
Requirements for extensive and intensive training 3.
The maintenance of high standards for admission to the craft – exclusiveness in selection.
4.
A stick code of ethics 5.
A high level of social status accompanied by a rate of remuneration 6.
A program of research on both an organized and individual level 7.
The practical application of research within the craft.
8.
Techniques that can be taught, but only with difficulty 9.
Responsiveness and service to the public 10.
Advanced training and certification List at least SEVEN qualities of a profession * Out of the ten listed qualities above, read and recall seven.
3.1.2 Professional Activities For the Supervisor Supervisory personnel should exhibit: 1.
An active interest and noticeable pride in being a member of the profession.
2.
A positive approach toward the status of the profession and the gains made toward professional status.
3.
A willingness to do the extra expected of the strongly motivated individual 4.
Interest in working with fellow educators and citizens to solve educational problems and to plan for improvement and evaluation.
5.
Courage to speak out when a situation demands attention.
6.
An image of the deep responsibility those in education bear to the nation’s needs as well as to the need of each student.
3.2 The Educator’s Responsibility Responsibility 1 – To Self.
NOUN 100 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Only when one has learned self-respect can one gain the respect of others.
Certain attitudes of the educator toward self and work have considerable bearing on total professional efficiency .
The educator must respect him/herself and his/her own ideas without becoming dogmatic or intolerant of the ideas of others.
Responsibility 2 – To Students Students constitute an educator’s taking up a good share of the thinking and effort throughout the tenure.
Educator should employ all available resources to provide leadership in developing the instructional program.
Merely having a dedicated attitude toward children is insufficient.
Responsibility 3 – To the Members of Staff The supervising principal who believes and practices the basic democratic tenets in relations with teachers in the school finds it easier to stimulate similar practices and attitudes in classroom teachers.
Supervisory leaders occasionally find if necessary, in order to protect the rights of individuals or groups, to uphold principles, in order to protect the rights of individuals and to uphold principles that may be unpopular in the community.
In selecting and employing new personnel, he 1.
Spares no effort to maintain and increase professional standards, stylizing professional placement agencies to obtain property qualified, full-time teachers and administration before employing provisionally credentialed or part-time personnel 2.
Provides opportunities to employees to make known their desires for transfer or advancement and gives consideration to their wishes.
3.
Considers no position vacant and seeks no applicants for it before the present employed has registered or has been notified that he will not be re-employed.
4.
Adheres strictly to adopted salary schedules in employing new personnel.
5.
Describes as accurately as possible the employment policies and educational philosophy of the district, the salary schedule and the grade level, subject areas, or other assignment for which the candidates is being considered .
6.
Make no offer of employment for a period of time concurrent to that covered by a contract to another district unless that district has first sent notice of its willingness to release the employee.
Enumerate the ethics for supervisor in handling personnel matters.
* Provision of opportunities to employees * He should consider no position vacant * He should adhere strictly to adopted salary schedules etc.
NOUN 101 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 4.0 Conclusion The principal of a school is an important member of a great profession.
This membership carries with it the obligation to carry out responsibilities in a manner that will reflect credit on the entire profession.
5.0 Summary Education will not be recognized as a mature profession as long as many educators hold jobs rather than follow a calling, or as long as many educators fail to keep abreast of developments in their field.
When educators themselves set the standard for admission to their rank, and when they make the decision about who may be retrained and who is to be expelled, then the profession will have come of age.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Question Enumerate the professional’s activities for the supervisor.
7.0 References/Suggested readings Henry, J.O (1954).
Elementary School Organisation and Administration New York.
Appleton – Contury-crofts, Inc, p.20.
Rearis, W.C et al (1953) Administering the Elementary School .
Englewood Cliffs, New Jesery: prentice – Hall, Inc. Stoops, E.and Russell, E.J (1967) Elementary School Administration.
New York: Mcgraw- Hill Book Co. NOUN 102 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 19 Evaluating a Supervisory Programme Table of Content: i.
Principles for the Evaluations of Supervision ii.
How to appraise supervisory Programme iii.
Evidence of an effective Supervisory Programme.
1.0 Introduction An effective supervisor continuously seeks to narrow the gap between what is and what might be in the supervisory programme.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
List the principles for the evaluation of supervision 2.
State how supervisory programme can be appraised.
3.
Explain the evidence of an effective supervisory programme.
3.0 The Content The Principles for the evaluation of supervision Supervising principles have suggested the following criteria for evaluating a supervisory programme.
1.
Supervisions must accept the principles that supervision is a cooperative service activity and that its goal is to help teachers perform more efficiently and more effectively.
2.
Supervision must release the energies of the professuional staff in creative ways to solve both individual and common problems.
3.
The evaluation of a supervisory programme should be a fundamental part of the programme itself.
4.
Evaluation is continuous and occurs at regular, frequent intervals.
NOUN 103 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 5.
The aim of evaluation is to improve supervision and, ultimately, instruction for students.
6.
A supervisory program should be evaluated in terms of its own objectives and the instructional improvement that it achieves.
7.
Evaluation should encourage improvement of the school’s organization for supervision.
8.
The evaluation of a supervisory programme helps form harmonious relationships between school staff members.
9.
Statistical data gathering and interpretation form the basis of supervisory evaluation.
10.
Evaluation considers the total teaching-learning situation.
List at least SEVEN basic principles of supervisory evaluation programme.
• Evaluation should be part of programme • Evaluation should be occurring continuously • Evaluation should encourage improvement etc.
3.1 How to Appraise Supervisory Programme The supervisory principal will not be satisfied to know merely the adequacy of the product; rather, he/she will want feedback concerning the status of the many conditions that limit or facilitate educational outcomes.
The feedback on the supervisory programme’s present conditions, knowledge of status and effectiveness in terms of goals met are very important.
The feedback can help interpret the many kinds that the principal might receive about the programme for supervision and its objectives, such knowledge can lead to revision, innovation, and subsequent improvement, continuous evaluation, and further feedback, which is so vitally important to educational supervision.
When the supervising principal asks question of opinion concerning the supervisory programme, every effort should be made to formulate wording that will not invoke bias in the respondents to record general remarks on special points.
These remarks should direct attention to facts that are relevant to the problem at hand, but that were not included in the list of questions.
Summarise in two sentences how to appraise supervisory programme.
* Through the measurement of its objectives and through a feedback.
3.2 Evidence of an Effective Supervisory Programme NOUN 104 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION The following are the evidence of an effective supervisory programme.
1.
Increased understanding of the nature of the student 2.
Increased knowledge of skills and techniques of directing, improving measuring and recording the intellectual and social growth of the student.
3.
Increased knowledge and skills in planning and adapting learning materials and activities to individual abilities and interest.
4.
Increased knowledge in the subject matter fields.
5.
Understanding the skill in the use of “newer| classroom procedures and devices of worth 6.
Knowledge of modern concepts dealing with the problems of discipline and control.
7.
Increased understanding and skill in counseling young people 8.
Constructing a curriculum related to local, state and national needs pertaining to present and future needs of the students.
9.
Establishing better relationships with students, professional colleagues and members of the community.
10.
Developing greater interest in reading, in research and ion professional writing.
A general survey of supervisory organization and administration by outside consultants should be completed occasionally.
A committee composed of local staff members should be appointed and asked to evaluate the supervision programme.
Explain the evidence of an effective supervisory programme • It should have been able to establish better relationships with students, professional colleagues and members of the community.
• It should increase knowledge in the subject matter fields etc.
4.0 Conclusion The supervisory principal should determine if goals have been met and whether or not the goals were desirable in the first place.
He /she should examine the validity of the instruments or records use to conduct the evaluation.
All results must be recorded and, if the evaluation is to be worthwhile, it should result in some sort of action.
Evaluation is affected by how orderly and systematically it proceeds.
Evaluation is affected by the error of the estimates of the cost of each alternative as well as the potential utility of each alternative.
Evaluation depends on the risk and uncertainty of each prospective outcome.
NOUN 105 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION 5.0 Summary Good supervision is based on a belief in democracy and uses the scientific method, continuously improving and evaluating its products and processes.
It proceeds by means of an orderly, cooperatively planned and executed series of activities and is judged by its results.
Effective supervision requires , then a sound knowledge of decision making and problem solving techniques,, since it seeks to evaluate (1) personnel ,(2) procedures and (3) outcomes.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Question what are the evidence of an effective supervisory programme.
7.0 References/Suggested Readings Sam, H.M (1950).
How good is your supervisory program, St. , Augustine : Florida, State Department of Education.
Bernard M.B (1965).
Organizational psychology.
Bostom: Allyn and Bacon, Inc. p 75 Dayton, B (1957).
“How principals can improve instruction” American School board Juornal CXXXII pp.37 – 39 Crosby, Muried (1957).
Supervision as co-operative action.
New York: Appleton – century crofts.
NOUN 106 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION Unit 20 The Future of Supervision Table of Content: i.
Factors producing changes ii.
New directions in educational supervision.
1.0 Introduction The supervisor of today need to know about supervisory practices of the future he/she will know how his/her role change and what issues will he/she confront?
And what emerging trends will he/she encounter.
2.0 The Objective At the end of this unit, you should b able to : 1.
Explain factors that produce changes 2.
Discuss the new Directions in Educational Supervision 3.0 The Content Factors Producing Changes There are many factors that will affect supervision in the future.
Some of these factors will be discussed below : Population/Migration Factors.
Our population expanded, people who could afford to leave the city moved into the suburbs.
Overproduction on the farm resulting from the sue of machinery and improved agricultural procedures made it necessary for the younger generation to leave the farm and move to the city and suburbs to seek other employment.
NOUN 107 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION The population changes and their consequences of personnel staffing, physical facilities and class size.
Population mobility usually means a high rate of teacher and pupil turnover.
Technology Recently machines have taken over some tasks formerly done by human beings if schools will accepts the challenges, the machine can be made to serve people.
If is safe to predict that advancing technology will affect supervision in a number of ways.
Not only will the content of the curriculum be changed , but the purposes, programme, techniques, procedures and the entire scope of education also will be affected.
Data-processing equipment already is a valuable aid in curriculum revision and in the learning process itself.
Increased Leisure Time As people have more free-time, they must be equipped to engage in a wide variety of worthwhile leisure time activities.
The supervisor must start planning to full this real void in the curricula.
Scientific Discovery and Invention Devices and machine have been invented to amuse people and to perform many unpleasant or difficult tasks.
The atom has been harnessed and the mysteries of the universe are now being fathom just as the discoveries of science are revolutionizing other areas of living, they will continue to affect supervision.
Through the use of new building materials ,improved lighting, cur-conditioning and acoustical treatment, the learning environment of students will be greatly improved.
Explain briefly factors that are producing changes.
• Population • Technology • Scientific Discovery etc.
3.1 New Directions in Educational Supervision As knowledge accelerates, new disciplines are developed and new roles and responsibilities emerge for the school and the teacher.
An example is the emergence of educational psychology as a field of study.
The impact of educational psychology NOUN 108 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION on the schools has resulted in a wider variety of roles being required of school personnel.
Supervisory practices will reflect this development.
Teachers will need new insights and skills in process if they are to be effective in moving children from school into a complex dynamic society.
Educational supervision will address issues such as inner city be developed in order to effect more dynamic and effective working relationships in the classroom and community.
Any social forces impinging on the classroom, dynamic in-service education experiences will relate to increasing diverse topics, including areas such as housing, zoning employment, leisure-time activities, health, stress, innovation and economic planning.
3.1.1 Changing structure of the School As the school continues to be pushed into cooperation and collaboration with increasing powerful governmental agencies, influential business forces, and a multifaceted society going in many directions at once, the structure of the school will adjust, adapt, and ultimately change.
The school is being forced to innovate, evaluate, and innovate again.
These processes will tend to have increasingly greater impacts on all aspect of supervision.
With innovation and extended roles, new specialists will be needed.
Teachers will continue to by re-educate for positions in areas such as instructional technology, reading instructions, systems development etc.
A proliferation of roles and tasks will result in increased development of the school hierarchy.
More supervisory specialists will be needed to manage and supervise departments and to coordinate, evaluate and direct programmes for change and changing programmes.
A more complex school organization will cause supervision to become more specialized and specific, and perhaps, more polarized as departments compete for status and finding.
What are the effects of changing the structure of the school?
• New innovation • New appointment • New focuses etc.
4.0 Conclusion Supervisory programmes must be geared to help teachers acquire know – how on helping children to become independent learners.
Supervisors must become even more creative and imaginative in developing instructional ,materials and procedures NOUN 109 EDU 810 SUPERVISION OF INSTRUCTION IN EDUCATION for the many city young stars who now receives a substandard education.
It is unrealistic to expect to meet their needs by subjecting them to the same educational fare served in most of today’s classrooms 5.0 Summary Developments in the field of instructional technology will greatly increase the repertoire of teaching and learning aids communication satellites will bring history to the classroom as it is being made any place on the earth and from outer space as well.
The new techniques and methods of teaching mean that teachers and supervisor must change their ways of thinking.
New teachers must be trained differently by the schools adopt the new ideas presented in the book.
They must change their methods and patterns of organizing and thinking.
Articulation of the elementary school with the secondary school and college is important if the advantages of new techniques of teaching are to be successful.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Question What are the effects of changing the structured of the schools.
7.0 References/Suggested Readings Jack.
Culberston et al (1973) social science content for preparing educational leaders.
Culombus, ohio: charles E. Merrill publishing co. Robert, A.L (1976).
“Collective Bargaining and in-service education” ph Delta Kapan pp 468 – 469 Elizabeth, A.D (1974).
“Staff development: whose job is it?
Educational leadership ,pp 137 140.
Roalad, F.C et al (1975) .The organization and control of American schools Colombus, Ohio: Charles E Merrilla , pp 406 407 N O U N  110
