 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 768 COURSE TITLE: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS 1  EDU 768: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS COURSE GUIDE Course Developer: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Writer: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor: Prof. Ken A. Meseiobi National Open University of Nigeria Owerri Study Centre Owerri Programme Leader: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr. F.F Fatimayin School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 2 EDU 768: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS 1.0 : INTRODUCTION The course EDU 768 titled “Social Studies Methods” is a two-credit course consisting of three modules and fifteen units.
It is designed to cater for undergraduates offering B.A.Ed programmes and other related programmes in the School of Education of the National Open University of Nigeria.
It is a two-unit course that demands your full attention and commitment as an undergraduate student.
As an undergraduate student of Education the course familiarizes you with the meaning of Social Studies and the various methods, techniques and strategies that can be used to promote the teaching of the subject for cognitive, affective as well as psychomotor learning.
Your successful completion of this course should prepare you better for the handling any Social Studies curriculum in the nation’s educational system.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what relevant reference materials are available to complement your reading of the course material and how you can work your way through the course.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
2.0 : WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The course EDU 768 titled “Social Studies Methods” will avail you an opportunity to acquire the basic and relevant knowledge and skills required for becoming a professional teacher of Social Studies as you will be able to differentiate from the three seemingly confusing technical terms of methods, techniques and strategies.
The Course is expected to facilitate your understanding of those methods and techniques of teaching Social Studies with vantage opportunity provided for you to apply some of them while studying and later when you get to your actual classroom.
3 You will also learn about what it takes to plan for effective teaching of any Social Studies content at any level of the nation’s education system.
The issue of dearth of instructional materials is one major problem facing the teaching and learning of Social Studies in our schools.
It is expected that this Course Material will assist you greatly in acquiring the skills of sourcing for and using these materials in your classroom.
Strategies for improvising and using the community as learning resource centre will also be discussed.
4  3.0 : COURSE AIM The course is designed for you as a reader and student to improve your knowledge and skills of teaching Social Studies as a value-based subject with the ultimate desire of creating opportunities for the learners to master solving their problems of survival with less stress.
4.0 : COURSE OBJECTIVES The aim of this course as stated in the preceding section serves as an all embracing goal which equally influences the objectives of your studying each of the units presented in the course material.
The objectives have been identified for each of the units.
You are advised to read them before you start working through each of the units.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit, in this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
By the end of this course it is therefore expected that you should be able to do the following: i.
Give concise and up to date definitions of Social Studies.
ii.
Explain the nature and scope of Social Studies and iii.
Describe Nigeria’s national philosophy of education and the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject.
iv.
Highlight the relationship between the philosophical background of Social Studies and Nigeria’s National Policy on Education.
v. Identify the goals of teaching and learning Social Studies as a school subject.
vi.
Highlight the values of learning Social Studies.
vii.
Describe what is new in the structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies viii.
Curriculum.
ix.
Describe how best difficult concepts can be handled by Social Studies teachers.
x.
Describe the concepts of methods, techniques and strategies as they apply to teaching and learning.
xi.
Describe and apply different instructional techniques in Social Studies classroom.
xii.
Identify those features that can be used to describe effective teaching in a Social Studies class.
xiii.
Identify the essentials of lesson planning for Social Studies teaching.
xiv.
Practically prepare yourself for effective teaching of Social Studies at either the primary or junior secondary level.
xv.
Explain in simple term the concept of instructional media or instructional material resource.
5  xvi.
Identify the principles guiding the selection and effective utilisation of instructional resource materials in the Social Studies classroom.
xvii.
Identify those factors that can promote effective use of instructional material resources in the Social Studies classroom.
xviii.
Describe the different types of instructional resource materials and use some of them in the Social Studies classroom.
xix.
Define the concept of improvisation.
xx.
Highlight the importance of improvisation towards the effective teaching of Social Studies.
xxi.
Identify and describe some of the skills needed by the teacher for improvising instructional resource materials in Social Studies classrooms.
xxii.
Describe the categories of community resources that can be used for Social Studies xxiii.
Teaching xxiv.
Highlight the importance of community resources for Social Studies teaching 5.0 : WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE It is important for you to be determined to complete this course by reading through from Unit 1 of the first module to the last unit of the third module and, carrying out all the activities stipulated therein.
These include self-assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignments listed under every unit.
At certain points during the course, you will be expected to submit your tutor-marked assignments as your scores in some of them form a reasonable percentage of your total scores for the course.
Each unit of each of the modules starts with an introduction followed by objectives to be achieved after interacting with the main content and the exercises.
Your facilitator for the course will be available to attend to you in case you find it difficult to comprehend any aspect of the course material.
You are therefore advised to ensure that you read ahead and attend tutorial sessions where you would be able to ask questions and interact with other colleagues of yours and the facilitator.
6  At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about a total 42 weeks to complete.
Below are the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
7 6.0 : THE COURSE MATERIAL The major components of the course which will be made available to you include: (cid:1) The Course Guide (cid:1) The course material with the corresponding Study Units (cid:1) Assignment file & (cid:1) Presentation Schedule.
7.0: STUDY UNITS 8  The study units in this course are presented in the table below.
Module Title Unit No.
Unit Title 1.
Meaning, Nature and Scope of Social Studies Foundations of Social Studies 2.
Philosophical Background of Social Studies 3.
Relevance of Teaching Social Studies 4.
Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum 1.
Methods, Techniques and Strategies of Teaching Methods, Techniques and Distinguished Strategies of Teaching Social Studies 2.
Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I 3.
Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II 4.
Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies Instructional Resource Materials 1.
Meaning and Principles Guiding for Effective Social Studies the Selection and Utilisation of Teaching Instructional Resource Materials 2.
Types of Instruction Resource 9 Materials and their Application in Social Studies Classrooms  3.
Improvisation of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms 4.
The Community as a Learning Resource in Social Studies 8.0: ASSIGNMENT FILE Your assignment file will be available through your facilitator and Study Centre Manager.
In this course, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in the section on assessment in this course guide.
There are tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are expected to practice all but submit at most 4.
9.0: PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due dates.
You should guard against falling behind in your works.
10.0: ASSESSMENTS There are two aspects to the assessment of the course: first are the tutor-marked assignments (30%) ; and second is a written examination (70%).
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File  10 At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of two hours duration 11.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) There are fifteen (15) tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are advised to attempt all.
Aside from the course material provided, you are advised to read and research widely using other references which will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Ensure all completed assignments are submitted on schedule before set deadlines.
If for any reasons, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
The extension may not however be granted after the due date except with very genuine excuse.
12.0: FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination for this course will be of two hours duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be assessed and the examination will consist of questions, which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between the conclusion of the last study unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self-assessment exercises, tutor- marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
13.0: COURSE MARKING SCHEME The work you submit will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will be required to sit for a final examination, which will also count for 70% of your total mark.
The table below shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Table 1: Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 4 (TMAs) 4 assignments, best 3 will be used for C.A = 10 x 3 = 30% 11 Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks 14.0: COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units and the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignment that follow them.
Unit Title of work Week`s activity Assessment (end of unit) 1 Meaning, Nature and Scope of Social Studies 2 Philosophical Background of Social Studies 3 Relevance of Teaching Social Studies Submission of TMA 1 4 Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum 5 Methods, Techniques and Strategies of Teaching Distinguished 6 Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I 7 Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II Submission of TMA 2 8 Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies 9 Meaning and Principles Guiding the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials 10 Types of Instruction Resource Materials and their Submission of TMA 3 Application in Social Studies Classrooms 11 Improvisation of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms 12 The Community as a Learning Resource in Social Submission of TMA 4 Studies Revision Examination 12  15.0: HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units are specially developed and designed to replace the university lecturer.
Hence, you can work through these materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Visualize it as reading the lecture instead listening to a lecturer.
Each of the study units follows a common format as earlier explained under the section on `Working through the Course`.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading Section.
Working through the self assessment exercises will help you to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and the examinations.
You should do each activity as you come to it in the study unit.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your facilitator.
Remember that your facilitator’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In summary, 13 (cid:1) Read this course guide.
(cid:1) Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the unit.
You need to gather together all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
(cid:1) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their coursework.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your facilitator know before it is too late for help.
(cid:1) Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
(cid:1) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
(cid:1) Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the dates) access the Assignment file.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due dates.
(cid:1) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your facilitator.
(cid:1) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
(cid:1) When you have submitted an assignment to your facilitator for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your facilitator’s comments.
Consult your facilitator as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
(cid:1) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives and the course objectives.
16.0: FACILITATORS AND TUTORIALS There are 20 hours of tutorials (ten 2-hour sessions) provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
14 Your facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter as they would provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your facilitator well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your facilitator and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary: when (cid:1) you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
(cid:1) you have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
(cid:1) you have a question or problem with an assignment with your facilitator’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your possible best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participations in discussions.
15 17.0: SUMMARY In this course EDU 768, you have learnt about a variety of concepts and issues relating to child rearing practices, parenting and effects of the child`s cultural and historical background on his/her social behaviours and growth.
(cid:1) Meaning, Nature and Scope of Social Studies (cid:1) Philosophical Background of Social Studies (cid:1) Relevance of Teaching Social Studies (cid:1) Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum (cid:1) Methods, Techniques and Strategies of Teaching Distinguished (cid:1) Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I (cid:1) Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II (cid:1) Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies (cid:1) Meaning and Principles Guiding the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials (cid:1) Types of Instruction Resource Materials and their Application in Social Studies Classrooms (cid:1) Improvisation of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms (cid:1) The Community as a Learning Resource in Social Studies Specifically, you have interacted with topics such as: Best of luck in your examinations.
We wish you every success in the future.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
16  16.0: TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCE MATERIALS Adaralegbe, A.
(1980).
The Nigerian Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect.
In NERC (1980) Social Studies: Teaching Issues and Problems.
Benin: Ethiope Pub.
Co. Adeyoyin, F.A.
(1991).
Towards a theory of Social Studies.
Nigerian Social Studies Journal 2 (1) 13-23 ADPRIMA (2003) Methods of Teaching Retrieved from www.adprima.com on the 20th May 2009.
Alonge, E. I.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
Science Teacher Association of Nigeria.
24th Annual Conference Proceedings pa 171 – 181 ASESP (1994).
Social Studies Curriculum and Teaching Resource Book for Africa Nairobi: ASESP Secretariat Eniayeju, A.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
17  Science Teachers Association of Nigeria – 24th Annual Conference Proceedings 187-190 Esu, A.
E.O., Umoh, S. J.
& Obi, F. B.
(1995).
Pedagogy of environmental education Lagos: Macmillan Pub.
Federal Ministry of Education (1992).
Training Guide for Master Trainers in Social Studies.
Ibadan Comprehensive Guide Limited.
Gestwicki, C. (2007).
Home, school and community relations USA: Delmar Cengage Learning Hornby, A. S. (1978): Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English.
3rd Edition.
Oxford University Press.
Kissock, C. (1981) Curriculum Planning for Social Studies Teaching.
New York: John Wiley.
Lawal M. B.
(1995).
Principles and concepts of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M. B.
(1997).
Enhancing in-service teachers’ skill in procuring and improving instructional resources for junior secondary studies.
Journal of Continuing Education (1) 1 June 36-44.
Lawal M. B.
(1999).
Values clarification, concept mapping strategies and students’ learning outcomes in junior secondary Social Studies Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Ibadan Lawal, M. B.
(2003).
Foundations of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Principles and Concepts of Social Studies Lagos: A Triad Associates 18 Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Critique Report on the Nigerian primary and junior secondary Social Studies curricula Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Workshop on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensitivity Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education Lagos: A Triad Associates Lawton, D, & Dufour, B.
(1976) New Social Studies.
London: Heinemann Mansaray, A.
(1984) The nature and scope of Social Studies A Monograph Mansaray, A.
(1999) The Nigerian Social Studies curriculum: A critique Paper Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Workshop on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensitivity Mesieobi, K.A.
(1993).
Teaching values in Social Studies: A contradiction of conceived and operative values in Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Social Studies Review 2(1) June Metcalf, L. E. ed.
(1971).
Values education: Rationale, strategies and procedures.
The NCSS 41st Year Book.
Washington, D.C. :National Council for Social Studies Michaelis, J.U.
(1972).
Social Studies for children in a democracy.
5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall Muyanda-Mutebi, P. & Yiga-Matovu, M. (1994) Social Studies Curriculum and Teaching Resource Book for Africa Nairobi:ASESP Secretariat NCSS (1992) Testing and evaluation of Social Studies students Social Education 55 (5) 284-293 NERC (1973) Guidlines on primary school curriculum Lagos: NERC 19  NERDC, (1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education: Population Education self learning module 12 Lagos: Population Education Dept.
Nwosu, S.& Corbin, H. (1977).
Handbook for Social Studies teachers Ikeja: Longman Pub.
NERDC, (2007) 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum Social Studies for Junior Secondary 1 – 3 Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook for the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Junior Secondary Level) Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook for the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Primary School Level) Abuja: NERDC Ogundare, S. F. (1988).
Curriculum development: a description of National Curriculum for Primary Social Studies in Nigeria.
Educational Studies 14(1) 45-50.
Ogundare, S. F. (2000).
Foundations of Social Studies Ibadan: Adesesan Press Ogunjimi, R.
A.(1996).
Values clarification as an instructional technique for teaching Home Economics Paper presented at a Training Workshop for Lagos State Secondary School Teachers Ogunyemi, S. (2000) Strategies for Teaching Social Studies Ibadan: OACE Pub Ogunsanya, M. (1984).
Introduction to Methodologies of Social Studies Ibadan: University Press Omosehin, F. (1996).
A Handbook on foundations of Social Studies.
Lagos: OACE Pub Olatunde, F. (2006).
Primary school Social Studies curriculum and methods Lagos: NOUN 20  Oroge, S. A.
(1995).
An overview of teaching methodologies in Population/Family Life Education In NERDC, A POP/FLE handbook for classroom teachers Lagos: NERDC Quartey (1984) Social Studies Methodology for Teachers Lagos: Refield Pub.
Quartey, S. M. & Lawal, M. B.
(1989) Refeild model objective questions and answers for Social Studies Lagos: Refeild Pub.
Preston, R. C. & Herman, W. L. Jnr.
, (1981).
Current research in elementary Social Studies New York: Crowell-Collier-Macmillan Raths, L.E., Harmin M. & Simon, S.B.
(1966).
Values and teaching: working with values in the classroom Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Walker, R. (1970) Rationale for elementary Social Studies In R.H. Jones (1970) Social Studies Education for Young Americans Iowa: Kendal/Hunt Pub.
Co. Wesley, E. (1950) Teaching Social Studies in high schools Boston: D.C. Heath & Co. Wright, I.
(1980) Elementary Social Studies: A Practical Approach to Teaching and Learning.
Toronto: Methuen Publications.
www.itek.ac.ug/curriculum, Retrieved 10th October 2009 21  EDU 768: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS Course Developer: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Writer: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor: Prof. Ken.
A. Meseiobi National Open University Owerri Study Centre Owerri Programme Leader: Dr. M. Babatunde Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr. U. S. A. Osuji School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 22  EDU 768: SOCIAL STUDIES METHODS MODULE 1: FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1: Meaning, Nature and Scope of Social Studies Unit 2: Philosophical Background of Social Studies Unit 3: Relevance of Teaching Social Studies Unit 4: Overview of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum UNIT 1: MEANING, NATURE AND SCOPE OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Social Studies 3.2: The Nature of Social Studies 3.3: Scope of Studies 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION This is the first of the units in the 15-unit course material aimed at improving your skill of teaching the subject Social Studies as a teacher in training.
It is a unit that will familiarise you with the current conception of the subject, its nature and scope.
The opportunity provided for you to interact with the content of this unit will also clarify your thoughts with regards to the wrong perception of the discipline as one that is restricted to the immediate confinements of the single discipline purview of the Social Sciences.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: i.
Give a minimum of three concise and up to date definitions of Social Studies.
ii.
Explain the nature of Social Studies and iii.
Describe the scope of the subject 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 23 3.1: Meaning of Social Studies Social Studies as a discipline of offering in Nigeria’s educational system has over the years been subjected to a variety of definitions which in most cases have been quite restrictive in focus and content.
For instance, majority of the earliest practitioners of the subject have defined it as an amalgamation of the arts, and social sciences in terms of history, geography, political science and sociology.
Again the varying professional backgrounds of the handling the subject before now, have equally affected the variety of definitions of the subject.
This made teachers to teach Social Studies as one week of history, another week of geography and so on.
Teachers who had this kind of perception taught the subject purely for knowledge acquisition, whereas the subject is supposed to be perceived as one that promotes the three domains of learning; cognitive, affective and psychomotor and not only the cognitive orientations of the subject.
This is a misconception of the discipline of Social Studies.
Lawal (1999) supports this view by observing that Social Studies is not a discipline in which academic selfishness is exhibited.
That is, a discipline in which a teacher seizes opportunity to emphasize his/her own area of specialisation at the expense of the real content of the subject (no compartmentalisation of knowledge).
Lawal & Oyeleye (2003) also remarks that other scholars have also had course to define Social Studies as the study of man and his environment.
In this definition, it is important to ask if this is not what other disciplines are equally doing or capable of doing.
This definition can described as one that does not ascribe any uniqueness to the subject.
As an adjunct, they also say it is how man influences the environment and how the environment influences man.
One could observe that this definition does not emphasize the essence of studying the relationships as well as the process for carrying out such task.
It could also be said to have a strong direct geographical and sociological connotations.
These observations might have influenced the lines of thoughts of scholars like Edgar Wesley as far back as 1950 when he defined Social Studies as a subject that deals with various kinds of social relationships needed for better understanding of social living.
This is closely related to Adaralegbe’s definition (1980) in which Social Studies is described as a “study of man’s mutual interaction with his physical, social, political, religious, economic, psychological and cultural environments.
The implication of this definition underlines the fact that within the human society, various skills are required to ensure living, interaction, growth, development and survival.
The recognition of the various misconceptions by contemporary practitioners of Social Studies have engendered opportunities for more rigorous researches and concerns capable of getting scholars to perceive the subject as one that offers education that is relevant to life.
For instance, at two different fora, NERC (1973 & 1977), looked at Social Studies and concluded that it should be defined as the “study of the outcomes of interactions between humans and their environment which equip the youth with tools necessary for solving personal and community-related problems.
Thus defined, Social Studies will therefore not mainly aim at giving out knowledge; rather, according to Quartey (1984), it will in addition put emphasis on inculcating a certain distillate knowledge which will assist man in acquiring tools necessary for life.
Such tools, he maintains, include knowledge, values, attitudes and skills needed to help the youth in solving both personal and community related problems.
24 This view is shared by Mansaray (1984) and Mesieobi (1993).
Mansaray (1984) defines Social Studies as the “study of the interactions between man and his physical and social environments, of the problems and issues posed by these interactions and of the way by which man seeks solution and clarification to them.
Mesieobi(1993) also confirms this by observing that the core of Social Studies teaching is value development, which should be positively oriented towards the betterment of the individual learner and for the overall societal progress.
Social Studies as a discipline of study in our educational system should therefore be seen as citizenship education, education for cultural integration and education for living.
This position has influenced the National Council for Social Studies (NCSS) in the United States of America to adopt an official definition of the subject which reads, The integrated study of the Social Studies and humanities to promote civic competence and help young people develop the ability to make informed and reasoned decisions as citizens of a culturally diverse, democratic society in an inter-dependent world.
(NCSS, 1992) In a nutshell, Social Studies can therefore be described as a discipline which attempts to modify or change the learners’ behaviours in the directions of acceptable values and attitudes through a process of studying human beings ‘relationships with their environment and with the desire to provide solutions to the various complementing problems in order to ensure their survival, having been equipped with the necessary tools such as values, attitudes, skills and knowledge (VASK), Lawal & Oyeleye (2003).
From the foregoing it is important to reiterate the fact that it might be very difficult to find a universally accepted definition of Social Studies.
According to Ogunsanya (1982) this is because the subject varies in objectives from time to time and from place to place, depending on the needs, aspirations and desires of a people.
In addition, there are other factors such as the dynamic nature of man and his culture as well as the diversity of culture among peoples.
3.2: The Nature of Social Studies The nature of Social Studies is concerned with the basic characteristics of the subject in terms of focus and content.
The variations in the definitions of the subject as pointed out earlier in Section 3.1 of this Unit have however gone a long way in determining its nature as well as the scope.
Nevertheless, Adeyoyin (1991) in one of her studies on the dynamics of Social Studies identified eight different but competing conceptions that one could use to explain the nature of the subject.
These include: (cid:1) Social Studies a citizenship education (cid:1) Social Studies as skill development (cid:1) Social Studies as ecological studies.
(cid:1) Social Studies as social science (cid:1) Social Studies as cultural integration (cid:1) Social Studies as dynamic education (cid:1) Social Studies as education for living (cid:1) Social Studies as a discipline.
25  3.2.1: Social Studies a citizenship education This conception harbours a nature of Social Studies characterised by an attempt to use the subject to inculcate the right beliefs into learners.
Here, Social Studies programmes are designed around the learning of democratic platitudes (Walker, 1970).
The individual is expected to be trained to become good citizen who votes during elections, obeys rules and regulations, performs his or her own duties and is active in the society.
This is presented in Figure 3.1 below: Exercises rational judgement Maintains respectable home life Develops abilities to the fullest Offers useful advice Obeys school rules when called upon Performs his civic Attends relevant duties community An Individual as a Good meetings Citizen Works willingly Active member of with his hands the society Respects the rights Puts himself up and properties Social Studies as Citizenship Education for elections of others when eligible Votes during Figure 3.1: Social Studies as Citizenship Education elections This nature of Social Studies requires the teacher to transmit essential components of a particular society’s cultural patterns which such society wants the learners to actually learn about and acquire.
This nature of the subject however restricts intellectual development and enlightenment while emphasizing too much of patriotism.
This view is fully supported by Ogundare (2000) where he observes that indoctrination as a result of citizenship education does not recognize the worth and initiative of the individual child.
He stresses further that it holds values as static for all ages and it does not allow free flow of culture contact through knowledge explosion.
26 3.2.2: Social studies as skill development The nature of the subject prescribed by this conception emphasizes a variety of opportunities that would encourage the learners to acquire a variety of skills.
Such skills would normally include those of: (cid:1) Locating information; (cid:1) Interpreting information and materials; (cid:1) Critical /reflective thinking; (cid:1) Performing in a group; and (cid:1) Analysing; (cid:1) Evaluating.
(cid:1) Synthesizing, comparing, and generalizing; It is not impossible to think that the acquisition of these skills is capable of considerably reducing learners’ problems of survival.
But on a cautionary note, the essential roles which knowledge processing and acquisition as well as attitudinal development play in learning cannot be over emphasized at any given time in the learning cycle of any child.
3.2.3: Social studies as ecological studies The nature of Social studies in this case emphasises human beings as the central focus around which all other relevant knowledge, values, attitudes, and skills revolve.
Social Studies nature here provides learners with the opportunity to interact with the sole aim of understanding better the complementary operations within and outside such interactions.
This is in terms of knowledge to be learnt, the values and attitudes being developed and the skills being acquired in the course of these various interactions.
This is diagrammatically represented in Figure 3.2 as provided by Adeyoyin (1994) The World Community ECOWAS National Community State Community OAU Community Town Co Fmamumnitiyl y School ge UNO Villa The Child UNICEF Figure 3.2: The Expanding Communities of Man 3.2.4: Social Studies as dynamic education 27  This conception reflects the open-ended nature of Social Studies as it emphasises the accommodation of social issues considered relevant to life.
This level of dynamism is reflected in the way through which an expanded horizon is promoted in Social Studies.
For instance, the focus of the subject in recent times is known to include Environmental Education, Population/Family Life/HIV/AIDS Education, Drug Abuse Education etc.
Social Studies students are now involved in the study of these areas in an integrated manner both at the formal and non-formal levels of the nation’s educational system.
Lawal and Oyeleye (2003) however remark that the major problem with this nature of the subject is the relatively low level of preparedness of its teachers who are expected to handle these dynamic characteristics of the subject.
It is only in recent times that one could find some pre-service teacher education programmes incorporating new educational initiatives into their curriculum and instruction programmes as a way of accommodating contemporary educational initiatives.
3.2.5: Social Studies as social science The nature of the subject here is characterized by an overlap of other disciplines (see Figure 3.3).
The emphasis here is that the contents of the social sciences are used to build the structure of Social Studies.
This is done with almost a total disregard for the personal social values of Social Studies and its democratizing and humanising roles.
GEOGRAPHY ECONOMICS HISTORY SOCIAL STUDIES POLITICAL SOCIOLOGY SCIENCE ANTHROPOLOGY Figure 3.3: Social Studies as Social Science-an Overlap of other Disciplines Walker (1970) remarked that this nature of Social Studies attempts to freeze subject matter lines and causes knowledge to be explored within the confines of a structure of separateness which he said further increases the fragmentation of knowledge.
28  From the foregoing, it could be deduced that the nature of Social Studies essentially presents the subject as one which puts both the teacher and the learners in positions where they have to learn how to use effective decision making processes for tackling the various problems confronting human beings in the society so that appropriate solutions can be proffered in order to ensure their survival.
3.3: The Scope of Social Studies The fact that Social Studies is a discipline that studies the totality of human existence makes its scope or what you can simply call level of coverage quite wide.
The variations in the definitions of the subject as discussed in Section 3.1 of this Unit have however been discovered to influence what practitioners accept as the scope of the subject.
Likewise, the nature of the subject equally influences the scope of the subject.
Hence, in a situation where you and I both agree that a good definition of the subject must necessarily emphasise problem solving and detailed understanding of the outcomes of human interactions with the environment, its scope must reflect integration of relevant disciplines and concepts for learning purposes.
Specifically, Social Studies content areas should: i.
Be problem solving oriented.
ii.
Not be limited to one or even just a few academic areas (that is, it must be multi- disciplinary).
iii.
Be concerned with how to examine and acquire positive democratic values.
iv.
Be concerned with how to examine and develop attitudes.
v. Be eclectic, that is, concerned with multi-faceted problems of huma beings which come in different forms and from time to time.
vi.
Recognise the importance of immediate and wider environment in term of culture and value systems.
vii.
Involve learners in the analysis of real life problematic situations so that they could help contribute their best to the advancement of their immediate and wider environment.
viii.
Be holistic, that is, provide opportunity for humans to be studied in an integrated manner- studying human behavior in its entirety.
In summary, a good Social Studies programme should have a scope which allows the learners to study people as they interact with one and the other, as they meet their needs for survival and comfort, and work out problems of group living within their environment.
3.4: Self Assessment 29  1.
State any two definitions that can be used to effectively describe the discipline of Social Studies.
2.
Describe the nature of Social Studies.
3.
What should be the scope of a good Social Studies programme?
4.0: CONCLUSION This Unit has presented to you the various misconceptions about the meaning of Social Studies.
It has advanced reasons why some of these definitions cannot be accepted for effective teaching of the subject.
From the presentations, the importance of having a clear perception of the nature and scope of the subject was emphasized and one could conclude that the kind of definition embraced by a teacher of Social Studies is capable of influencing the nature of the subject and the content area to be focused on in the classroom.
For effective teaching of the subject, it should be seen as one that is concerned with the continuing improvement of the society through the application of social criticisms and ethical decisions on social issues.
5.0: SUMMARY My dear reader, you will agree with me that this Unit has provided you with an ample opportunity to clarify your thoughts about what a good Social Studies definition should contain.
You have also been familiarized with the nature and scope of the subject.
The relationship among the definition, nature and scope of the subject has been discussed.
It is therefore expected that you will become a rebranded teacher of Social Studies when it comes to the issue of defining the subject and building content areas for your lesson.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Attempt a concise and good definition of Social Studies.
b.
The nature of Social Studies is capable of influencing its scope.
Discuss 7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adaralegbe, A.
(1980) The Nigerian Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect.
In NERC (1980) Social Studies: Teaching Issues and Problems.
Benin: Ethiope Pub.
Co. Adeyoyin, F.A.
(1991) Towards a theory of Social Studies.
Nigerian Social Studies Journal 2 (1) 13-23 Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Principles and Concepts of Social Studies Lagos: A Triad Associates 30  Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education Lagos: A Triad Associates Mansaray, A.
(1984) The nature and scope of Social Studies A Monograph Mesieobi, K.A.
(1993).
Teaching values in Social Studies: A contradiction of conceived and operative values in Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Social Studies Review 2(1) June NCSS (1992) Testing and evaluation of Social Studies students Social Education 55 (5) 284-293 NERC (1973) Guidlines on primary school curriculum Lagos: NERC Ogundare, S. F. (2000) Foundations of Social Studies Ibadan: Adesesan Press Ogunsanya, M. (1984) Introduction to Methodologies of Social Studies Ibadan: University Press Quartey (1984) Social Studies Methodology for Teachers Lagos: Refield Pub.
Walker, R. (1970) Rationale for elementary Social Studies In R.H. Jones (1970) Social Studies Education for Young Americans Iowa: Kendal/Hunt Pub.
Co. Wesley, E. (1950) Teaching Social Studies in high schools Boston: D.C. Heath & Co. 31  MODULE 1: FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL STUDIES UNIT 2: PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0Main Content 3.1: Nigeria’s National Philosophy of Education 3.2: Philosophical Background of Social Studies 3.3: Philosophical Background of Social Studies in relation to Nigeria’s National Policy on Education 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you learnt about the meaning, scope and nature of Social Studies.
This is very essential for a better understanding of the philosophical background of the subject which happens to be the focus of this unit.
You will therefore have an opportunity to learn about Nigeria’s national philosophy of education and its relevance to the choice of Social Studies as a core subject of offering at the basic level of the nation’s educational system.
This is based on the principle that the relevance of a school subject is determined by the educational philosophy of a country.
2.0: Objectives By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: i.
Describe Nigeria’s national philosophy of education.
ii.
Describe the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject.
iii.
Highlight the relationship between the philosophical background of Social Studies and Nigeria’s National Policy on Education.
32  3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Nigeria’s Philosophy of Education The philosophy of Nigerian education which is vividly stated in the country’s national Policy on Education (2004) is based on the provision of an education that emphasizes the integration of the individual into a sound and effective citizen with equal educational opportunities for all.
Specifically, the main objectives preached by this kind of philosophy are aimed at building of: i. a free and democratic society; ii.
a just and egalitarian society; iii.
a united, strong and self-reliant nation; iv.
a great and dynamic economy; and v. a land of bright and full opportunities for all citizens.
The National Policy on Education is a tool for achieving the country’s national objectives.
3.2: Philosophical Background of Social Studies The fact that numerous subjects exist in the school curriculum for learners to pick from for offering implies that so many of them are capable of facilitating the realization of the nation’s philosophy of education.
But what is more important is how capable is a nation’s educational system in organizing and reorganizing its school curricula to achieve desirable goals and aspirations.
This is particularly so when it is recalled that the type of education legacy Nigerians enjoyed at immediate post independence was not one that could assure them smooth transition devoid of social ills.
Hence, school subjects with peculiar features that could help train the young ones in a way that avail them opportunities to use the content of what they were being taught to generate interest, and acquire experiences needed for coping with the noticed problems characterizing the transition from colonial rule to independence.
Educationists at this time realized the importance of the school as an agency of the community and the society at large which can be used to develop effective living in the society.
Social Studies was therefore perceived as one of those subjects that could be charged with this responsibility.
The subject was seen as one with a primary function of humanizing the learners based on the philosophy of the society they belong to.
A critical look at the curriculum of the subject called Social Studies at this time did not however reflect a subject would easily facilitate greater chances of coping with these societal problems.
Hence, they explored these inadequacies and worked towards 33  addressing them.
This attempt formed the nucleus of the philosophy of Social Studies as it presently exists in the country, although the dynamic nature of the subject have gone a long way to influence such philosophy.
Consequently, the philosophical background of the subject became more influenced by the concept of integration which emphasizes the comprehensive body of knowledge, and inter-relationship of knowledge.
This has over time encouraged the construction of syllabuses and curricula which introduce learners to the interrelated aspects of the basic forms of knowledge and each of the several disciplines but in an integrated manner.
This background allows the subject to be perceived as the study of human beings, their interactions with their physical and social environments in the past, present and emerging future.
Human relationships are studied as learners explore ways of developing their personalities and art of living at home, on communities and in other lands.
Emphasis is thus given to relationships among people, relationships between people and institutions, relationships between people and goods and services, and relationships between people and the earth.
One could conclude using Ogundare’s position (2000) that the need to educate the child firmly in the rudiments of his or her culture thereby re-establishing the role of education as a socio-political agent through its emphasis on citizenship led to the introduction of Social Studies in schools.
3.3: Relationship between the Philosophical Background of Social Studies and Nigeria’s National Policy on Education As earlier highlighted in section 3.1 of this Unit, the philosophy of Nigeria’s education is premised on specific objectives.
In order to effectively realize these objectives the National Policy on Education (2004) Section 1(2) emphasizes that the quality of instruction at all levels of our educational system should be oriented towards the inculcating of some values which include: i.
Respect for the worth and dignity of individuals.
ii.
Faith in man’s ability to make rational decisions.
iii.Moral and spiritual values in interpersonal and human relations.
iv.
Shared responsibility for the common good of society.
v. Respect for the dignity of labour.
vi.
Promotion of the emotional physical and psychological health of all children.
34  The recognition of these values in the National Policy on Education as being essential in the realization of our national goals implies that a subject like Social Studies which incidentally is a value-oriented or affective-based subject is capable of playing a key role in the inculcation of these values.
This is not saying that Social Studies can single-handedly achieve this task.
Other subjects are capable of equally assisting.
By their differences in nature, content and methodology, each subject has its own basic functions as well as peripheral responsibilities.
If we critically look at the national objectives of education in Nigeria and those values they should promote, it could be noted that words and phrases such as “national consciousness”, “national unity”, “attitudes”, “skills” and “competencies” etc.
are quite prominent.
The focus of Social Studies and its philosophical background which emphasizes human interaction among themselves, societal values and problems as well as their environment, can make the subject have a comparative advantage of being very suitable for the accomplishment of such objectives relating to national consciousness, national unity, and inculcation of right type of societal values over other existing bodies of knowledge.
Social Studies can therefore be taken as one discipline which effective teaching is capable of promoting those values that the quality of instruction should emphasize as stated in the National Policy on Education.
For example, teaching to achieve a Social Studies objective like developing a capacity to learn and to acquire certain basic skills can equally facilitate opportunity to train a group of youths that can contribute to the building of a united, strong and self reliant nation, which incidentally is part of nation’s philosophy of education.
Again in an attempt to teach to promote national identity and integration within Nigeria’s varied historical origins and inter-related cultures, a just and egalitarian society can be built which is one of the country’ national objectives emphasized by the National Policy on Education.
This is quite possible because the Social Studies teacher handling this topic will normally be expected to emphasize and inculcate the values of respect for the worth and dignity of the individuals in their learners.
The desire to relate the philosophical background of Social Studies to the National Policy on Education could therefore be described as one that is based on the recognition of the importance of establishing a link between the education system of a given country and the fulfillment of the needs of the society.
The Nigeria National Policy on Education can be regarded as a by-product of the 1969 national Curriculum Conference which recognized among other things, the importance of Social Studies as a subject capable of being used to promote citizenship, knowledge about one’s community, nation and commitment to democratic rule.
It cannot therefore be out of place to conclude that the realization of Nigeria’s philosophy of education can partially be made possible with the help of Social Studies as value-laden discipline.
The subject can thus be seen as one that facilitate the 35  inculcation of social, political, civic and value education which are all embedded in the country’s national objectives of education.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise i.
Identify and list out those objectives that can be used to describe the nation’s philosophical background.
ii.
Attempt a description of the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject.
iii.What values do the National Policy on Education recommend for promotion through our quality of instruction as Social Studies teachers?
4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion on the philosophical background of Social Studies presented in this Unit is reflection in the belief of the dynamic nature of the subject which without doubt is a major influencing factor in its philosophy.
Hence, the recognition of some inadequacies in the old curriculum of Social Studies which could not facilitate the development of relevant concepts, positive attitudes and critical thinking abilities needed for living in the modern society engendered a review.
This eventually brought about the integrated Social Studies as we presently offer it on the school curriculum.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have interacted with the content areas that focus on Nigeria’s philosophy of education, the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject and the relationship between such background and the country’s National Policy on Education.
The Unit has presented those factors which influenced the development of Social Studies as a value-laden subject and a derivative of modern philosophy of education which emphasizes the integration and inter-relationship of knowledge.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the relationship between the philosophical background of Social Studies and the realisation if Nigeria’s national objectives of education as contained in the National Policy Education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies.
Lagos: A-Triad Associates Ogundare, S.F.
(2000) Foundations of Social Studies: A handbook of Concepts and Principles of Social Studies.
Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press.
Omosehin, F. (1996) A Handbook on Foundations of Social Studies.
Lagos: OACE Pub.
36  UNIT 3: RELEVANCE OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: The Goals of Social Studies Programme 3.2: The Values of Social Studies 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learnt about the philosophical background of Social Studies and its relevance to the realization of Nigeria’s National Policy on Education.
This unit further presents you an opportunity to understand the general goals of learning Social Studies as a subject.
This is informed by the recognition of the subject as a tool for partial solution to human social problems as well as for national development.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the goals of teaching and learning Social Studies as a school subject.
2.
Categorise these goals under the four general motifs of teaching the subject.
3.
Highlight the values of learning Social Studies.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: The Goals of Social Studies Programme Generally, Lawton and Dufour (1976) observed that the goal of Social Studies should be the development in children a critical and balanced awareness.
This is needed for the development of positive socio-civic attitudes and values in the learners, thereby reducing the chances of indoctrination in them through the teaching-learning process.
Ogundare (1988) supported this position by remarking that the modern Social Studies programme emphasizes the promotion of how to think over what to think.
37  This is why Lawal & Oyeleye (2003) observed that the main goal of a Social Studies Programme should be to help students develop the ability to make decisions so that they can resolve personal problems and contribute to policy making processes.
They went on further to argue that Social Studies is expected to help students to find ways of acquiring skills and values needed for dealing with and shaping the future, through the process of developing a positive perspective that will allow construction, planning, creativity and innovation.
Specifically, the goals would normally include: i.
Developing well informed and responsible citizen; ii.
Developing children who would possess the ability to deal with questions of what ought to be?
And what can I do about it?
iii.Building attitudes and values that are consistent with society’s desires; iv.Developing in learners skills such as those involved in reporting, acquiring and classifying data (reflective thinking/inquiring skills); v. Developing the appreciation and understanding of learners cultural heritage and its role in contemporary society; vi.Acquisition of academic knowledge and skills related to the study of the human actions, and their consequences as they live individually as well as in groups and societies, in a variety of places and timelines; vii.
Using the Social Sciences, humanities and sciences to describe social phenomena.
Kissock (1981) had explained that the need for establishing Social Studies programmes arises when a society determines that it requires formal instruction to develop a common set of understanding, skills, attitudes, and actions concerning human relationship among members of the society.
So the introduction of the discipline at any level in any nation is basically aimed at producing citizens with skills, competencies, moral values and reasoned judgements required to effectively live, interact, interrelate and contribute positively to the economic, social, political and cultural development of the Nigerian society in particular and the world in general.
Social Studies is also a discipline aimed at providing humanistic education.
By this, it facilitates in learners, an opportunity to better comprehend the around them.
The subject should help the learners to understand their experiences and find meaning in life.
The discipline equally prepares the learners for social responsibility in order that they may perpetuate and enhance their society through the knowledge of the heritage of the society to which they belong, its dominant social values and political economic life.
Through social Studies, the learners are assisted to participate effectively in the dynamic life of their society.
38  Social Studies as a subject of offering in schools avail learners that opportunity to acquire knowledge of the potentials and limitations of their environment and thus become able to appreciate the contributions they can make towards improving their society.
It is aimed at providing learners with an awareness of possible futures and the roles they might play in developing these futures.
A good Social Studies programme is aimed at helping learners to acquire analytical ideas and problem solving skills.
Through the subject, learners should be able acquire basic skills not only those of listening, speaking, reading and writing as well as calculation, but also those associated with the ability to observe, analyse critically and make reasoned judgement.
The subject is expected to develop students’ abilities to deal with questions of “what ought to be ?” and “what can I do about it?” (Wright, 1980).
It is therefore not out of place to conclude here that Social Studies is a discipline established with sole aim of helping the learners to acquire social, intellectual, and psychomotor skills for the purpose of making them independent learners and functional human citizens of their country.
3.2: Categorising the Goals under Four General Motifs of Teaching the Subject Ogundare (2000) quoting the NCSS (1981), highlighted four general motifs under which the goals of Social Studies can be categorized.
These are: i.
Concern with Self-Esteem; ii.
Concern for Right and Wrong; iii.
Concern for others; and iv.
Concern for the World.
3.2.1: Concern with self-esteem: This is related with the development of self-esteem and a strong sense of identity.
Some of the goals of Social Studies programme that can be classified under this concern are: a.
Acquisition of appropriate skills and attitudes to be a lifelong learner; b.
Ability to communicate effectively; c. Competence in conducting activities necessary for research, critical thinking and problem solving; d. Ability to recognize and capitalize upon relationship between school subjects as well as integrate experiences with academic knowledge; e. Awareness and use of primary sources.
3.2.2: Concern for right and wrong: This is related to the development of ethics and the goals that can be put under this include: a.
Commitment to democratic values and ethical standards; b.
Ability critically and to analyse one’s thought and actions.
3.3.3: Concern for others: This is related to the development of group and other- centredness.
The goals categorized under this include: 39  a.
Ability to function effectively as a member of variety of political, economic and social groups such as the family, market place and the community; b.
A sense of efficacy in analyzing and participating in contemporary affairs, public matters, and global issues; and c. Understanding of the significance of one’s own past life in relation to current social issues.
3.3.4: Concern for the world: This emphasizes the development of a global perspective of issues.
The goals of Social Studies that can be categorized under this concern include: a.
Respect for cultural diversity, knowledge of diverse cultures, and their inter-cultural competences; b.
Understanding of and appreciation of the world and its characteristic features; c. Knowledge of temporal and spatial relationships and of the world as a dynamic system.
Social Studies programme as a subject in African schools is one discipline that should make every school-going child to acquire relevant knowledge, develop the skills, attitudes and values that can facilitate his/her ability to identify his/her personality as an African with a rich heritage, worth of pride.
3.3: The Values of Social Studies The values of learning Social Studies are quite related to the goals and objectives of teaching the subject at different levels of a nation’s education system.
The nature of Social Studies as a problem solving discipline makes it very essential for the development of any nation, especially if one accepts that no society is static.
Hence, exposing learners to the subject using appropriate value-oriented strategies and techniques is therefore capable of promoting in them the ethics of good and responsible citizenship.
In this case, learners are more likely to commit themselves to active citizenship particularly if they are effectively taught some concepts that are related and fall within the context of human problems of survival.
Cognition of knowledge which is part of Social Studies is also capable of assisting the learners assess the implications of conditions within their immediate social environments- face- to-face relationships such as friendship, family, school and religious for making and implementing decisions to achieve their personal goals.
Effective teaching of Social Studies also assists learners greatly in the appreciation of the contributions of individuals and groups to ever changing cultural heritage.
This could eventually make them develop the desire to foster attitudes that can facilitate the reduction of tension and friction among groups and encourage cooperation among individuals as well as among groups and nations.
Learning Social Studies is a source of inspiration in children to love their country and appreciate their natural heritage.
For instance, the emphasis in the subject for the teacher to 40  expose the learners to national symbols and heroes/heroines can effectively facilitate the desire in them to show more appreciation for their country.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Highlight the goals which any good Social Studies programme should aspire to achieve in any educational system.
2.
What are the general motifs that can be used to categorise the goals of Social Studies?
4.0: CONCLUSION The foregoing presents a position that effective teaching of any Social Studies programme demands a detailed understanding of its goals.
It is by this that the subject will not be taught in ways that will make learners perceive and believe that the social phenomena they are studying are essentially disconnected from the conditions of their lives and the goals they seek in life.
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, there is no doubt that your knowledge of the goals for teaching and learning Social Studies at any level of educational system.
The general motifs which support the goals have also been highlighted, with concerted efforts made to categorise them under these motifs.
It is therefore expected that this opportunity will make you prepare better for the teaching of the subject as a value-laden subject.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
Convince a group of Social Studies teachers in training that teaching and learning the subject at any level of our educational system is of ultimate importance.
1b.
How will you categorise the goals of teaching Social Studies using the four general motifs?
7.0: REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Kissock, C. (1981) Curriculum Planning for Social Studies Teaching.
New York: John Wiley.
Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) Foundations and Principles of Social Studies.
Lagos: A-Triad Associates Lawton, D, & Dufour, B.
(1976) New Social Studies.
London: Heinemann Ogundare, S.F.
(2000) Foundations of Social Studies: A handbook of Concepts and Principles of Social Studies.
Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press.
Ogundare, S. F. (1988) Curriculum development: a description of National Curriculum for Primary Social Studies in Nigeria.
Educational Studies 14(1) 45-50.
Omosehin, F. (1996) A Handbook on Foundations of Social Studies.
Lagos: OACE Pub.
Wright, I.
(1980) Elementary Social Studies: A Practical Approach to Teaching and Learning.
Toronto: Methuen Publications.
41  UNIT 4: OVERVIEW OF THE NEW 9-YEAR BASIC EDUCATION SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: What is New in the structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum?
3.2: The New Content Areas in the Social Studies Curriculum 3.3: Handling Difficult Concepts in the New Social Studies Curriculum 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION As teachers in training, it is mandatory that you are conversant with the structure, contents, the dynamics and instructional delivery demands of your subject curriculum which in this case is Social Studies.
This Unit therefore provides a chance for you to understand the recent developments and transformation which the Social Studies curriculum at the Basic Education level has undergone and the what is expected of you either as pre-service or in-service teachers.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe what is new in the structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum.
2.
Identify the new content areas in the Social Studies Curriculum 3.
Identify difficult concepts in the new Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum 4.
Describe how best such difficult concepts can be handled by Social Studies teachers.
42  3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: What is New in the Structure of the 9-Year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum?
In 1999, the Federal Government introduced the Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme and the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) was mandated to develop curricula for use at all levels of these educational system in Nigeria.
In line with the Federal Government mandate for a 9-year Basic Education Programme, the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) restructured and realigned the existing Primary and Junior Secondary School Curricula to meet the government targets of ensuring unfettered access and equity to education that will lead to the realization of the National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategies (NEEDS) objectives and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
At both the primary and junior secondary school levels which now form Nigeria’s Basic Education level, a number of subjects of which Social Studies is one, have been recommended for offering.
A new 9—year Basic Education Curriculum which prescribes what is to be learnt in each of these subjects was developed by the Nigeria Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) in 2007.
However, before the development of this curriculum, the curricula used for teaching Social Studies at both the primary and junior secondary school levels were found not to be in full tune with the philosophy and objectives of the subject.
This was particularly so with the junior secondary school Social Studies curriculum.
For instance, prior to the development of the 9-year Basic Education Curriculum, there existed the Primary Curriculum Modules designed and produced by the then National Primary Education Commission which were used throughout all the primary schools in the country.
The Primary Curriculum Modules for Social Studies just like others, was programmed schemes of work based on the contents of earlier developed National Curriculum in Social Studies, produced by the then Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC).
An analysis of these modules however, revealed that they are not likely to be adequate enough to help the poor, the socially marginalized and vulnerable groups effectively develop their full capacities and potentials.
This is particularly important now that the Federal Government is focusing on 43  the use of education to promote value re-orientation, poverty eradication, job/employment generation, wealth creation and general capacity building.
The format of the curriculum of Social Studies, at the junior secondary level is also presented in thematic form unlike the old one that adopted the topical approach.
The thematic approach adopted by the new curriculum is reflected in the alteration of the structure of presenting its contents.
The structure presents very specific and clear components which are effectively linked with one and the other.
These components are theme, corresponding topics, performance objectives, content, activities (teacher and students) teaching and learning materials and evaluation guide.
Hence, the new curriculum is structurally a clear departure from the existing one.
Unlike the existing one which is more of modular, the new one is thematic in nature.
There is now a shift from the modular structure to a thematic arrangement.
The new structure provides for issues to be studied in themes and sub-themes, but in spiral nature, that is, studying the same concept from its simplest level to its most complex level as the learner progresses in his/her educational pursuit.
Another uniqueness of the curriculum structure is that, opportunity is created for practising teachers to be conscious of the desire to promote the infusion of emerging issues right from the performance objectives level all through to evaluation guide column.
The advantage of this is that while planning a lesson, the teacher is placed in a vantage position to ensure that there is a strong link between what is to be taught and what behavioural change is expected from the learners.
There is that deliberate effort to promote total infusion of emerging issues.
Practising Social Studies teachers at the primary school level are therefore expected to note this while interacting with the curricula.
3.2: The New Content Areas of Social Studies in the New 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum The new structural arrangement of the curriculum has subsequently influenced the enrichment of the content areas of the curriculum of Social Studies at both the primary and junior secondary school levels.
There is tremendous enrichment in the content areas of the curricula.
There are a lot of new topics reflecting the current thinking of using education to 44  promote the social wellbeing of its recipients and contribute to the realization of the Millennium Development Goals.
The content areas drawn out of the existing Social Studies Curriculum have been structured in such a way that the students can be re-oriented to become more politically tolerant and interested in the democratic governance of the nation and her citizens.
The new Upper Basic Education level Social Studies Curriculum as a document is a complete departure from the old Junior Secondary Social Studies Curriculum.
This is reflected in the inclusion of a lot of new topics and total restructuring of the curriculum.
The new Social Studies curriculum presents its content in a concentric pattern which allows topics to be studied from simple to complex.
This is unlike the old curriculum where topics were presented in more global form and with broad topics, and uncoordinated format.
In the new structure of the upper Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum, teachers are expected to infuse some emerging issues and the foundation of which the students would have had at the primary school level.
These emerging issues include: (cid:1) Peace education: an education that provides opportunity for the teacher to “incite” the students into investigating deep-rooted causes of violence and suggesting tentative solutions for bringing about genuine peace.
(cid:1) HIV/AIDS education: which is aimed at educating learners on the various misconceptions about the disease as well as promoting healthy sexual behaviours and better care for people living with HIV/AIDS?
(cid:1) Family life education: This is aimed at promoting good quality of life within the family.
The new content areas of the primary section of the Social Studies component of the 9-year Basic Education Curriculum are presented as follows: (cid:1) Citizenship - Trafficking in dangerous drugs and the -Community law - Leadership  Health Issues - Government main services - Drug Issues - National Honorary Award - HIV/AIDS - Nationalism and Patriotism - Drug Abuse  Social Issues and Problems  Agriculture Technology 45  (cid:1) Mechanized Agriculture  Agencies that Promote social (cid:1) People and Environment wellbeing of Youths - Pollution The new content areas of the Social Studies Curriculum for junior secondary school, as informed by some emerging issues are presented as follows:  Introduction to Social Studies o Meaning, Scope and objectives of Social Studies  People and their Environment o Social Groups o Group Behaviour  Social Issues and Problems o Drug Trafficking o Poverty o Corruption o Cultism  Communication o Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  Health Issues o Drug Abuse o Water Supply  Social Values o Trafficking in Children and Women o Harmful Traditional Practices o Population o Family Life  Peace and Conflicts o Peace o Conflicts o National security  National Economy o Sectors o Nature of Nigerian Economy o Economy reform Measures  World Issues o Global and International Cooperation Unlike the old curricula, which are sketchy and quite abstract, the new thematic curricula, content-wise, are very informative and direct to the issues.
The way the content components of the curricula have been developed will guide you as practising teachers to build on the available background of the pupils and the information provided.
46  In the new curricula, the use of variety of concrete objects, community, human as well as material resources are recommended.
In these curricula, the prescribed evaluation guide component is closely related to the recommended performance objectives.
This is another new and very unique component that is capable of reminding the teacher of the need to be fully prepared before teaching his or her pupils.
These evaluation guides are also structured to assess and promote learning at all three domains of learning; cognitive, affective and psychomotor.
The content enrichment in the new Primary Social Studies Curriculum now makes it possible for teachers to interact with their pupils more effectively.
Content areas that hitherto existed in the old curriculum have been effectively expanded to make learning more meaningful.
For instance, while learning about “Culture” pupils at this level can now learn about issues such as “pre-marital sexual relationship and its dangers”.
However, the recognition of the prevailing problem of lack of patriotism, loyalty, commitment and love for one nation, despite the existence of these subjects that should help address these problems, among the Nigerian citizenry influenced government’s desire to introduce this curriculum.
The new curriculum reflects depth, appropriateness and interrelatedness in contents.
The curriculum also contains emerging issues that cover value orientation, peace and dialogue, human rights education, family life and HIV/AIDS education.
The introduction of the curricula is going to serve a very unique purpose in Nigeria where it is effectively taught.
This is because it will facilitate in the learners, the development of skills needed for making decisions about public issues and participating in public affairs.
3.3: Strategies for Handling Difficult Concepts in the New Basic Education Curricula NERDC (2008) observes that past and current interactions with practising and pre-service teachers at the primary school level reveals that there are content areas which quite a large number of them find difficult to teach while in the classroom.
On inquiry it was discovered that this problem is based either on the level of professional preparation or their non- 47  readiness for the introduction of unfamiliar new content areas by the teachers who are sometimes less resourceful.
Some of the concepts which primary school Social Studies teachers have been finding difficult to teach over time include: (cid:1) International Conflicts (cid:1) Group Conflicts (cid:1) Agricultural Technology (cid:1) People and Environment (cid:1) Gender Discrimination (cid:1) Values (cid:1) HIV/AIDS (cid:1) Drug Abuse (cid:1) Agencies that Promote Social wellbeing of Youths Each of these concepts can be better handled where the primary school Social Studies teacher decides to increase his/her level of resourcefulness and readiness to search for new and relevant knowledge, experiences and examples that will make the pupils learn more meaningfully.
Let us see how some of these concepts can be handled in the Social Studies class at the primary school level.
(a) Drug abuse: - The relative newness of this theme in the curriculum is a reflection of the dynamism of the subject.
The misconception usually haboured by a large number of teachers on the concepts of drug and drug abuse has to a great extent affected the way the concepts are handled.
These teachers are not too clear of when a drug becomes abused and/or what exactly are drugs.
For example, some of them find it difficult to believe that self-medication is drug abuse.
The teacher needs a lot of value clarification exercises to convince their pupils on the dangers of drug abuse.
The effect of this approach is that, they can get back home and also convince their parents who usually the ones are leading them into this abuse of drugs (a) People and environment:- Practising teachers’ perception of the theme needs to be extended beyond environmental sanitation.
The Social Studies teacher will need to understand that the concepts within the theme go beyond sanitation.
They need to emphasise other human activities that affect the quality of our 48  environment.
This is in terms of industrial processes, careless use of natural resources, and the effects of these on the environment.
They should also be ready to source for information on ways of promoting wise use of our natural resources and strategies for developing relevant positive attitudes and skills in the pupils as they interact with their environment.
Suggestions on the strategies for handling other difficult concepts that are more specific are contained in the next few paragraphs.
(a) Gender discrimination: - The relative newness of the theme “Gender discrimination“ and the non-availability of abundant locally relevant textbooks has made this theme and its corresponding concepts difficult to handle by teachers.
However, Primary Social Studies teachers can better handle this theme, where they take gender issues as those relating to how people are perceived and expected to think and act as men, women, boys or girls because of the way society is organised, not because of their sex or biological differences.
Teachers should be ready through their teaching to de-emphasize discrimination based on a person’s sex and emphasize fairness and justice in the distribution of benefits and responsibilities between men and women.
(b) HIV/AIDS: The myths surrounding the concept and phenomenon of HIV/AIDS particularly the causes and treatment of the disease seem to make it difficult to handle by the teacher and easily learnt by the pupils.
This is particularly so, when it is remembered that majority of the teachers do not have any prior training or orientation on how to teach the concept.
Teachers can however, handle this more effectively if they are ready to source for relevant published materials, books, magazines, pamphlets, flyers, films, poster and charts that will provide rich information which they can process and use for teaching-learning purposes.
It is equally important to emphasise here, the use of invited guest speakers from health-related institutions and non-governmental or community-based organizations working to promote healthy living.
49  (c) Defending democracy/social justice (Pressure groups): These concepts are very important ones that should be skillfully taught by the teacher.
This will be easier done, where the teacher creates avenue for the pupils to develop interest in politics and learn to analyse public policy decisions.
This will make them develop in the learners positive attitudes needed for showing concern and commitment to government activities and programmes that might not be too beneficial to the populace.
The Social Studies teacher would also be expected to create and maintain a classroom climate that is conclusive to free and open exchange of opinions about public issues and other controversial topics.
This is a foundation that will later make these pupils become reliable members of pressure groups in the society.
(d) Values: This is a concept most Social Studies teachers generally find difficult to teach and evaluate.
This is probably based on the traditional practice which reflects the fact that teachers are usually more confident teaching for knowledge acquisition rather than for all round cognitive, affective and psychomotor learning.
Teachers of Primary Social Studies can however handle this concept better if they equip themselves with instructional techniques that promote value acquisition.
Some of the techniques include values clarification, use of value sheets, raising of value-laden questions and keeping of anecdotal records on the pupils.
In addition, the teacher handling the concept of values must be ready to serve as good role model for the learners.
At the Junior Secondary level, Social Studies teachers are equally likely to find it difficult to handle some concepts like: (cid:1) Meaning, Scope and Nature of Social Studies (cid:1) Objectives and Importance of Social Studies (cid:1) National Unity and Integration (cid:1) Group Behaviour (cid:1) Trafficking in Children and Women 50  (cid:1) Poverty (cid:1) Economic Reforms – Privatization, Commercialization and Deregulation (cid:1) Global Cooperation (cid:1) Core Messages of Family Life Education The Social Studies teacher at this level should be able to handle these difficult concepts better where he or she is conversant with the goals and objectives of the subject.
This is to reduce the chances of delivering the concepts purely for knowledge acquisition sake.
Examples of how some of these concepts can be handled by the teacher of Social Studies include: (a) The Meaning, Scope, Nature, and Objectives of Social Studies: These are concepts which most practising teachers of the subject have found very difficult to teach.
They usually allow their professional biases in terms of their disciplines as Geographers, Historians and Economists etc to influence what they conceive as Social Studies.
The subject can be better explained to the students as one which allows them to study the relationship between humans and their environment with the purpose of getting them to acquire the knowledge, values, attitudes and skills necessary for solving the various problems confronting human survival.
This perception of the subject should influence the teachers’ organization of his/her and the delivery of such content using appropriate instructional strategies and resource materials.
(b) Economic Reforms: This is a new concept in the Junior Secondary curriculum that could be difficult to handle for the teachers particularly those without a Social Science education background.
Information on related concepts such as privatization, commercialization, deregulation and national economy must be sourced by the teacher from relevant economic institutions and media outfits in the community.
This will include the state and federal ministries of finance, the legislative houses (state and federal), banks and other national agencies such as the National Economic Intelligence Group.
51  The teacher should equally be ready to relate these concepts to the day to day activities of the students and the community/society to which they belong.
This will make them more real as well as make their learning more permanent.
Social Studies teachers should not also hesitate to consult colleagues who are more knowledgeable in those areas, while not forgetting the use of relevant invited guests to give talks on the concepts.
Effective teaching and learning of Social Studies, at both the primary and junior secondary school levels requires that some basic skills must be developed in the learners.
This should be in addition to some essential values and attitudes needed by the learners for effective interaction with various shades of human beings.
Some of these skills include: (cid:1)Identification (cid:1) Reporting (cid:1)Interference Drawing (cid:1) Listening (cid:1)Critical Thinking (cid:1) Narration (cid:1)Effective (cid:1) Manipulative Communication (cid:1) Discovery (cid:1)Demonstration (cid:1) Information Processing (cid:1) Social Skills (cid:1) Participation (cid:1) Decision Making (cid:1) Interpersonal (cid:1) Observation (cid:1) Creativity (cid:1) Team Building The affective nature of the Social Studies demands that teachers must strive to use their content and instructional delivery strategies to promote learning environment where learners can gain knowledge, process information, develop these identified skills, examine and clarify values and participate in decisions and actions about their quality of life and survival.
Some of the values that could be developed here will include those of tolerance, commitment, loyalty, patriotism, respect etc.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Highlight the features of the structure of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum.
2.
List some of the new content areas of the new Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum.
52  3.
Select any five concepts from the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum and describe how you will handle them in your class.
4.0: CONCLUSION The teaching and learning of Social Studies, at the lower and middle basic levels of our educational system is a serious exercise that requires careful planning and skills from the teacher.
Social Studies teachers are therefore expected to fully understand the structure and content of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum so that it can be effectively used for promoting affective based learning.
The difficult concepts that have been identified in the new curriculum will be better handled where the teacher prepares himself/herself very well for exploring a variety of primary and secondary literature sources.
53  5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have been intimated with the characteristics features of the new 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum in terms of structure, content areas and new concepts.
Attempt has also been made to identify some of the concepts which quite a number of practising Social Studies teachers might find difficult to handle while interacting with the new curriculum which structurally is a clear cut departure from the old ones.
It is therefore hoped that you will lay your hands on a copy of this new curriculum and attempt to practically identify some of these features and unique characteristics of the curriculum.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT The 9-year Basic Education Social Studies Curriculum is clear cut departure from the old ones in terms of structure and content areas.
Discuss.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS ASESP (1994) Social Studies Curriculum and Teaching Resource Book for Africa Nairobi: ASESP Secretariat Kissock, C. (1991) Curriculum Planning for Social Studies Teaching.
New York: John Wiley & Sons Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye A. S. (2003)Foundation of Social Studies Lagos: A Triads Associate Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye A. S. (2004)A Pedagogy Handbook for Social Studies Pre-service and In-service Teachers Lagos: Turbans Pub.
Lawal, M. B.
(1999) Critique Report on the Nigerian primary and junior secondary Social Studies curricula Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Workshop on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensitivity Mansaray, A.
(1999) The Nigerian Social Studies curriculum: A critique Paper Presented at the NERDC/UNICEF Workshop on Basic Education Curriculum on Gender Sensitivity NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook for the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Junior Secondary Level) Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2008) Teachers Handbook for the 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum (Primary School Level) Abuja: NERDC NERDC, (2007) 9-Year Basic Education Curriculum Social Studies for Junior Secondary 1 – 3 Abuja: NERDC 54  MODULE TWO: METHODS, TECHNIQUES AND STRATEGIES OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1: Methods, Techniques and Strategies of Teaching Distinguished Unit 2: Techniques of Teaching Social Studies I Unit 3: Techniques of Teaching Social Studies II Unit 4: Planning for Effective Teaching of Social Studies UNIT 1: METHODS, TECHNIQUES AND STRATEGIES OF TEACHING DISTINGUISHED CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Methods as it Applies to Teaching and Learning 3.2: Meaning of Techniques as it Applies to Teaching and Learning 3.3: Meaning of Strategies as it Applies to Teaching and Learning 3.4: Relationship among Methods, Techniques and Strategies 3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION A quick recall of what operates in our classrooms will reveal one fact which is the seeming confusion by teachers in the use of the terms methods, techniques and strategies of teaching.
These three concepts have often been loosely considered as means of delivering instruction by most teachers.
This Unit will therefore avail you an opportunity to better understand what each of them is, how they are related and how can each be applied in a typical Social Studies classroom.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: i.
Describe the concept of methods as it applies to teaching and learning.
ii.
Describe the concept of techniques as it applies to teaching and learning.
iii.
Describe the concept of strategies as it applies to teaching and learning.
55  iv.
Establish the relationship among methods, techniques and strategies in teaching-learning situations.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Meaning of Methods Muyanda-Mutebi & Yiga-Matovu (1994) observed that that the term method or method of teaching is often used as a general term to cover everything a teacher does.
This they believe cannot be taken as a one best way of describing the concept.
Hence, they define method as “the way a teacher decides on what the students will learn”.
They perceive method as a general choice between what learners will mainly be told and what they will largely find out by themselves.
Lawal and Oyeleye (2004) gave a simple definition of method as “an orderly arrangement of activities and systematic procedure of doing things.
It sets guidelines for the patterns of behaviour the teacher expects from the learners in class.
Method is therefore a teacher’s approach to instruction on facts, concepts and generalisations, that is , a systematic way in which teachers approach their teaching.
The method of teaching also describes how the teacher intends to proceed with the lesson.
For instance, one teacher may intend to proceed by presenting information, while another, teaching the same lesson intends to proceed by providing situations which demand that the students must work on a problem.
ADPRIMA (2003) categorises methods of teaching as either direct or indirect.
When it is direct, it involves the organisation of the content in advance and the teacher is expected to have information about his or her students as prerequisites for the lesson.
Here, students are told reasons why content is important.
The indirect type of method of teaching involves situations that give the teacher the opportunity to decide what skills or knowledge are to be learned, with the students given some time to prepare how to work on their or in groups.
Closely related to this categorisation made by ADPRIMA (2003) is that one that had earlier been made by Muyanda-Mutebi and Yiga-Matovu (1994).
They remarked that there are two main methods of teaching and these are transmission and problem-solving.
They observed that if the teacher or the book mainly provides the class with what they have to learn, then the teacher is using transmission method.
This implies that the teacher merely hands down or conveys the subject matter to the learners.
In brief, it is an expository approach which involves the teacher in the domination of the instructional process and telling of students what they need to know.
It encourages nothing but passive learning.
The problem-solving method on the other hand emphasises situations where learners are challenged to examine, investigate, and explore subject matter.
Here, the teacher or a teaching resource demands that the students must think about questions or problems and try to work out the answers or solutions to the problems.
3.2: Meaning of Techniques Teaching techniques on the other hand, are the specific activities and actions required in class to implement the selected method, either transmission or problem-solving.
Lawal & Oyeleye (2003) therefore describe a teaching technique as an activity performed to achieve the method selected for teaching.
It is simply the activity which the teacher gets the learners to perform in/out of the classroom.
56  Teaching techniques are also specific actions and processes through which the goal of a particular method of teaching is realised.
Some of these actions and processes are presented and utilised in a teaching-learning environment in form of lecture, recitation, debates, discussion, dramatisation, role play, brainstorming etc.
Let us examine the kind of techniques to be expected in situations where the teacher is using transmission method and those to be expected when he/she is using problem-solving method.
Some of the teaching techniques that can be drawn from, by that teacher using transmission method would include, recitation, lecturing, and workbook exercises.
The one employing problem-solving method would require choosing from techniques such as inquiry, field trips, case studies and values clarification.
Teaching techniques can therefore be described as activities performed to achieve the method.
ADPRIMA (2003) observed that techniques are building blocks of learning, remembering and effective learning.
Techniques facilitate the development of skills that can be used to encourage and assist learners develop the concepts and processes required for achieving the set goals and objectives of any teaching-learning endeavour.
A teacher who is for instance interested in developing the critical skills of his or her learners can employ inquiry technique.
This is because it will create room for the learners to investigate, ask questions, compile and collate data for analysis and presentation n the class.
Involving the learners in this kind of activities (techniques) therefore implies taking them through a process that reflects problem-solving, whereas passive techniques will usually achieve transmission.
3.3: Meaning of Teaching Strategy Strategy generally is a term that has been popularised over time by the military as it suggests the plan for success on a battle ground.
When it is applied to teaching and learning, our battle ground becomes the classroom.
It could therefore be seen as a plan made in order to win a battle and in this case, successful teaching.
Quoting Muyanda-Mutebi & Yiga-Matovu (1994), Lawal & Oyeleye (2003) describe a teaching strategy as the sequencing or ordering of the techniques that have been selected by a teacher to teach a particular lesson.
It is simply the sequencing or organisation of a given selection of techniques for the purpose of achieving a particular method.
Ogunyemi (2000) also describes a teaching strategy as the overall plan developed by a teacher to satisfy his/her instructional objectives..
It is thus a laid out specific plan which is characterised by systematic presentation.
The process of sequencing techniques of teaching by a teacher interms of which one comes first and which one follows is also a reflection of what teaching strategy actually means.
Strategy can equally be referred to as the steps taken in organising a general or specific plan of teaching and learning activities so that the objectives are achieved.
(www.itek.ac.ug/curriculum, 2009).
It involves the arrangement of techniques relating to a teacher’s particular choice of method in a systematic order, that is, in a way that allows the lesson to flow, so that it can effectively and efficiently delivered.
For instance, a teacher using problem solving method can apply a combination of techniques such as using reaction to posters first, followed by questioning and later discussion.
This implies that the 57  teacher is strategising in order to ensure that his/her lesson is effectively taught.
This explanation is a reflection of the importance of the acquisition of the skill of strategising by the teacher which incidentally demands the knowledge and consideration of the use of a variety of techniques and the ability to combine them in one single teaching-learning situation.
3.4: Relationship among Method, Technique and Strategy in Teaching and Learning It is not going to be a wrong thought to assume at this juncture that you can now differentiate these three concepts from one another.
While you will want to agree with this writer that the three concepts are not the same, as they each refer to different but related activities, it is expected that a highly professional teacher should be ready to be mindful of a variety of them when preparing for any teaching-learning situation.
Methods, techniques and strategies are related to good teaching but we have seen in the preceding paragraphs that they are different from each other.
This implies that they mean differently although they are all part of planning to teach.
Hence, we can say that while they could be different from one another, they need each for effective teaching and learning to take place.
So if a method is accepted as a teacher’s approach to instruction, techniques would mean the specific activities performed while using the method and the strategy will be the sequence adopted for using the techniques during the lesson.
For instance if as a Social Studies teacher you decide to use problem-solving method to teach a topic of your choice to a group of learners, you will need to also select a combination of techniques (activities) such as role play, case studies and small group discussion, depending on the topic.
Your strategy will now require determining which of these techniques will come first and which one will follow.
That is, you can decide to say I will first use case studies by presenting a relevant case on the topic for the students to react to, then, followed by a role play and finally a small group discussion on their observations on the case presented and roles played.
Thus, the use of techniques and strategies in a teacher’s method of instruction is a reflection of a greater possibility in his/her chances of realising the goals of education as well as making learning more practical.
Identifying the method, techniques and strategy for delivering a lesson is s reflection of a teacher’s level of readiness for a planned lesson.
Methods, techniques and strategies describe how a lesson is going to be taught, starting from the general method to the specific techniques and strategy for using such techniques with the learners.
In short, the three concepts describe what the teacher will do and how it is going to done.
3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Give a simple definition of method of teaching.
2.
Give two reasons to show that a technique of instructional delivery is not the same thing as teaching strategy.
4.0: CONCLUSION From the discussion so far, it is quite valid to to say that method of teaching is an umbrella concept in teaching that covers both teaching strategy and instructional technique.
The three concepts are major concepts that have been found to be usually misinterpreted and misused by most practising 58  teachers.
Effective teaching however demands a clearer perception of the meaning and expectation of each of these concepts if meaningful teaching must be promoted.
Thus, we can conclude that methods cannot be effective on their own; rather they need techniques and strategies.
As teachers, you are therefore advised to be more conversant with the distinguishing features of methods, techniques and strategies and allow such experience to guide your preparation and delivery of lessons in your classrooms.
5.0: SUMMARY This Unit has exposed you to the unique features that distinguish seemingly confusing concepts of method, technique and strategy in teaching.
It revealed that method can be basically transmission or problem-solving and direct or indirect in nature.
It has equally presented the fact that there could be infinite number of techniques that could be used in the classroom depending on the teacher’s choice of teaching method, and that, a strategy is merely the plan by which the techniques are sequenced to accomplish the chosen method.
All these are however essential for active learning.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Establish the fact that effective teaching of a subject like Social Studies demands a detailed understanding of the statement that says “methods, techniques and strategies are not the same, as they refer to different but related activities, which teacher cannot avoid, in order to plan for a meaningful lesson”.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS ADPRIMA (2003) Methods of Teaching Retrieved from www.adprima.com on the 20th May 2009.
Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A.S. (2003) A Pedagogy Handbook for Social Studies Pre-Service and In-service Teachers Lagos: Tunbans Publishers Muyanda-Mutebi, P. & Yiga-Matovu, M. (1994) Social Studies Curriculum and Teaching Resource Book for Africa Nairobi:ASESP Secretariat Ogunyemi, S. (2000) Strategies for Teaching Social Studies Ibadan: OACE Pub www.itek.ac.ug/curriculum, Retrieved 10th October 2009 59  UNIT 2: TECHNIQUES OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Inquiry Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.2: Values Clarification Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.3: Role Play Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.4: Case Studies Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the first Unit of this Module you learnt about the differences among the concepts of method, technique and strategy as they apply to teaching and learning.
It is therefore important to learn about each of the techniques that can be used for the delivery of Social Studies content depending on the method selected by the teacher, that is, problem solving or transmission.
For the sake of this Unit, you will interact with four techniques, all of which are very useful when using problem- solving as your method of delivering a lesson content.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: Describe and apply inquiry technique in Social Studies classroom.
Describe and apply values clarification technique in Social Studies classroom.
Describe and apply role play technique in Social Studies classroom.
Describe and apply case studies technique in Social Studies classroom.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Inquiry Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching Inquiry technique is a systematic investigation into a problem.
Nwosu and Corbin (1977) describe it as a way of conducting, quests and searches into problems.
It is a technique in which students are asked to find out about things, which puzzle them on their own with the teacher playing the role of a guide.
The technique also involves investigating into a problem with a view to arriving at alternative means of solving that particular problem.
60  Inquiry technique is a process of asking and answering key Social Studies questions.
SSCED (2002) further describes the technique as one that provides opportunity for students to develop questions; collect and organise data related to the questions, analyse the data and draw inferences or conclusions about the data to answer raised questions.
It is a scientific method because it involves a systematic procedure.
It involves seeking of answers to the big question, the attack on which is made by formulating numerous smaller questions, which guide one through the investigation.
The technique is aimed at developing reflecting thinking skills in the learners.
Tucker (1965) lists four characteristics of inquiry-centred Social Studies classroom to include: 1.
The learners are active and content is problem-centred 2.
It utilizes the intellectual tool of inquiry 3.
It emphasises the systematic study of problem issues and values.
4.
It becomes progressively/less teacher-centred.
Process Any inquiry techniques should basically take the learners through some major steps which SSCED (2003) say include: Step I: Identifying and clarifying questions, issues, problems.
This can be student-generated (within limitations) or teacher-created.
Step II: Propose a hypothesis.
That is, suggested possible solutions or explanations to the problem or question earlier identified or raised.
This facilitates students’ ability to get involved in a research.
Step III: Gathering and organising evidence.
It involves locating and collecting data.
To do this effectively, the students are expected to develop and use some skills such as selecting relevant data and dropping irrelevant ones, evaluating the value of primary versus secondary data, organising and interpreting information, classifying and categorising, presenting the interpreted information etc.
Step IV: Evaluating, analysing and interpreting the data.
This step allows students conducting the research or inquiry to examine the feasibility or otherwise of the possible solutions or explanations using the available collected data.
Step V: Conducting, inferring and making generalisations.
That is, the students want to conclude but based on whether the hypothesis is proven or disproved.
It is at this stage that inferences are drawn and what additional questions are raised by the analysis are revealed.
Udoukpon, (1988) traced the origin of inquiry as an instructional technique to the work of John Dewey.
He said that most experiences in the classroom should be problem-centred and that the learners need to be helped especially to build skills of reflective thinking.
The technique offers opportunity for learners to gain and verify knowledge through a process of re-arranging and re-organizing information in order to make new knowledge.
Ross (1985) 61  also expressed the opinion that this is usually possible when the learners are exposed to either the use of the logical analytical model of reflective inquiry or the reflective skepticism model.
Michaelis’ (1968) submission in the California Framework for Social Science Education lend credence to this view put forward by Ross, (1985).
For, Michaelis (1968) identifies three types of inquiry-analytic, integrative and policy.
But he went further to emphasize that in the actual classroom situation it is highly unlikely that these models of inquiry will exist separately and distinctly.
Rather, he maintained that, it is the student who engages in inquiry that will be running his mental processes through the three modes.
However, Hunkins, (1970) had earlier emphasised that inquiry can be both inductive and deductive.
That is, pupils engaged in an inquiry would at times be proceeding in an inductive manner and at other times in a deductive manner.
Even then, there are probably numerous thinking behaviours comprising each manner.
This is supported by Ausubel (1963) while making a case for both inductive and deductive learning.
He maintained that deduction is a technique of teaching that proceeds from rules or generalization given to examples by the teacher.
Induction on the other hand proceeds from examples or facts given to generalizations, which may be given by teachers or discovered by the students.
Regardless of the kind of interpretation given to the meaning of inquiry, Hunkins, (1970) still holds the belief that there are various degrees of pupils’ inquiry.
There is one in which students or pupils can be engaged in pure inquiry and assume total responsibility for dealing with data.
There is another one which he tagged "direct inquiry", in which the teacher provides students with guidance in dealing with data.
The teacher in the latter type provides the students with the necessary skills needed for consultation and investigation.
Lawal (2003) spoke of some of these skills as including, comparing sources of data, interpreting data, drawing inferences, evaluating thinking as to its relative dogmatism and drawing conclusion from evidence.
Students using inquiry are therefore expected to be assisted in confronting, questioning and inquiring about data in order to comprehend more thoroughly Social Studies knowledge.
Lawal, (1989) further explains that effective utilization of this technique guides the students in the use of tools like survey, interview, questionnaire etc for information collection.
While recognizing the importance of those tools for data search and collection, a great proponent of inquiry Suchman, (1958) identified four types of questions that the students could be asking during any inquiry.
These he said include: a. Verification questions- those that will deal with specific facts about the discrepant event.
b.
Necessity questions- to determine if something were necessary for the discrepant event to take place.
c. Experimentation questions- which would manipulate data gathered, and d. Synthesis questions- which would really state a theory or conclusion arrived at via questioning.
Clements, Fielder and Tabachnick, (1966) seems to be sharing Suchman's view by describing inquiring as an attempt to seek answers to big questions.
They said that the attack on the big question is made by formulating numerous smaller questions which guide one through the 62  investigation.
Hunkins, (1970) therefore observed that in the discussion of Clements and his colleagues on this issue, one can identify several stages of inquiry.
These include: formulation of the big question, identification of smaller questions to initiate inquiry, seeking answers to smaller questions through observations; inventing or choosing concepts that facilitate inquiry; and terminating the inquiry with some kind report to communicate the findings to other students.
All these go a long way to confirm Goldmark's (1989) idea of the process of any good inquiry.
Some of advantages of Inquiry as a student activity-oriented techniques include: (cid:1) It encourages students generate their own knowledge (cid:1) It encourages students to discover answers on their own and these become more memorable.
(cid:1) Divergent and creative thinking is encouraged (cid:1) It emphasizes high order thinking skills which include analysis, synthesis and evaluation (cid:1) Promotes the integration of skills with knowledge as students organize and analyze data in a variety of ways e.g.
through maps, graphs, charts etc.
Application When teaching a topic like "Religious Conflict and the Nigerian society" to a J.S.S.
3 class, the Social Studies teacher can engage the student in an inquiry-oriented activity demanding the following steps: a) Get the students to identify the central problem to be focused on e.g.
the increasing rate of religious conflicts in some parts of Nigeria.
In this case, the causes as well as the solutions will be sought for.
b) Ask them to make some guesses in terms of causes and tentative solutions e.g.
"Settler/Indigeneship perception has been a significant cause of the incessant religious crises in some northern parts of Nigeria” or “Perceived supremacy of one religion over the other significantly influences the chances of religious riots in some States in Nigeria”.
The students can now be asked to employ any of the methods of data collection to get necessary information from youths, religious leaders, opinion leaders, psychologists, senior police officers or any relevant stakeholder as the case may be.
d) On collection of such data, they would now need to put them together analyze and place beside their hypotheses/tentative guesses so as to come up with some findings and concrete conclusions.
e) From their findings, they may conclude with a general statements like “To stop religious conflicts in Nigeria, the policy of state of origin should be abolished” etc.
The role of the Social Studies teacher in this kind of learning environment is that of a guide.
In doing this, he would need to be consistent and intellectually honest with the students.
Ample opportunities must be provided for the students to develop their powers of systematic analysis.
Students also need to be allowed by the teacher to commit genuine mistakes and work their way out of such mistakes.
All these, avail the students with opportunity to operate in a controlled environment that allows them to experiment with problem and their solutions in a setting described by Tucker, (1965) as that which builds success and self confidence before hazardous ego-destroying encounter are made.
63  3.2: Values Clarification Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching Values are essential components of any good Social Studies programme.
They are concerned with those things which people consider desirable.
Social Studies teachers through their choice of instructional techniques and strategies are expected to teach for value acquisition among others, particularly because of the affective nature of the subject.
Values serve as a basis for judging the behaviour of individuals.
They supply individuals with a sense of purpose and direction.
They play greatly in assisting individuals to fix the sense of right and wrong, fair and foul, desirable and undesirable, moral and immoral (Barnes, 1970).
One major technique of making all these possible in the Social Studies classroom is values clarification technique.
It has been described by Nelson and Michaelis, (1980) as a technique designed to help students clarify their personal values and resolve personal values conflict.
Lawal, (1995) equally observed that it is an instructional technique designed to engage students in the active formulation and examination of values.
The technique provides students with practical experiences that allow them to become aware of their own feelings, ideas, and beliefs needed for making conscious and deliberate as well as concrete decisions about value system (Lawal, 1999).
Value clarification technique calls for opportunity for the learners to remove shaft from grain, separate good from bad and useful from useless, in order to have a clear grip of such things that are beneficial to one (Ogunjimi, 1996).
It is an instructional technique that can be used to help students develop both rational thinking and emotional awareness in order to examine their personal and social values.
The skills acquired through this process become useful in solving value conflicts and to act in accordance with their value position choices.
The goal of a well utilized value clarification technique is to involve students in practical experiences, making them aware of their own feelings, ideas and beliefs in order that decisions they make are conscious, deliberate and based on their own value system.
In order to effectively utilize the technique in the class, teachers ar-e advised to allow themselves to be guided by the following guidelines recommended by NERDC (1988): (i) Before the value clarification process is embarked students need to understand the meaning of values.
(ii) Teacher needs to be non-judgmental about students' own values by treating their values with respect.
(iii) Students participation in the classroom discussion values should be on a voluntary basis (iv) Teachers are free to share their values with the students if it will help them clarify their values, but teacher's values must not be imposed on the students.
64  A teacher trying to involve his/her students in value clarification would be expected to take the students through some value process.
This involves: a.
Choosing 1. freely 2. from alternatives 3. after thoughtful consideration of the consequences of each alternative b. Prizing 4. cherishing being happy with the choice 5. willing to affirm the choice publicly.
c. Acting 6. doing something with the choices 7. repeatedly in some pattern of life.
Source: Raths, Harmin & Simon, (1966).
This process has been further simplified by Metcalf (1971) for teaching-learning purpose to include: i) Guiding the students to identify and clarify the issue of value ii) Gathering and organize the facts.
iii) Assessing the truth of the facts iv) Clarifying the relevance of facts v) Arriving at a tentative value decision vi) Testing the value principle implied in the decision.
Some of the strategies recommended for carrying out this process are: a.
Use of the Value Bag i.e.
students are allowed to choose what they wish to reveal about themselves.
Students are asked to bring to class a paper bag or envelope containing three to five possessions, replicas or picture of items the value in turns, students select and talk why those items are important to them.
The exercise helps students to think about some things that are important and to recognize that a variety of things are symbolic and of deeper meaning in their lives.
b.
Use of Incomplete Sentences, i.e.
completion of open-ended statements to help a student become more aware of some of his/her beliefs, likes and dislikes.
e.g.
If I have one million naira, I'd ........... During my leisure, I prefer to ........... My kind of wife or husband is a person who ...........
The completed sentences are read out and students are asked to confirm whether any of these ambitions or interests can become personal values for those who gave them and others include value listing and value rank order.
65  Application The Social Studies teacher who intends to teach a topic like “culture and identity” with a sub-topic like "Traditional Culture vs. Foreign Culture" can prepare a lesson like the following.
Lesson Topic: Culture and identity Sub-topic: Traditional Culture Vs. Foreign Culture Concepts: Cultural Preservation Objectives At the end of the lesson, students should be able to: a) explain what is meant by culture b) differentiate traditional culture from foreign culture using five concrete examples c) state in simple words why it is good to preserve our cultural traditions instead of foreign ones.
Instructional Aids i) A case of two Nigerians relating with Nigeria Traditional cultural traits and foreign culture traits respectively.
Procedure Step I: Guide students to identify and clarify the issue of value (a) Definition of Terms The concepts of culture, cultural traits, foreign culture and cultural traditions are explained with the teachers guiding the students.
That is, culture means a particular group's total way of life.
It is dictated by what happens around us.
Cultural traits are those symbols, which differentiate one cultural pattern from the other.
They include the clothes we wear, the way and what we eat, the type of houses we live in, the way we great and even the work we do.
When cultural traits from foreign lands, especially from western or Arab world are brought into our country for practice, we talk of foreign culture.
Examples of these include, putting on pair of trouser, shirt and suit, speaking English or Arabic language, living a nuclear family life style etc.
Teacher presents a case in which two Nigerians were found with one relating to the traditional cultural traits, in their day-to-day life activities.
He also asks the students to identify the problem(s) that is/are imminent in the case.
Step II: Guide students to gather and organize the facts.
a) Teacher asks the students to list the dangers and benefits of each type of these two Nigerian's actions or their relationship with cultural traits (that is the pros and cons of each of the traits).
Step III: Guide students to assess the truth of the facts a) Teacher asks the students to support each of the facts with concrete real life examples either from their personal experiences or from books/magazines they have read or stories they have heard.
Step IV: Guide students to clarify the relevance of facts.
a) Students are then asked to weigh the facts for both traditional culture and foreign culture, so as to come up with the least preferred of the two, using genuine reasons with the guidance of the teacher.
(Use probing questions).
Step V: Assist students to arrive at a tentative value decision 66  a) Based on the foregoing steps, the students are asked to arrive at a decision on which of the two discussed cultures (traditional culture and foreign culture) they think will be more tolerant.
b) The students should then be made to give the criterion on which their lesson is based, by asking questions like: (i) Is it compulsory for Nigerians to preserve their traditional cultural traits?
(ii) If yes, what roles can a Nigerian who believes in this play, which those who believe in foreign culture cannot easily play?
Step VI: Teacher tests the value Principle implies in the decision Teacher could ask questions like: (a) Is it compulsory for every Nigerian to aspire to preserve every bit of our traditional cultural traits?
(b) What if as a Nigerian you discover that you need to practise and preserve foreign culture at the expense of traditional ones in a particular situation.
How will you feel?
(c) Suppose you are a Nigerian who because you belief and support the need to preserve our own culture, you are requested to support the practice of animal sacrifice at the shrine.
What will you do?
Source: Lawal M. B.
(1999) 3.3: Role Play Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching Students love playing roles.
They enjoy taking on the identity of others.
In the process they learn reliable Social Studies skills such as developing empathy and seeing situation from multiple perspectives.
Corbins et al, (1983), describe role playing technique as a spontaneous organized activity in which players pretend to be someone else, by acting out the role of people to show specific situations for study or discussion.
Usually, in this technique there is no rehearsal or prepared script which students have to memorize.
ASESP, (1994) opines that since the technique encourages learning through impersonation, learners experience directly or through practice and this encourages 80% learning and remembering.
As an extemporaneous learning it emphasizes the act of getting learners to respond to a situation or set of feelings without prior practice.
When planning to use a role play, the teacher must begin by identifying the roles that might be logical enough for students to play.
The teacher is expected to develop role description for the students once they have been identified.
Such role descriptions should include background information regarding the character to be portrayed, typical behaviours of these 67  individuals and other information that would enable role player to come to term with the personality being role-played.
He or she should develop a situation in which the characters to be role-played find themselves i.e.
(the scenario).
Time limit must be established to prevent the dialogue from drifting away from the main concerns.
Students are to be allowed to select the role At the end of the role play, a debriefing session should be conducted by the teacher where value-laden questions like the following could be asked: a.
Did Abdullahi portray the role played realistically?
b.
Having seen Abdullahi play that role, what do you think are the most notable personal characteristics of role played?
c. What did you base your opinion on?
d. What values were held by the character role played by Ngozi?
e. What modifications or change would you like to see effected?
This debriefing session would help students to synthesize what they have observed into some defensible conclusions.
Similarly, SSCED, (2003) recommends that role play should essentially take place in five stages which are: Stage 1: Initiation and Direction At this stage the teacher identifies a topic, which requires students to look at many sides of a difficult issue, requires the development of an opinion, or includes key players with interesting personalities.
Stage 2: Describing the Context The teacher sets the context and makes sure students do not full into the trap of “presentism” -role playing with hindsight.
The situation must be set up and all perspectives explained clearly.
Stage 3: Roles In a successful role playing activity, everyone must have a role.
There may not be five or six key roles but the entire class should be engaged in the role playing in some way, albeit as jurors, or interested citizens, or newspaper reporters.
Everyone has an assignment, something they do in the role play.
Once everyone is assigned a role, time is needed for students to understand their role, to practice, to "try on" their new identity.
68  Stage 4: Enactment Make sure students stay in role, and proceed.
Stage 5: Debriefing Depending upon the structure of the role playing activity, students complete the action with a written reflection followed by an oral debriefing.
The debriefing is the most important part of a role play; it is the teacher's chance to ask students to discuss, to reason, to draw conclusions, and to pull everything together.
Application In teaching a topic like "THE NEED FOR MORAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY', you can present a story for the students to listen to and react to by role-playing the content of the story.
Usman and his best friend John are in supermarket.
John wants a birthday present for his sister, but hasn't enough money, especially for an expensive bottle of perfume.
John picks up the perfume and puts it into his pocket and later gave Usman the perfume to hide.
At the gate, a security man stopped them and asked both of them to empty their pockets.
What should Usman do?
This case can be presented to students with the teacher familiarizing them with the general situation, which is stealing.
Students could now be made to act this story, and the following questions could be asked during the debriefing session.
a.
If you were Usman, would you have exhibited the same reaction to the gateman's request?
b.
What do you think will be the consequence of the action of the two of them to: (i) Usman (ii) John owner (iii) Their parents (iv) The supermarket c. How would you feel if you were John or Usman?
d. What would happen if everyone has been stealing from the supermarket?
e. Is stealing right at all?
Why?
3.4: Case Studies Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom This technique is quite similar to role play but unlike role play it does not require the students to act out the situation being presented by the teacher.
Dubey et al, (1982) remarked that case studies require the selection of stories from real life situations and the bringing of such into the classroom for close examination and analysis.
This instructional technique involves situation analysis, which allows value laden questions to be raised at the end of presentation.
69  That is, it is a technique that aims at developing positive values and attitude formation in the learners.
It is made up of an intensive study of an individual, a situation, an institution, a decision or an issue as basis of making generalization concerning similar situations.
This technique allows learners to infer from a concentrated and deep study rather than a hasty study of a number of cases.
While quoting Feeder, (1973) Udoukpong describes case studies "as examination of an institution, an organization, an event, a decision or situation.
A good case for study is further said to be intrinsically interesting; it could involve conflict and decision and it may tell a story.
Students may identify with one or more of the characters make value judgments as they listen, read, take sides and gradually come closer to the real world of political economic and social behaviour than they would by reading a formal description of an institution or process.
The efficacy of case studies as an instructional technique has been highlighted by Wasser Man, (1992) who describes the technique as a complicated interaction that seeks to blend cognitive ad affective learning modes.
It promotes active students involvement and development of thinking skills.
Effective utilization of this technique however demands that the teacher must do everything possible to create the proper atmosphere in the class so that the period of studying the case is pleasurable and at the same time educative.
The teacher must be ready to select or guide learners in selecting short cases to fit the short class period and still have time for questions afterwards.
The kind of questions to be asked must be affective based, that is value-oriented.
These will be similar to the ones raised under application section of role-play in the previous section of this Unit.
Application The situation or event described in the previous section of this Unit under role play could be applied here.
This could be by turning the role cards into a complete short story or case, which will be presented to the students.
After listening to or reading the case by themselves, the same set of questions raised under role play would serve a very useful purpose while using case studies as an instructional technique.
3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Explain the steps you will take your students while using inquiry technique with them.
2.
Use three features to distinguish between case studies and role play as instructional techniques in Social Studies.
3.
To carry out values clarification exercise with your students in Social Studies classroom you need to involve them in three steps.
What are these steps?
4.0: CONCLUSION 70  The techniques of instructional delivery discussed in this Unit can be seen as a set of techniques, which can enhance the Social Studies teacher’s capability to teach for cognitive, affective and psychomotor learning.
Effective utilization of any of these techniques will however depend on the Social Studies teachers ability to get more involved in out of classroom activities in order to search for relevant background information and materials that can be built up for teaching purposes.
This is very essential for the teacher if he or she must present and utilize relevant cases and stimulate meaningful role plays and discussion sessions in the Social Studies classroom.
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have been exposed to four techniques that can be used to promote effective teaching and learning in the Social Studies classrooms.
These include inquiry, values clarification, role play and case studies.
Specific attempts were also made to demonstrate how you can apply each of the techniques to your classroom situation.
It is therefore expected that as Social Studies teachers you will move a step ahead by looking for the new 9-year Basic Education Curriculum for Social Studies and then try out your hands on how some of these techniques can be used to teach some selected themes and topics in your classroom.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Select any topic of your choice from the new Junior Secondary Social Studies Curriculum for JS One and describe how you will use any the four techniques discussed in this Unit to teach such topic to your students.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS ASESP, (1994).
Social studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa.
Nairobi: ASESP Ausubel, D. et.al.
(1978).
Educational psychology: A cognitive view 2nd edition.
New York: Holt,Rinehart & Winston Barnes, D. (1970).
Helping children clarify values.
In R.H. Jones Social Studies Education for Young Americans Iowa: Kendal Hunt Pub.
Dubey, D. et al, (1982).
Social Studies for our nation Book 1.
Ikeja: Thomas Nelson Nig.Ltd.
Goldmark, B.
(1989).
Social Studies: A method of inquiry Belmont, Calf:Wadsworth Hunkins, F. P. (1970).
Review of research in Social Studies education Washington: NCSS Lawal, M. B.
(1989).Social Studies: Getting it all together at the college of education level Seminar Paper Presented at LACOED Otto/Ijanikin Lawal M. B.
(1995).
Principles and concepts of Social Studies.
A Monograph 71  Lawal M. B.
(1999).
Values clarification, concept mapping strategies and students’ learning outcomes in junior secondary Social Studies Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Ibadan Lawal, M. B.
(2003).
Foundations of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004) A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre-service and in- service teachers.
Lagos: A Triad Associates Metcalf, L. E. ed.
(1971).
Values education: Rationale, strategies and procedures.
The NCSS 41st Year Book.
Washington, D.C. :National Council for Social Studies Michaelis, J.U.
(1972).
Social Studies for children in a democracy.
5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall NERDC, (1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education: Population Education self learning module 12 Lagos: Population Education Dept.
Nwosu, S.& Corbin, H. (1977).
Handbook for Social Studies teachers Ikeja: Longman Pub.
Ogunjimi, R.
A.(1996).
Values clarification as an instructional technique for teaching Home Economics Paper presented at a Training Workshop for Lagos State Secondary School Teachers Raths, L.E., Harmin M. & Simon, S.B.
(1966).
Values and teaching: working with values in the classroom Ohio: Charles E. Merrill 72  UNIT 3: TECHNIQUES OF TEACHING SOCIAL STUDIES II 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Dramatisation Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.2: Simulation Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.3: Discussion Technique and its Application in Social Studies Teaching 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the preceding Unit, you were given an opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skills for using instructional techniques such as role play, inquiry, values clarification and case studies in the Social Studies classroom.
It is however important at this juncture to let you understand the fact that there are still some other techniques that can be used to promote effective teaching of Social Studies in your classroom.
Some of these techniques are equally presented in this Unit in addition to the ones you have learnt about in Unit 2 of this Module.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe dramatisation technique and apply it to the teaching of Social Studies in your classroom.
2.
Describe simulation technique and apply it to the teaching of Social Studies in your classroom.
3.
Describe discussion technique and apply it in various forms to the teaching of Social Studies in your classroom.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Dramatization Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom Dramatization is an instructional technique that allows learners to be creative and understand better what is being taught.
Dramatization has been described by Oroge (1995) as a technique used by the teacher to inspire activities such as memorization, development of imagination, imageries and drama in students.
73  It provides learners with opportunities for independent activities, actions, analysis, interpretation of facts and logical argument.
It is one of the most effective techniques for stimulating learners in what they are to learn.
The technique, Corbin and Akinlaye (1983) observe, encourages the immediate involvement of learners in the learning activities.
It allows for a great deal of participation by learners and it enlivens the routine procedures of teaching and learning.
Dramatization provides an active situation in which the learner not only participates but also interprets his feeling and attitudes thereby reinforcing knowledge.
It has been described by ASESP (1994) as a good technique to focus quality time on a task.
When the content of a lesson is dry or uninteresting, dramatization may be an effective way of attracting and holding the attention of learners.
Acting which is a major component of the technique develops the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
Dramatization can come in form of miming, play-let, monologue, dialogue or puppetry.
When it is miming, it involves acting out something without using words.
This allows emphasis to be placed on body language.
That is, the actor is understood only by his/her body movement, gestures and actions.
The whole body of the actor or actress is used to produce a situation or a character.
In miming, exaggerated motion of the eyes, head, hands (including each finger) and feet is of the greatest importance.
Miming can be used to act out an event or an experience.
It may present a characterization of some person or nation.
Miming is a very useful teaching technique as it encourages both slow learners and learners with speech difficulties or shy ones to participate easily in a teaching-learning endeavour.
3.2: Simulation/Instructional Game Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom Simulation/Instructional games are interesting and rewarding teaching techniques that have not been too popular with our cotemporary Social Studies in most Nigerian schools.
They are dynamic and lively ways of presenting thought-provoking ideas and problems in our social life.
The Teacher Explorer Centre of the UNO, (2003) describes simulation as attempt to approximate reality as closely as possible.
They are not only effective in skill development, but also, help students to gain insight and understanding of things they would not otherwise get a chance to experience.
Corbin et al, (1983) noted that the word simulation comes from the Latin word "simulars" which means "to copy" or "similis" meaning like.
Hence, simulations are like real-life situation.
They allow learners to act out the same roles and make the same kind of decisions as are made in real life but on a mini-scale.
They can come in form of historical simulations, simulation activities and simulation games.
The latter is however, the most commonly used by the few teachers who try their hands out on the instructional technique.
74  Simulation games as an instructional technique has been described by Preston and Herman Jnr.
(1981) as a scaled down simplified model of an important process of institution.
Its main characteristic is the ability to place the learner in a situation that simulates real life.
The technique offers unique opportunities for decision making, negotiating, problem solving, analytic reasoning, reacting to opponents’ tricks and plans.
Unlike real game which people play to win in a contest, simulation game as an instructional technique involves pretence and imitation (Muyanda-Mutebi and Yiga Matovu, (1994).
It could therefore be seen as involving role playing on imaginary event using a set of rules.
They went further to observe that the most important characteristic of simulation game is that the rules and instructions have an in-built potential for conflict of interest or alternative actions.
These they said call for practices that can help achieve affective teaching.
Some of these practices are also said to include self-directing, accommodating, integrating, challenging, giving feedback and rewards with elements of chance prominent.
It is therefore a technique that is very good for generating creative thinking, formation of opinions and effective learning.
It is quite motivational as learners usually enjoy it and thus they tend to have positive attitude towards it.
It is a good tool for education through entertainment that is "Enter-Educate".
Scholars like Crist, (1972) Preston & Herman Jnr.
, (1981) and NERC, (1983) have however reported that in spite of the popularity of the technique and the high interest generated by its use in schools, it has been found to be quite expensive to provide for all, and quite unacceptable for a conventional classroom.
Furthermore, Crist (1972) is of the opinion that the results of experimental studies with the technique have been mixed.
In spite of these observations, simulation games, if well utilized, where they are affordable, are capable of enhancing effective teacher-student and student-student interactions.
The game is not supposed to be used to see which team or who wins.
In situation where this is done, it will render the technique worthless.
Rather, the game as a technique of teaching is expected to be played as a means of understanding the topic or issue under discussion.
This will in turn assist the learners to identity useful concepts and subject matter or ideas based on the gains of such game.
In as much as simulations are still a relatively new phenomenon in our school settings, it is expected that for anybody trying to design one, the following points should be considered.
a. Goals/Objectives of the game must be selected in what do you want to use it to teach?
b.
A process that would fit the set goals must be constructed.
c. Roles and sections to be exemplified must be identified and selected.
d. The behaviours expected to be exhibited must be made as much like real life as possible.
e. Negotiating terms must be established, that is what do you use to negotiate, is it money, goods, cards and so on?
f. Select the goals for which the negotiation takes place, that is, what would happen before I start negotiating and what do I gain from such negotiation?
75  g. Set rules for which behaviours or players h. Make provisions for chances.
i.
Establish the limits of the game.
Teachers would therefore be expected to develop values games that focus on simulated replication of social problems, international relations and governmental functioning.
Application When teaching a topic like `problem of teenage motherhood in our society", the teacher would be expected to work with his/her students to identify the causes, effects and prevention of accidents both at home and on our roads.
This is because; by the time he/she decides to use simulation game to teach this topic, if he/she is not fully armed with these areas of focus he/she might not be able to carry the students along with him/her.
In constructing the process that fits the set net goals, all the causes, effects and control measures will come into play on the board game.
This will be in form of an action demanding a response of reaction.
So that at the end of the game developed and played, students would have learnt about why there is a high prevelance of teenage motherhood inn their locality, what can be done to reduce the incidence, and their effects.
3.3: Discussion Technique and its Application in the Social Studies Classroom Discussion as an instructional technique is verbal exchange led by the teacher or participants about a specific topic.
Like Quartey (1984), rightly observes, discussion technique basically emphasises group interaction.
This is because it is operated within the premise of the fact that the knowledge and ideas of several people are more likely to find solutions or answers to specified problems or issues.
Adeyoyin, (1988) sees the technique as tying together processes which fosters co-operation in learning.
This co-operation becomes essentially possible if the teacher creates opportunities for the exchange of pleasurable emotional experiences in the class, and allows for a warm and friendly relationship within the students.
The purpose of discussion as an instructional technique makes it a very important teaching-learning tool.
Kochnar, (1988) observes that it can be used to lay plans for new work, share information, clarify ideas, in spite interests and make decision concerning future actions.
Oroge, (1995) also opines that discussion technique is a process of free or guided interchange between members of a group.
It operates on the principle that the knowledge and ideas of several people pooled together have a great merit than those of a single person.
However, Lawal, (1999) noted that scholars like Corbin and Nwosu, (1980) are of the opinion that in spite of its advantages and capability of contributing meaningfully to learning, it might create serious problem for learners where the teacher or leader lacks imagination and organizational ability.
When using this technique, we all have to bear in mind that the teacher should not necessarily be the leader.
This implies that the leader might be chosen by the group, the class teacher 76  himself/herself or his/her appointee.
For any discussion to be meaningful and successful, it is important that the following are noted and ensured: a.
Identify the leader right from the onset; b.
Define the issue clearly at the onset; c. Prepare well for the discussion; d. Stick to the topic as discussion progresses; e. Respect the view points of others (no `blind arguments"); f. Be attentive to others contributions; g. Be objective (do not be emotional); h. Use facts to support your statements; i.
Allow as many people as possible to take part; j.
Do not allow individuals to dominate the discussion; k. Ask questions to clarify your doubts.
However, discussion may take different forms; for example, we may have large group discussion, small group discussion, which incidentally can also be in form of panel discussion, brainstorming or round table.
Large Group Discussion: The teacher using this is expected to ensure the participation or involvement of every member of the group.
This could be by ensuring that the students sit in circle, semi-circle or even square, so that they would face each other during the discussion.
This will make it possible for non-participating students to be easily identified.
Small Group Discussion: This instructional technique is described by Quartey (1984), as that “which involves the breaking of the class into small groups to enable each person contribute effectively to a selected topic, an issue, a problem or a question".
The teacher is not expected to start using small group discussion technique until he/she has exposed his/her students enough to working in committees.
This is because, this technique requires independent working of students in groups, with assigned leaders, secretary, and other participating students handling one responsibility or the other.
When this technique involves panel discussion, it is more or less a situation where panel members make some presentations before a free discussion session is commenced.
Such free discussion session would involve the members of the audience in constant questioning of the panel members.
It is very formal.
Roundtable: Unlike the preceding one, the technique is quite informal although they have a lot of things in common.
It is usually conducted in a more relaxed atmosphere, where a moderator who is expected to be well informed will introduce the problems, and keep the discussion on.
He/she is equally expected to summarize the view points of the contributors, and state the conclusions arrived at.
In both cases, the size of the group is usually small (between three and eight).
77  Brainstorming: This could also be referred to a Buzz Group Technique.
Here, there is free flowing exchange of ideas on a given topic.
The teacher or a student is expected to pose a problem, dilemma or issue.
The learners are expected to suggest in brief whatever answers or ideas they can think of.
All these responses or answer will first be accepted and recorded by a fast writer.
By the time the brainstorming exercise is over, the group will evaluate the ideas together in order to identify those they consider most realistic or useful.
When forming any group, the teacher should endeavour to do it by interest group and let the class know that he/she will be asking for evaluation at the end of the exercise.
For any of these techniques, it is important for the teacher using it to allow himself/herself to be guided by those essentials already outlined.
Application Any topic or even controversial issues in the Junior Secondary Social Studies curriculum can be taught with any of these discussion techniques provided the identified guidelines are respected.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
What is simulation technique in Social Studies teaching?
2.
List any three discussion techniques.
3.
Highlight those essential factors that must be considered by a teacher using dramatisation as an instructional technique if he/she must successfully teach with it in class.
4.0: CONCLUSION Dramatisation, simulation and discussion techniques of teaching Social Studies demand versatility and commitment on the side of the teacher.
In situations where he/she cannot generate relevant scripts for dramatisation, he/she is free to contact colleagues in the school who may be English Studies, Yoruba or Drama Education specialists who will serve as resource person for this purpose.
Effective use of discussion technique requires teacher's competence in the determination of the size of the students and space to be used.
It also involves making the right selection(s) from among the various forms of discussion technique earlier discussed.
Simulation technique is one of the major techniques used in Social Studies to promote value oriented teaching.
Teachers have to develop keen interest in doing a lot of classroom presentations for them to effectively use this technique.
It demands the use of real life experiences, which are replicated in the classroom for interaction.
The choice of post- presentation questions in form of debriefing also matters.
It is pointless choosing only cognitive based questions; rather one expects the teacher to use more affective-based questions.
5.0: SUMMARY 78  In this Unit you have further learnt about some other instructional techniques that help facilitate effective teaching and learning in the Social Studies classroom.
These techniques- dramatisation, simulation/instructional game and discussion are very useful for promoting learning in the three domains- cognitive, affective and psychomotor.
Each demands specific actions and responsibilities from both the teacher and the learners.
It is therefore expected that you will take time off to look at the Social Studies curriculum and attempt to put into practice these techniques by preparing dummy lesson plans showing how you will use each of them in your class.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the process you will adopt to produce a relevant instructional simulation board game to be used in a Social Studies class.
2.
Attempt a description of the different forms which discussion could take as a technique of teaching in Social Studies.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyoyin, F. A.
(1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education Lagos: NERDC ASESP, (1994).
Social studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa.
Nairobi: ASESP Lawal M. B.
(1999).
Values clarification, concept mapping strategies and students’ learning outcomes in junior secondary Social Studies Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Ibadan Lawal, M.B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004) A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre-service and in- service teachers.
Lagos: A Triad Associates Muyanda-Mutebi, P. & Yiga-Matovu, M. (1994) Social Studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa Nairobi:ASESP Secretariat NERC, (1983) .
Nigeria Primary Social Studies programme.
A working document on preparing what to teach for the Kano State ERC workshop.
NERDC (1988).
Teaching methodologies in Population Education: Population Education self learning module 12 Lagos: Population Education Dept.
Oroge, S. A.
(1995).
An overview of teaching methodologies in Population/Family Life Education In NERDC, A POP/FLE handbook for classroom teachers Lagos: NERDC Preston, R. C. & Herman, W. L. Jnr.
, (1981).
Current research in elementary Social Studies New York: Crowell-Collier-Macmillan Quartey, S. M. (1984).
A method book for Social Studies teachers Lagos: Refield Pub.
79  The Teacher Explorer Centre of the UNO, (2003) 80  UNIT 4: PLANNING FOR EFFECTIVE TEACHING OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: What Constitutes Effective Teaching in Social Studies?
3.2: Lesson Delivery Essentials in Social Studies Teaching 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION By administrative instrument Social Studies has become a core subject of offering at Basic Education level of Nigeria’s educational system.
This Unit will prepare you towards effective handling of the subject at the Basic Education (primary and junior secondary school levels).
Specifically, it will acquaint you with what you need to source for and do before you can confidently say that you are correctly teaching the subject- Social Studies, in your classroom.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit you should be able to: 1.
Identify those features that can be used to describe effective teaching in a Social Studies class.
2.
Identify the essentials of lesson planning for Social Studies teaching.
3.
Practically prepare yourself for effective teaching of Social Studies at either the primary or junior secondary level 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: What Constitute Effective Teaching of Social Studies?
Comprehensive Guide Ltd., (1994) observes that in preparing any teaching programme, Social Studies inclusive there are usually six major components that should be considered.
These are: (i) Nature, Philosophy and goals of the subject (ii) Objectives (iii) Content-subject matter and learning experiences 81  (iv) Methodology - strategies, techniques, scheme of work and lesson preparation (v) Resources - material and human (vi) Evaluation - continuous assessment and record keeping For instance, if one is preparing to teach Social Studies, the teacher must ask himself or herself for the nature, philosophy and goals of the discipline.
This can be found in the new 9- year Basic Education Curriculum document prescribed for the subject by the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC).
It is from such document that one would obtain the themes, topics, performance objectives, contents, methodology in terms of teacher and learners’ activities and recommended evaluation techniques.
The teacher is therefore expected to properly and adequately familiarize himself/ herself with this document for effective and efficient preparation and performance on the job.
His/her responsibilities also include breaking down curriculum topics/contents into teachable periods and schemes of work.
This is in terms of what is to be learned in a period of say thirty or forty minutes and in a week.
The Social Studies teacher would be able to boast of promoting effective teaching where he uses all the above in accordance with the goals and objectives of the subject.
He /she needs to have a clear view of the concept for each topic, the positive values, attitudes and skills to be developed through the teaching.
Effective teaching of Social Studies also demands that the teacher should have that ability to help develop in the learners, relevant situations that will make to reason and reflect on their thoughts before they take decisions.
3.2: Lesson Delivery Essentials To deliver lessons properly as laid out in the new 9-year Basic Education Curriculum, there is need for the Social Studies teacher to plan his/her lesson.
When a teacher stands before his/her class to deliver a lesson, he/she must be clear in his/her mind what objectives he/ she intends to achieve.
Hence, he/she must prepare a detailed lesson plan containing preliminary information as regards the: (cid:1) Class (cid:1) Grade of students - which determines the choice of teachers and language of instruction.
(cid:1) Topic/sub-topic 82  (cid:1) Concepts in focus (cid:1) Behavioural objectives (cid:1) Entry behaviour - which must necessarily have a direct link with the new topic.
(cid:1) Contents -with emphasis on the three domains of learning depending on subject areas.
(cid:1) Instructional Resources (cid:1) Procedural steps - which must describe vividly the methodology, strategies, techniques and materials to be used in teaching the content and how such will be done.
(cid:1) Evaluation - In terms of specific items that will be used to test how well the students have learnt what has been taught.
Concrete efforts must be made to promote the evaluation of learning at the three domains (cognitive, affective and psychomotor) (cid:1) Follow up or Assignment - This will allow for students to be more active after learning any topic.
It must however not be a general task.
Rather make it specific and measurable.
Hence, in preparing any teaching programme, it is important for the teacher to raise three basic questions viz: 1. Who will be learning?
2.
What exactly will they learn?
3.
How will they learn?
The answers to these questions will go a long way in putting the teacher into a state of mind that will facilitate the process of the lesson.
All his/her choices of objectives, techniques and strategies must be SMART.
That is Specific, Measurable, Acceptable, Rewarding and Timely.
Once these have been considered, then the weekly lesson plan as well as the daily ones can then be prepared in any of the formats presented here i.e.
vertical or horizontal presentation.
83  SAMPLE WEEKLY LESSON PLAN TOPIC: ORGANISATION AND CO-OPERATION CLASS: J. S.S. TWO INSTRUCT TEACHER PUPILS' PERFORMAN CONCEP CONTENT IONAL S TOPIC CE TS S ACTIVITE OBJCTIVES RESOURC ACTIVITI S ES ES Organizati By the end of Every 1.
Meaning of Pictures -Introducing -Answering on and the society is organization showing the lesson raised Cooperatio lesson, students characteriz 2.
Meaning of various with questions n- should be able ed cooperation cooperative act relevant -Reacting to Meaning to: by 3.
Types in different question.
pictures.
And Types 1.explain what organizatio organization organization - is meant by ns, 4.
Ways of Participatin organization.
which Promoting g 2. explain the promote or Cooperation in the meaning of demote any discussion cooperation.
cooperative organisation -Presenting and 3. list some living.
relevant asking types of pictures to questions.
organization.
and - Answeri 4.describe how explain the ng cooperation can concepts of evaluation be promoted in organization- questions.
any organization - Guiding discussion on ways of promoting cooperation in any organization - Evaluatin g the lesson using some question s Organisatio By the end of The 1.Benefits of Cases for -Introduce -Answering n the lesson, success of living together study the lesson raised and students should any 2.
Importance with relevant questions.
Cooperatio be able to: of a good questions.
- 84  n- 1.
List the organisatio organisation.
Present two -Listening Importance importance of n is 3.
Problem of cases to and people working living for students cases determined problem together as a Together to presented by the group.
4.
Ways of study as by the amount of 2.
Explain why solving the regards to teacher and a good cooperation problem t h e benefits reacting to organisation that exist of living them.
is necessary within it.
together and among people importance -Answering living together.
of a good questions organization.
on - Questioning problems the students and the problem providing of living solutions to together and problems how such identified.
could be resolved.
- Participatin - Evaluatin g in g the evaluation.
lesson through some questions.
85  SAMPLE LESSON NOTE DATE: 12t h December 2009, SCHOOL: ABU GUMEL HIGH SCHOOL CLASS: J.S.S 3A-E KANO SUBJECT: SOCIAL STUDIES, TIME: 40minutes ENTRY BEHAVIOUR: Majority of the students belong to groups and are used to seeing people other than those in their group.
TOPIC OBJCTIVES BEHAVIOURAL CONCEPTS CONTENT MATERIALS INSTRUCTIONAL PRESENTATION EVALUATION DES VALUES/ATTITU ASSIGNMENTS Cultu By the 1.
Meanin a. a.
Teacher Teacher The Ask the re end of Identifyin g of Different links the asks the topic students and the g culture.
pictures students students should to identi lesson, with the Culture showing with the the help compile ty the ones means a various new topics followi the a list of student culture particul cultural using the ng studen other should makes ar traits entry objectiv ts cultural be able more group's and behaviour e develo traits to: permanen total instances asking the questio p which 1. t way of of following ns values some explain 2. life.
cultural questions: taken like: ethnic what is Cultural identity.
1.
Can from a) groups Meanin you tell us Refield Respe use to meant appreciati g of b.
Cases your Model ct for identify by on identity.
for groups?
Objecti one's with is an It is a class 2.What ve cultur their culture indicator physical study special Questio e b) dressin and of way of festivals ns Pride gs cultural showing do your and in mores, identit identity.
one's people Answer one's foods y. belongi do?
s past habits, 2. ng 3.What for JSS c) languag identif to a language by Readi e etc.
y group s do your Lawal ness some people & to Importa Cultural speak?
Quartey defen nce of cultura Traits , (1989) d the identify l traits STEP II: 2.
With cultur ing with of Teacher one’s al one’s 86  their explains culture, practi culture.
own the demonst ces of It locality.
meaning rate one's allows 3. of culture some localit the discuss and acts that y. culture how it identity depict to be is using how one respecte response.
can d. import identify Preserv ant to with his ation of STEP III: culture.
cultural identit Teacher heritage y shows the .
students some pictures of different cultural traits and he asks them to react to them.
STEP IV: He uses the students' responses to explain cultural traits and identity.
STEP V: He presents a case on the importance of cultural identity for the student react to.
A brief session in form of questions like: 87  1................ .......... 2................ .......... 3................ ........... is conducted To turn any of these tabular form plans, into prose format, the teacher would just need to write it out in prose i.e remove it from the tabulation form.
3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Highlight any five things you can use to confirm that your Social Studies teaching is an effective one.
2.
What are the essentials of instructional delivery in Social Studies class?
4.0: CONCLUSION Effective teaching in Social Studies demands a high degree of commitment from the teacher.
This is in terms of his or her ability to prepare regularly, detailed weekly and daily lesson plans.
There are equally some essential components that must regularly reflect in such teaching plans, so that even when the teacher who prepared such lesson plans happens to be 88  unavoidably absent in class, somebody else who is equally qualified can effectively handle the class.
5.0: SUMMARY This Unit has offered you an opportunity to sharpen your skills in planning to teach the subject very effectively in your class.
From the interaction you had with this Unit it is clear that as Social Studies teachers you need to understand the definition, nature and philosophy of the subject as well as those techniques and strategies for organizing the curriculum contents to be delivered to your students, using the essential components of a good lesson plan.
89  6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
What is the important of the acronymn SMART in lesson preparation in Social Studies?
b.
Prepare a weekly lesson plan on a junior secondary Social Studies topic of your choice and a daily lesson plan on one of the sub-topics.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004).
A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre-service and in-service teachers Lagos: A-Triads Associate Quartey, S. M. & Lawal, M. B.
(1989) Refeild model objective questions and answers for Social Studies Lagos: Refeild Pub.
90  MODULE THREE: INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCE MATERIALS FOR EFFECTIVE SOCIAL STUDIES TEACHING Unit 1: Meaning and Principles Guiding the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials Unit 2: Types of Instruction Resource Materials and their Application in Social Studies Classrooms Unit 3: Improvisation of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms Unit 4: The Community as a Learning Resource in Social Studies UNIT 1: MEANING AND PRINCIPLES GUIDING THE SELECTION AND UTILISATION OF INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Instructional Resource Materials 3.2: Principles Guiding the Selection and Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials 3.3: Factors that can Promote Effective Use of Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Effective teaching in Social Studies is of paramount importance at any point in the classroom.
This is however impossible where the teacher is not ready to get familiarised with a variety of instructional resource materials that can help reduce the number of “teacher talk” times during a teaching-learning event.
It is therefore expected that as teachers of Social Studies you will become more conversant with the variety of instructional media you can choose from in order to make your interaction with the learners more meaningful.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain in simple term the concept of instructional media or instructional material resource.
2.
Identify the principles guiding the selection and effective utilisation of instructional resource materials in the Social Studies classroom.
91  3.
Identify those factors that can promote effective use of instructional material resources in the Social Studies classroom 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Meaning of Instructional Resource Materials Instructional resource materials are software and hardware that are used to make lessons more meaningful and clearer to learners.
They are devises that appeal to multi model senses which help the learners conceive, perceive, internalize, interpret and transfer the experiences gained to similar or different learning situations.
These materials and equipment, could be those that appeal to the sense of hearing-known as audio material/ equipment those of seeing called visual materials/equipment and those that combine the two senses called audio-visual materials.
Olatunde (2006) quoting Schramm (1977) further describes instructional resource materials as “information carrying technologies that are used for instructional purposes with the hope of delivering educational information very quickly and widely”.
Instructional materials or media is the modern term used for teaching materials.
The media are the channels for communication used by both the teacher and the learners in and out of the classroom for effective teaching and learning.
With instructional media in use in a class, the teacher talks less while passing an intended message(s) in the class in a more effective and meaningful manner.
The Social Studies teachers are therefore expected to consider and use these materials and equipment if effective learning must evolve on a regular basis in the classroom.
3.2: Principles Guiding the Selection and Effective Utilisation of Instructional Resource Materials in the Social Studies Classroom Effective utilization of these instructional media demands that the Social Studies teacher must consider six basic principles, which are: 1.
Objective specification: That is, what do you hope to achieve by using the media/medium.
Such objective create proper learning environment by giving the learners clear and definite direction as well as providing scientific basis for valid evaluation instruments.
2.
Optimum fit: No one instructional material is best for all purposes, and at all times to all learners.
So choose instructional materials that are appropriate to instructional tasks and that can benefit as many learners as possible.
3.
Multi-media presentation: Wise and creative use of a variety of media at different levels of lesson development can be effective in achieving various instructional objectives.
This allows for a variety of learners to be reached easily.
However, too many instructional media that are not well coordinated and methodologically presented can create confusion in the classroom.
4.
Environmental conditions/constraints: These could be physical, social or cultural.
They are conditions in which the instructional materials are utilized for learning and they have significant impact on the effectiveness of such materials.
92  5.
Preparation & preview: It is important for the teacher to prepare himself/herself well in advance, if the instructional media must be effectively utilized.
The materials must of necessity be previewed, sequentially arranged in order of presentation.
6.
Evaluation: Instructional media needed to be evaluated in terms of suitability to the objectives, appeal to the learners, cost-effectiveness and learner-achievement level.
Once all the principles are considered before Social Studies teacher sets out for a lesson, it is not impossible that his/her lesson will be quite fruitful.
This is because, much is learnt and remembered when learners watch TV, read and see slides, discuss issues and engage in peer teaching using a variety of instructional media.
3.3: Factors that Promote Effective use of Instructional Media in Social Studies Effective utilization of any or a combination of these instructional resource materials depends on a lot of factors, some of which Akinmoyewa (2000) identifies as including: 1.
Appropriateness: That is, are they okay to the learners’ age, socio-cultural background, level of academic competence, and technological skill, so that it will be easier for the learners to acquire the behaviour the teacher intends them to exhibit?
2.
Levels of sophistication: This has to do with the class, the vocabulary, the rate at which content is presented, the type of visualization and the approach of the subject matter, in an effort to make sure that the material is suitable for the class and its sophistication does not obscure its usefulness.
3.
Availability: As a Social Studies teacher, one may know a number of good and even appropriate materials that can be used but these may not be available.
So it is important to consider the possibility of the material going round the students or its being available before considering and selecting such for use in the class.
4.
Technical quality: That is, carrying the message it is supposed to carry.
If pictures are to be used, they must be clear and visible.
The use of electrically operated teaching materials such as slides, radio, video and television should ensure technical quality, hence, the intention could be counterproductive.
Having considered these factors, it is also important for the teachers to raise and answer the following questions before a final selection of the materials is made.
These include: a.
Do I have a clear knowledge of the instructional media/ medium I want to use?
b.
Is the classroom environment suitable for the use of the media/medium?
c. Are the instructional media capable of ensuring the achievement of the stated objectives?
d. Will the instructional media make the lesson clearer and more meaningful?
e. Are the instructional media in line with the methods or strategies selected?
It must however be noted that not every instructional media will be available at the disposal of the Social Studies teachers.
Hence, he or she must acquire some skills in the improvisation of instructional materials.
You will learn more about the concept of improvisation in one of the Units after this one.
93  3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Define the term instructional media.
2.
Use the list of instructional materials provided in this Unit to categorise them into audio, visual and audio-visual types.
3.
List those factors that will guide you in the selection and utilization of instructional resource materials in your class.
4.0: CONCLUSION Instructional media come in different forms and they exist for use in classroom for the purpose of making real what would have looked abstract before the learners.
The choice and use demand considerations such as appropriateness and level of sophistication, so that the teacher does not end up complicating the learning situation for the students.
As Social Studies teachers, you need to be versatile in the choice and handling of these resources for you to contribute meaningfully to teaching and learning in your class.
The teacher also needs to learn how to improvise in areas where he or she cannot easily lay his or her hands on already provided ones either because they are costly or they are not easily accessible.
5.0: SUMMARY You will agree with the writer of this Unit that effective teaching in Social Studies class requires making the experience real for the learners and that this will be near possible where the teacher does not consider the choice of a combination of instructional resource materials.
These materials come in audio, visual and audio-visual forms.
For you to effectively handle any of them you need to follow some guiding principles and allow some essential factors to guide your choice and utilization.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Effective use of instructional media in Social Studies demands a conscious consideration of some factors.
Discuss.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Olatunde, F. (2006).
Primary school Social Studies curriculum and methods Lagos: NOUN Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004).
A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre-service and in-service teachers Lagos: A-Triads Associate 94  UNIT 2: TYPES OF INSTRUCTION RESOURCE MATERIALS AND THEIR APPLICATION IN SOCIAL STUDIES CLASSROOMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Audio Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms.
3.2: Visual Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms.
3.3: Audio-Visual Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION In the last Unit, you learnt about the meaning of instructional resource material, the principles guiding its usage and the factors you need to consider while selecting and using it.
As a follow up to this, you need to be conversant with the variety of instructional resource materials from which you would regularly need to choose from.
This is exactly what this Unit is going to tell you about.
You will learn about the categories and characteristics of each of the instructional resource materials and how to use them in your class.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe audio resource materials and use some of them in the Social Studies classroom.
2.
Describe visual resource materials and use some of them in the Social Studies classroom.
3.
Describe audio-visual resource materials and use some of them in the Social Studies classroom.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Audio Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms Audio instructional resource materials are aids that promote effective and meaningful listening as part of learning experiences in and out of the classroom.
They are teaching and learning resources that appeal to learners’ sense of hearing.
The possibilities of making dramatic, vivid presentation of Social Studies content through sound give significance to available audio transcriptions, either on magnetic or audio cassette tapes or discs.
95  The audio resource materials therefore come in form of recordings from speeches, accounts of important historical events, and musical selections.
Tape recorders, record players and radio allow children to exercise to the fullest their listening comprehension.
Teachers are will not be expected to neglect the use of these resources as learning media.
For instance, getting children to listen to cultural programmes such as concerts, dramatic productions, broadcast of historical events and news items from radio stations would go a long way in complementing classroom teaching as well as build in the learners an interest and awareness in current events.
Tape recorders can be used effectively for slow learners and for improving the communication skills of the learners.
The teacher must however prepare his/her learners adequately for the use of audio materials by particularly ensuring that there is no distraction.
3.2: Visual Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms These are instructional resource materials associated with the learners’ sense of seeing (sight).
The use of visual materials is based on the wise saying that “ a picture is worth thousands of words”.
They could be symbols, images, sketches and drawings which the learners can see and get the necessary message(s) being passed by the teacher.
They provide direct first hand experience for the learners.
Examples of these include; the chalkboard, magic/marker board, flannel graph, wall charts, graphs, maps, diagrams, pictures, newspaper cuttings, flash cards, bulletin board, posters, collage, globes, sand table and salt maps.
The Social Studies teacher attempting to use any of these visual materials must make sure that they are placed in strategic positions in the classroom so that every learner can have access to it.
They must be made colourful, attractive, interesting and less clumsy.
For them to be effectively used in the class, the teacher must be resourceful.
That is, he/she must be ready to search for the relevant ones either personally or through his/her students.
He/she must necessarily assist the learners in their understanding of the natural setting of the visual resource particularly when it is an object.
It does not hurt if the teacher decides to get the learners to construct some of these visual resource materials for class use.
For instance, children can be made to learn how to construct and interpret graphs based on data they are studying or collected.
Preston and Herman Jnr.
(1981) observed that children are often intrigued by cross-sectional diagrams.
After studying the diagrams, pupils may be encouraged to draw sections of structures about which they are learning or about which they have detailed knowledge through first-hand observation.
This will however depend on the age and level of the learners.
3.3: Audio-Visual Resource Materials and their Use in Social Studies Classrooms Learning and remembering can be better promoted where the teacher uses audio-visual instructional resource materials.
These are aids which encourage the use of more sensory organs such as sight, hearing, touching and even feeling.
The fact that Social Studies teaching 96  appeals to the three domains of learning-cognitive, affective and psychomotor, there is that dire need for concrete illustrations which only audio-visual resource materials can provide.
The resource materials in this case are both audible and visible.
Typical examples include the television, video cassettes, digital video discs (DVDs), video compact discs (VCDs), and film strip projectors.
Effective use of any of these calls for a systematic planning.
When thinking about what will be appropriate for your class it is important to consider the following: i.
The number of students to use the resource(s).
ii.
The age of the students.
iii.
How abstract the content to be learned.
iv.
How complex is it to create or use the instructional resource material.
v. What instructional materials are available at home, in the school or community from which the teacher can equally draw from with less stress.
So as Social Studies teachers you will expected to use the instructional resource materials skillfully with the learners by ensuring that enough time is given for discussion before and or after the presentation or involvement of the learners.
You would also need to encourage your students to note the important messages being passed across so that they could summarise the main points at the end of their interactions with the resource materials.
It is important to also note that computer and internet sources have now become very useful instructional resource materials which cannot be directly categorized as done in the preceding paragraphs.
These are resources that provide active individual instruction at student’s pace and they give instant feedback.
There are also phenomenal which could be described as instructional media.
These include events, things features, settings and other community resources that are directly or indirectly apprehended by the learners at their natural or semi-natural setting.
You will learn more about this in the last Unit of this Module 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Differentiate between a visual resource material and an audio-visual type with concrete examples.
2.
What is an audio instructional resource material?
Cite any three examples.
4.0: CONCLUSION This Unit has been presented in such a way that teachers must necessarily accept the fact that the more concrete a learning experience is, the more it is likely to help learning and remembering.
The various instructional resource materials presented in this Unit should therefore be accepted as effective tools of changing learning experience from being abstract to being concrete.
Teachers however need to be more conscious of the fact that they cannot derive maximum benefit from these instructional resource materials unless they know how to use them properly and what all of their possibilities are.
97  98  5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have learnt about the various categories of instructional resource materials and the different ways of using them in the classrooms.
Specifically, the categories discussed include audio, visual audio-visual and computer/internet sources.
They demand skilful usage and high degree of preparation from the teacher.
As Social Studies teachers it is expected you will demonstrate your mastery of their usage by combining a variety in your class without necessarily creating confusion among your learners.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Select any visual and audio-visual media and describe how you will use the two to teach a Social Studies topic of your choice at the junior secondary level.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Olatunde, F. (2006).
Primary school Social Studies curriculum and methods Lagos: NOUN Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2004).
A pedagogy handbook for Social Studies pre- service and in-service teachers Lagos: A-Triads Associate Preston, R.C.
& Herman, W.L.
Jnr.
(1981).
Teaching Social Studies in the elementary school 5th ed.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston 99  UNIT 3: IMPROVISATION OF INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCE MATERIALS IN SOCIAL STUDIES CLASSROOMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: The Concept of Improvisation in Social Studies 3.2: The Need and Importance of Improvisation in Social Studies Classrooms 3.3: Skills for Improvising Instructional Resource Materials in Social Studies Classrooms 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION The quality of instructional resources available for any learner goes a long way to determine how motivated and active he/she would be in the teaching-learning process.
But experiences in the recent times have shown that it is becoming increasingly difficult for practising teachers of most school subjects (social studies inclusive) to source for and utilise appropriate instructional materials in their respective classrooms.
In this Unit, opportunity will be provided for you to have a detail insight into how you can acquire the skills necessary for procuring and improvising relevant instructional resources for teaching social studies.
100  2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define the concept of improvisation.
2.
Highlight the importance of improvisation towards the effective teaching of Social Studies.
3.
Identify and describe some of the skills needed by the teacher for improvising instructional resource materials in Social Studies classrooms.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: The Concept of Improvisation Hornby (1978) in the 3rd edition of Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary of Current English defines improvisation as “providing, making, or doing quickly in time of need, using whatever happens to be available”.
The proposed contextual usage of the concept of improvisation would however not allow one to totally succumb to Hornby’s definition.
Hence, improvisation could therefore be specially seen as an activity, embarked upon or initiated by a teacher purposely to address problems of scarcity of instructional materials either due to economic or logistic reasons.
Alonge (1993) while sharing the same view, describes improvisation as “an activity in promoting curiosity, creating, excitement, alertness and endurance among learner”.
It therefore implies that improvisation embraces activities invented by a Social Studies teacher to ensure that a replica of scarce or costly instructional materials are produced or caused to be made purposely to promote effective teaching-learning.
Along this line, Eniayeju (1983) describes improvisation as the act of using alternative materials and resources to facilitate instruction whenever there is lack or shortage of some specific first hand teaching aids.
Such activity is a way of minimizing cost on equipment and materials.
Likewise, it is a means of local replication of the universality of some ideas.
This is coupled with the fact that it is an inexpensive method of widening the scope of inquiry in preparing for any teaching-learning activity.
101  3.2: The Need and Importance of Improvisation in Social Studies Class The teacher’s role in the development of a piece of learning material or apparatus is extremely important.
But the question is, when does it become extremely important for such teacher to embark on the development of such learning materials?
In finding solution to this question, one needs to consider the present situation in the country.
In the first instance, the state of the economy in Nigeria today cannot be described as that which is capable of helping the school system to source and store instructional materials for ready access by practising teachers.
Funds have become so scarce that all the government now strives to fulfill as a major obligation is the payment of staff salaries.
School administrators are therefore finding it difficult to stock their school audio-visual or educational technological centre with relevant instructional materials and equipment which teachers can regularly fetch for use.
So practising Social Studies teachers are expected to be less dependent on what the government or school can provide in terms of teaching aids.
They are therefore expected to be very alert, outward-looking very creative, and be ready to produce relevant instructional materials for use in their classrooms.
Closely linked with this state of the nation’s economy is the disposition of the government towards procurement of imported instructional materials or equivalent e.g.
slides mounts, slide projectors, for use by teachers.
So it becomes pertinent for teachers of Social Studies to think of improvising any instructional material which they could not get due to this reason.
Furthermore, when teachers discovered that the equipment or material they are sourcing looks too foreign or sophisticated for the group of learners they are relating with, there could also be the need to localise such resource for the benefit of the learners.
By so doing, the inability of the learners or teachers to use the resource for technical or cultural reasons would have been addressed.
One other major situation that regularly calls for improvisation of resource materials in Social Studies class or any other class for that matter is the inability of the instructional material to go round the students’ population.
The practising Social Studies teacher will not be expected to give up hope, but rather he/she will be expected to learn more to fabricate similar materials from indigenous materials to compliment the few available ones.
102  3.3: Skills for Improvising Instructional Resources The skills required for improvising instructional resources in any Social Studies class are shrouded in the phrase “coping with limited resources”.
That is, it is only a skilful teacher who is capable of determining when resources are limited that he/she can effectively improvise and still make his/her students learn.
However, effective improvisation in the Social Studies class requires a detail and in-depth content analysis of the curriculum in use.
This is with the desire to acquaint him/herself with the recommended instructional materials.
Such acquaintances will offer the teacher the opportunity to discover early enough, equipment or material requiring improvisation.
This will therefore allow actions to be stepped up on time for the procurement and development of such scarce or costly instructional material(s) or equipment.
A quick rundown of Social Studies instructional materials that might require improvisation as contained in the relevant curriculum include: film strips, slides, maps/charts, commercial but educative posters, models, transparencies etc.
To improvise any of these materials effectively in class, the teacher must be ready to raise and answer the following questions during and after improvisation exercise.
These include: a.
What does the improvised material seek to promote?
b.
Will it further the interest and curiosity of the learners?
c. Will it provide the desired skills in the learners?
d. Is it simple, durable and readily replicable?
e. What is the aesthetic rating of the improvised material or equipment?
f. Is the classroom environment suitable for the use of the improvised materials?
These are all pertinent questions, the answers to which are capable of facilitating an effective teaching-learning process in Social Studies.
103  Nevertheless, the teacher trying to improvise still needs to acquire some basic skills, the acronym of which Lawal (1997) tagged “MR.
GLOPPOC”.
That is: (cid:1) Mechanical Manipulation: which allows one to draw, sketch, cut, glaze and paint if need be.
(cid:1) Reflective Thinking: which allows one to think fast but critically, about alternative resources in case of scarcity and their suitability.
(cid:1) Gathering: which puts one at an advantage to “scout round” for relevant materials to be put together to produce improvised material.
(cid:1) Locating Information: which is a demonstration of currency as regards source(s) of information and materials that could be useful for prompt and easy development of the improvised teaching aids.
(cid:1) Observation: this concerns the alertness that could help to regularly discover the need for improvisation.
(cid:1) Planning: which concerns ability to recognise the need for improvisation and work towards it systematically.
It facilitates the successful production of the materials.
(cid:1) Problem-Solving: It is the “mother of all the skills”.
This is because it is that which encompasses all other skills.
A good use of this skill increases the chances of producing useful and relevant improvised instructional materials.
(cid:1) Organising: This is closely related to the skill of planning.
It depicts the teacher’s capability to put everything being developed in proper shape for eventual use.
(cid:1) Controlling situation: This is the skill that assists the teacher in managing crisis situation that has to do with limited or scarce instructional resources.
With this skill, the teacher will not unnecessarily panic.
The utility value of each and all of these skills can be demonstrated with the following typical examples of improvising instructional materials in a Social Studies classroom.
104  Slides/slide film improvisation: Procuring slides mounts and films might become a major problem for a Social Studies teacher.
But if he/she has the skill of problem solving, locating information, gathering and manipulation, these can be easily addressed within a very short time.
For instance, the teacher could procure cheap board of low grammage or cardboard which could be cut into strips to make the frame of the normal size of a slide mount.
These stripes can be glued to form a 2” X”2 slide mount.
As for the slide films, one could employ the procedure recommended by the African Social and Environmental Studies Programme (ASESP, 1994) in one of its publications.
The materials recommended for use shall include: i. clear adhesive paper or tape (one or two-inch wide).
ii.
thin glass square 2” X”2 iii.
scissors iv.
bowl of water v. printed matter or pictures from paper such as magazines or catalogues that stick.
Procedure i.
Cover the printed matter or picture with adhesive paper or tape a little larger than two-inch square.
ii.
Place a piece of paper over the tape (to protect it from scratches) and rub with flat stick pressing fairly hard to rub out all the little air bubbles under the tape.
This seals the tape to the picture.
iii.
Cut the picture covered with tape into two-inch square (the size of a slide).
iv.
Lay the picture covered with tape in a bowl of water and allow to soak for at least one or two minute(s) until you can begin to rub off the back of the picture on the tape.
v. Gently rubbing the back of the tape, the paper residue will rub off, leaving the transfer printed matter or picture on the sticky tape.
vi.
When all residue is removed, place the adhesive tape with the image (sticky side down) on the 2” X”2 thin glass square.
vi.
Blot away excess water, and place a clean piece of paper over image to the slide.
The slide is ready to be placed on the slide projector.
If however you don’t have a slide projector, a clean school window where the sun can shine through it becomes your projector.
Transparencies: These can be made using the same procedure employed for slide films, provided the teacher is quite skilful.
But this time, a wider adhesive paper or tape 105  is required.
Rather than placing the produced transparency on 2” X”2 thin glass square, the produced transparency could be laid on a thin acrylic sheet or a piece of clean plastic grocery bag (Nylon).
The same improvised projector could also be used in case the teacher cannot lay his hand on an overhead projector (OHP).
Other instructional materials that could be improvised using similar skill include-display boards, like bulletin board, posters and collage three-dimensional materials like model, a mobile, a dio-rama, and graphic materials like maps, charts and graph.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Give a simple definition of improvisation.
2.
State four reasons that can make you support improvisation of resource materials in Social Studies class.
4.0: CONCLUSION Effective teaching of Social Studies at any level requires that a variety of instructional resource materials must be considered and used.
However, we are also aware that it might not be easy at all times for the teacher to access every material needed to promote meaningful teaching in his/her class.
It is therefore expected that improvised materials will be sourced by the teacher to complement existing and easier sourced instructional resource materials.
It is hoped that as Social Studies teachers you will consider factors like appropriateness, level of sophistication, cost of effectiveness and technical quality of materials to be improvised before embarking on such activities for any teaching-learning process.
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have interacted with the concept of improvisation and the need for effective teaching in the school system through improvisation of instructional materials.
A critical attempt was made to examine the reasons that could regularly demand improvisation from the Social Studies teacher.
The need to carry out a content analysis of the curriculum and the recommended instructional materials in order to be more readily available for the demand of 106  improvisation was emphasised.
Attempt was also made to acquaint you with the skills required for effective improvisation.
Typical application of such skills was demonstrated using slides and transparencies.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Establish the rationale for getting involved in the production of improvised instructional resource materials.
2.
What skills would you need to effectively carry out improvisation of instructional resource materials for meaningful learning in a Social Studies class?
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alonge, E. I.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
Science Teacher Association of Nigeria.
24th Annual Conference Proceedings pa 171 – 181 ASESP (1994).
Social studies curriculum and teaching resource book for Africa Nairobi: ASESP Secretariat Eniayeju, A.
(1983): Improvisation in integrated science: A practical demonstration.
Science Teachers Association of Nigeria – 24th Annual Conference Proceedings 187- 190 Federal Ministry of Education (1992).
Training Guide for Master Trainers in Social Studies.
Ibadan Comprehensive Guide Limited.
Hornby, A. S. (1978): Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English.
3rd Edition.
Oxford University Press.
Lawal, M. B.
(1997).
Enhancing in-service teachers’ skill in procuring and improving instructional resources for junior secondary studies.
Journal of Continuing Education (1) 1 June 36-44.
107  UNIT 4: THE COMMUNITY AS A LEARNING RESOURCE IN SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Categories of Community Resources for Social Studies Teaching 3.2: Importance of Community Resources for Social Studies Teaching 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0: Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Schools and centres exist within particular communities, and each community has much to offer as a resource to teachers planning curriculum for young children.
Teachers need to assess and access what the community can provide.
In this Unit, you will acquire more knowledge and skills for addressing any inadequacy that might be experienced while sourcing for instructional materials for Social Studies teaching.
This is in terms of improvising resource materials where it is difficult to get the actual resource materials that may be required for meaningful teaching and learning in Social Studies.
2.0:OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit you should be able to: 1.
Describe the categories of community resources that can be used for Social Studies teaching 2.
Highlight the importance of community resources for Social Studies teaching 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Categories of Community Resources for Social Studies Teaching Carol Gestwicki (2007) categorized community resources into three main groups which are; natural resources, people resources, and materials resources.
Natural Resources Within reach from a school, teachers may find business, shopping areas, transportation systems and depots, construction sites, police and fire stations, parts and recreation areas, churches, zoos, museums, and residential streets.
Each one of these offers countless learning experiences.
It is a 108  useful exercise for the Social Studies teacher to walk the areas within ten minutes walking distance of his/her school, to discover all the places that might be intriguing from a young child’s point of view.
There might be, for example, a traditional institution or palace where children could visit and interview the rulers or keepers on topics relevant to what they are going to be or have been taught.
They could also visit historical sites, national parks, zoos, game reserve and other places where they would be opportune to have direct and first-hand experiences that are of direct relevance to the contents of their curriculum in Social Studies.
Alert teachers are therefore expected to use these natural community resources to design curriculum outside and inside the classroom.
People Resources Every neighbourhood has its own socioeconomic and cultural composition.
Teachers who familiarise themselves with the customs and life-styles of the people in the community surrounding their school, may find richness and diversity to share with the children.
Parents themselves may be the link to assist teachers in learning the community’s people resources, as they disclose aspects of their home lives.
For example, teachers may find neighbours experienced in ethnic cooking or traditional music who could share their interest with the children.
Many community service agencies have representatives prepared to explain the agency to young children e.g.
a fire-fighter, complete with boots, hat, and heavy coat; a medical doctor in his/her full professional outfit kitted to enter a theatre etc.
Teachers who notice the people in neighbourhoods surrounding their school, may discover others who would have interest in spending time with young children e.g.
a retired chief matron would enjoy talking to children on how to avoid incidence of teenage motherhood and pregnancy.
People resources of all types can enrich the school Material Resources Gestwicki (2007) remarks that teachers who make “community connections” can find their classrooms recipients of many objects children can use.
Manufacturing companies located that are contiguous to the school community can be contacted to donate materials needed for practical teaching of some topics in the Social Studies class.
Sawmill industries may be contacted to provide scraps usable in constructing models that can be used as instructional materials in the class.
The GSM network companies such as GLO, MTN or ZAIN may offer old telephone sets, more inviting for their realism.
Large packing cases from the local appliance or furniture store can be transformed into storage or play spaces.
The decorating shop’s wall paper, and sample books can be used in dozens of ways by creative Social Studies teachers.
Teachers should make lists of all community businesses and then brainstorm all possible material resources.
Most businesses like to feel they can make a contribution.
Parents are often helpful connections in identifying and obtaining material resources.
All of these “community connections” can enrich curriculum offerings, as well as convey evidence of community interest and support for teachers and families.
109  3.2: Importance of Community Resources for Social Studies Teaching Instructional media such as events, things, features, settings, festivals and other community resources that are directly apprehended by the learners at their natural or semi-natural setting constitute part of what can be described as phenomenals.
Usually, community resources help to bring the learners in direct contact with learning experiences.
They help provide the learners with first-hand experience of the realities of their social and physical environments.
Community resources such as resource persons, museums, aquarium, zoos, farms, beaches, caves, warm springs, and historical sites facilitate learning experiences that can leave more lasting impressions in the learners’ minds.
Community resources equally assist the teacher to easily overcome the limitations of the classroom, by making the inaccessible accessible.
For a very resourceful Social Studies teacher, his/her ability to explore the use of community resources reduces the financial costs of going to procure instructional resource materials which sometimes might even be difficult to access.
The use also makes it possible for the learners to operate in familiar terrain manipulating familiar situations and relating with situations that will not necessarily be too complex for them to handle.
Community resources also stimulate aesthetic talents, they promote tactile stimulus and enhance identification and attachment not to only nature but also with the particular learning situation they facilitate socialisation process.
This class of media deals mostly with the affective but does not preclude the psychomotor and the cognitive domains.
The effects of direct contact on the learners can hardly be under estimated.
3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
List any three categories of community resources.
2.
Give any three reasons why the use of community resources should be embraced by the Social Studies teacher.
110  4.0: CONCLUSION Community resources are essential instructional resource materials which Social Studies teachers must learn to source for if he/she must contribute effectively to meaningful learning in the classroom.
They come in different forms and are in abundance for the teacher to explore, provided he/she is very reflective in his thoughts and actions so that it will be easier to identify these resources and make relevant choices regularly.
Every place, event, festival, professional and other local resources of interest are therefore of relevance when we talk of community resources that can be used for teaching different content areas in the Social Studies curriculum at different levels of Nigeria’s educational system.
5.0: SUMMARY You have learnt about the various categories of community resources and their importance in the teaching and learning of Social Studies.
They could be natural resources, people resources and material resources.
Teachers must accept that these resources are of paramount importance particularly when it is remembered that other instructional resource materials could be expensive to procure and sometimes inaccessible.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Attempt a categorization of community resources and establish why it is important for the Social Studies teacher to consider their usage in his/her class.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Esu, A.
E.O., Umoh, S. J.
& Obi, F. B.
(1995).
Pedagogy of environmental education Lagos: Macmillan Pub.
Gestwicki, C. (2007).
Home, school and community relations USA: Delmar Cengage Learning 111  112
