 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 735 COURSE TITLE: TEACHING PRACTISE MANUAL Course Code EDU 635 Course Title Teaching Practice Manual Course Developer/Writer Course Editor Dr. U. M. Celawu Course Co-ordinator Dr.
I. D. Salawu Programme Leader Dr. U. S. Osuji NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2008 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by: For National Open University of Nigeria  UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT OF STUDENT TEACHING PRACTICE PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Student Teaching Practice?
3.2 Rationale for Student Teaching Practice 3.3 The Goal of Student Teaching Practice 3.4 Objectives of STP 3.5 Definition of Technical Terms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References I Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is no teacher education programme that can be said to be complete without an effective Student Teaching Practice programme.
Although, there is a school of thought, which says that "teachers are born, not trained", the overwhelming view today is that there is a need for professionally trained teachers to teach in our schools.
This view was echoed by the former Minister of Education, Professor Aliu Babatunde Fafunwa who expressed his belief that "a good teacher education programme must seek to assist the individual teacher to grow and develop as a person, provide him with the necessary skills and professional abilities that will help him become an effective teacher".
The type of teacher education under discussion can only be provided through several strategies, one of which is Student Teaching Practice (STP).
Therefore, the concept of STP is deeply rooted in the drive towards the education and training of competent and professional teachers.
The purpose of this unit is to discuss the meaning, the rationale, goal and general objectives of STP as well as define some technical terms you will come across during the exercise.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: • define Student Teaching Practice (STP) • discuss the rationale for STP • list the goal and general objectives of STP • define some technical terms used in STP.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Student Teaching Practice?
The term STP is defined differently by many educationists.
A few of these definitions are, however, worthy of note.
These are: (i) According to Salawu and Adeoye (2002), Student Teaching Practice: ……is a practical teaching activity by which the student -teachers are given an opportunity in actual school situation to demonstrate and improve training in pedagogical skill over a period of time.
(ii) Student Teaching Practice is a kind of apprenticeship stage during which the students are sent out to school to gain practical and professional experience by translating all the educational theories they have acquired or learnt during training into practice (Fagbulu, 1984).
(iii) Yee (1967) defines Student Teaching Practice and its processes as: A prolonged period of laboratory experience in an actual classroom situation during which the student takes increasing responsibility for his/her preparation as a teacher under the direction of an institution supervisor representing his/her teacher –education centre and cooperating teacher who is responsible for the classroom situation.
(iv) Student Teaching Practice is a pre-service professional preparation for interested persons, aspiring to become teachers with a credible vision for sustainable human development (Oyekan, 2000).
All of the foregoing definitions are valid for our purpose in this Practical Teaching Manual.
Whatever definition is given to STP, the most important thing is that it is a professional exercise which is focused on helping the student-teacher to bridge the gap between theory and practice in education.
In the process of bridging the  gap between educational theories and practice, the student-teacher, through a programme of cooperative and interactive guidance, acquires valuable skills in teaching and the management of teaching etc.
from experienced teachers.
A meaningful STP embodies both laboratory/clinical (microteaching) and field teaching experiences in actual school classroom situations.
3.2 Rationale The National Policy on Education NPE (2004) in section 6 dwells on teacher education.
Among others, the section specifies the following as the objectives of teacher education: (a) to produce highly motivated, conscientious and efficient classroom teachers for all levels of our education system; (b) to encourage further the spirit of enquiry and creativity in teachers.
Implicit in these specifications of the NPE is the fact that the teacher education programme in all educational institutions in Nigeria is billed to turn out effective professional teachers.
Towards the realization of this goal, the general component requirements of teacher education curriculum in Nigeria today include: (a) General Studies (b) Foundation Studies (Principles and Practice of Education Courses) (c) Teaching Subject (Double or Single Major) (d) Teaching Practice (STP) The theoretical basis for SIP is perhaps informed by the general traditions whereby majority of the professional organisations do provide the "neophytes" some forms of prescribed pre-service training.
This practice dates back to the time of apprenticeship under experienced bricklayers, blacksmiths, sculptors etc.
in the traditional African society.
SIP in teacher education can be likened to similar clinical and field practice arrangements, such as Industrial Training, Housemanship and other Students Work Services programme for would-be doctors, lawyers, engineers, pharmacists etc.
The value of SIP lies in providing the teacher-trainees the initial exposure to the realities of teaching through a broad range of activities.
A successful participation in SIP is a compulsory requirement for the completion of any certificate, diploma or degree in Teacher Education Programme in Nigeria.
The basic assumption is that since most of the teacher-trainees have never taught formally before, it is rational to include SIP in their professional training  programme, to provide them, unique experience and opportunities to learn by doing.
3.3 Goals There are very many views about the goals of STP.
However, the mostly accepted general view is that SIP provides for testing educational theories and for putting educational principles into practice.
In other words, the purpose of SIP is to provide planned and carefully supervised learned activities which allow the teacher-trainees not only to demonstrate but also to improve their resourcefulness as teachers to be.
The goals of SIP are to: (1) provide you the opportunity to learnt the art of teaching in actual classroom situations under the guidance of an experienced cooperating teacher; (2) provide you the opportunity to demonstrate in real classroom situation your mastery of teaching the subject matter and the methodology of imparting it to learners; (3) provide your professional development and foster a positive attitude to teaching in you; (4) assess the extent to which you satisfy the requirement for the award of the certificate you are pursuing, and (5) enable School of Education, NOUN, to evaluate the adequacy or otherwise of the practical aspects of the teacher education programmes.
3.4 Objectives SIP is expected to enable you: (i) develop skills and competencies of teaching; (ii) apply the principles you learnt from the courses you studied to teach in addition to bringing about meaningful changes in learners; (iii) write scheme of work, lesson notes using appropriate concepts and generalizations that will facilitate learning; (iv) select and use a variety of teaching strategies and instructional resources that are appropriate to achieve the objectives you stated in your lesson plan; (v) study and diagnose learning difficulties of pupils and provide guidance and remedial instruction to those who need them;  (vi) apply the principles of evaluation in assessing the effectiveness of your teaching as well as the progress of your pupils, as a means of improving instruction; (vii) acquire skill in democratic classroom management; (viii) participate actively and effectively in the various instructional and non- instructional programmes and activities of the school where you are posted for teaching practice (TP); (ix) establish good human relations with the students, staff, parents and other members of the community of the school where you are posted; (x) have the opportunity to participate in community activities which will enhance your professional growth as a teacher.
3.5 Definition of Technical Terms The following terms are defined either as generically used in the field of education or as specially used in NOUN.
Student-teacher/Teacher-trainees are students at undergraduate and postgraduate diploma’’levels studying to become teachers.
Teaching Practice Monitoring involves the visitation, observation and evaluation of student-teachers by teacher educators where they have bee posted.
Pre-practice Teaching Activities are the array of activities carried out in preparation for the teaching practice exercise by student-teachers, facilitators, supervisors, teacher educators aimed at ensuring a successful teaching practice exercise.
School of Education refers to the academic unit in the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) Headquarters charged with the responsibility of producing competent teachers in various programmes at undergraduate and postgraduate levels through distance learning modes.
Cooperating Schools are the schools where the student-teachers will be undertaking their teaching practice exercise.
Cooperating Teachers are the subject teachers in the cooperating schools who serve as mentors to student-teachers assigned to their classes.
Cooperating teachers, according to Afe (1990) are usually appointed by the Head Teachers on grounds of age, competence, experience and qualification.
They are to play the role of guiding, advising and helping the student-teachers.
In addition, they act as a bridge between the school and the supervisors.
Head Teachers are the Heads of Primary Schools or Principals of Secondary Schools or the Heads of Departments of specific subject areas in cooperating schools.
Evaluation refers to the assessment and judgment of the student-teacher's performance during and at the end of the teaching practice.
The essence of evaluation is to determine a student-teacher's overall performance in order to assign him/her a grade.
4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING  UNIT 2 QUALITIES AND SKILLS EXPECTED OF STUDENT ON TEACHING PRACTICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Qualities Expected of Teachers 3.1.1 Personal Qualities 3.2 Skills Expected of Teachers 3.2.1 Skills in Lesson Preparation and Delivery 3.2.2 Skills in Management and Assessment of Learners 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every student-teacher must possess certain personal qualities as well as skills in lesson preparation and delivery in order to have a successful teaching practice exercise.
In this unit, these qualities and skills are listed and explained.
As a prospective student-teacher, you must not only know about these qualities and skills, you must demonstrate your knowledge of them practically.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the personal qualities expected of a student-teacher • enumerate and explain the skills a student-teacher must possess.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Qualities Expected of Teachers 3.1.1 Personal Qualities A teacher must have personal qualities that should positively impact on his/her students.
These qualities are listed and explained below:  (i) Dressing mode: The works of Skinner Gagne, have shown that children learn through imitation of their teachers.
Children tend to emulate their teachers in their formative years.
The teacher's mode of dressing may positively or negatively influence his/her students.
It becomes impressive therefore that the teacher must dress properly and neatly.
He/She must be simple and well kept.
The wearing of costly clothes does not imply being well dressed.
Neatness, simplicity, and appropriateness in dressing are some of the areas a student-teacher is rated.
(ii) Self-confidence and Emotional Composure: Self-confidence and emotional composure are attributes that a well trained teacher should possess.
Self-confidence in oneself shows that the student-teacher knows what he/she is doing.
A student-teacher who has adequate mastery of his/her subject matter and has prepared his lesson notes in accordance with the dictates of the pedagogical situation is likely to be confident and composed.
Lack of self-confidence arises if the student-teacher fails to prepare for the lesson.
This can manifest through nervousness, vocal inhibition, rapid breathing and constant blinking of the eyes.
Lack of confidence may also result from poor interpersonal social skills.
Some individuals do not feel comfortable in front of an audience.
As a student-teacher, you must try to overcome stage fright when teaching.
Emotional composure is another important attribute you must possess as a teacher.
If you are easily annoyed or flare up at the slightest provocation by your students; if you get annoyed when you make a mistake and are corrected by your students or supervisor, you are not emotionally stable.
Someone who lacks emotional composure tends to manifest unhealthy reactions to difficult and frustrating situations.
(iii) Exhibition of Enthusiasm: The student-teacher is teaching the subject of his specialization.
Therefore, he should feel good about it.
This is the first order of effectiveness.
Otherwise, his students are going to be equally unlikely to be enthusiastic about the subject.
(iv) Acceptance of Constructive Criticisms and Corrections: A student-teacher should be able to accept criticisms and corrections from both supervisor, his colleagues and even from the students.
A supervisor does not criticize the student-teachers in order to fail them but to help them improve on their teaching and classroom management skills.
The student-teachers are therefore required to exhibit emotional maturity by taking the constructive suggestions by the supervisor in good faith.
(v) Good Manners: Manners and comportment of student-teachers are reflective of the type of people they are, the type of people they interact with, their value beliefs, their social and educational background.
It is very important that the student-teachers exhibit good manners and comport themselves well before their class and in the entire school of their teaching practice assignment.
(vi) Respect for Students: If you respect the students you teach, you will very likely enjoy their cooperation.
This is because the attitude of the teacher and his approach to students, whether harsh or friendly, affects the student-teacher relationship.
What kind of a teacher are you?
Are you approachable?
Do you insult your students?
Are you willing to answer students' questions?
The teacher is expected to treat his/her students as individuals capable of contributing to their own learning.
Teachers should avoid injuring the ego of their students by shouting down at the students who ask or want to ask questions.
They should avoid casting aspersions on students who fail to answer questions correctly.
They should avoid denying them the right to contribute to their own learning in the classroom and thereby crippling their intellectual growth.
3.2 Skills Expected of Teachers 3.2.1 Skills in Lesson Preparation and Delivery The ability to prepare and deliver lessons is at the centre of any teaching practice exercise.
In your Curriculum and Methods courses, you learnt how to plan and deliver lessons in your subject areas.
This section of this unit will briefly remind you of the important points in lesson planning and delivery.
(i) Quality of Lesson Notes: The first step in teaching is learning how to plan and deliver lessons.
The supervisor should critically evaluate the lesson plans by examining the terminologies used by the teacher-trainee and their relevance to the particular subject matter.
The supervisor should also pay attention to the writing style.
The final grading should reflect the desired level of competency shown by the student- teacher and his/her willingness to adjust his/her teaching as required by the supervisor's suggestions.
(ii) Statement of Aims and Objectives: The supervising teacher should always pay special attention to the statement of aims and objectives in the lesson the student-teacher is teaching or going to teach.
He should ask questions such as: Are the aims and objectives well stated?
Are the objectives stated in specific behavioural and measurable terms?
Do the objectives of the lesson reflect any level of knowledge?
Are the objectives pupil-centred?
Do the objectives cover all the aspects of the lesson content?
Answers to these questions would enable the supervisor guide the student-teacher appropriately.
(iii) Adequacy of Facts: It is important that the facts presented in the lesson are adequate and based on the recommended texts.
The supervisor should be able to help the student-teacher to separate facts from opinion.
(iv) Logical Presentation of Materials: It is important that facts are presented in a logical sequence.
The topics should be presented in a progressive order.
The supervisor should therefore focus on whether: (a) the introduction to the topic is adequate and stimulating; (b) the topic prescribed by the syllabus for the day is adequately covered; (c) the sequence of presentation enables the students to attain the stated objectives of the lesson.
(v) Knowledge of the Subject matter: Knowledge of the subject matter he is teaching is a very important area the student-teacher is evaluated on.
The depth of knowledge of the subject  underscores the student-teacher's preparation of his lesson plan, lesson notes and his ability to gather relevant materials and aids to supplement the recommended texts.
(vi) Language and Voice Control: The student-teacher should express himself very well and control his voice in order to achieve the objectives specified in the lesson plan.
He must try to express himself in very simple and correct English.
He should try to avoid colloquial language which adulterates the proper use of the English Language.
He should also avoid words and expressions which may hinder the students from fully understanding the concepts being taught.
The student-teacher is also evaluated on his/her tone of voice.
He should avoid shouting while teaching but he/she must make sure that he/she is audible enough to be heard by all the students.
(vii) The use of the Chalkboard: This is an area which should be critically evaluated by the supervisor.
The assessment should focus on such questions are: (a) Does the student-teacher write legibly on the board?
(b) How often does he use the board?
(c) Does he write out on the chalkboard the major points covered?
(d) Does he write out difficult words for explanation?
(viii) Effective Utilization of Teaching Aids: Adequate and effective use of teaching aids is very important especially in the explanation of the content of the lesson.
Emphasis is on teacher-made teaching aids rather than on mechanical ones which may not be affordable.
The ability of the student-teacher to improvise teaching aids should be noted.
Assessment should focus on the coordination of the lesson and the teaching aids.
The sequential use of teaching aids in the lesson plan should be noted.
3.2.2 Skills in Management and Assessment of Learning An important area in teacher preparation is management and assessment of learning.
A teacher may have good personal qualities and a good knowledge of the subject matter but he/she may lack the necessary skills to manage and assess learning.
This subsection under Unit 3 of this Teaching Practice Manual describes what a student-teacher needs to know and do in the process of managing and assessing learning.
The unit covers such areas as: Students' participation in class  activities, Teacher's distribution of questions/activities to students, Teacher's assessment of learning through in class and out of class assignments.
In the assessment of the student-teachers, the level of students' participation in class activities should be noted by the supervisor.
This is because instruction should be student-centred and the students must be actively involved in the lesson.
Discussions, questioning, suggestions, etc.
from students encourage progressive learning.
Interactive environment should be encouraged by the student-teacher.
The student-teacher should be friendly, active and must respect the students' right.
He/She should distribute the activities and questions in the class evenly to avoid chorus answers.
Assessment of learners should focus on the amount and quality of work done by the learners in and outside the class.
In conclusion, an effective classroom management will require the student teacher to: (i) understand the purpose of his teaching is to help students to develop their academic potentials; (ii) display leadership qualities that will steer the class towards meaningful discussion of curriculum contents; (iii) create an atmosphere for students to achieve the goals set for them at their own pace; (iv) take care of individual differences of the students which may emanate from their background, family status, inheritance among others; (v) avoid partiality in order to meaningfully contribute to the development of each student; (vi) motivate the students to perform to their fullest capacity and give credits to students whenever an accomplishment is made; (vii) assess his performance in the classroom.
This is an essential factor in teaching.
He should therefore ask such questions as: (a) Do I know much of the subject matter which I will teach or do I need to consult a subject specialist?
(b) Do I need to interact with my colleagues about the subject and at what level?
(c) Have I made myself familiar with recent developments in my area of specialization?
(d) Have I been reading the recommended textbooks and other relevant materials in order to update my knowledge of the subject matter before going to teach the students?
The purpose of self-evaluation is to enhance self-development and professional growth.
It is oriented toward goal therefore the student teachers should be able to accept criticisms from others.
He should have the ability to accept new ideas and innovations willingly.
4.0 CONCLUSION Like in other professions such as medicine, law, engineering etc.
the teaching profession requires that prospective teachers undergo a period of internship.
Internship in the field of Education is called Teaching Practice.
Student-teacher is not certified as a teacher on completion of his/her degree programme until he/she has undergone a teaching practice exercise.
This Manual is a Handbook on Teaching Practice as conducted in the School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES & FURTHER READING  UNIT 3 ROLES OF DIFFERENT STAKEHOLDERS IN NOUN'S STUDENTS' I TEACHING PRACTICE A number of individuals or groups of individuals who are stakeholders in the proposed Teaching Practice exercise have different functions to perform.
Their various functions are listed below: NOUN's MANAGEMENT NOUN is the initiator of the Teaching Practice.
She is therefore responsible for ensuring the attainment of the standards desired in the exercise.
She should see to the following: • The appointment of relevant staff to take charge of the teaching practice.
• Making of adequate provision of needed funds, vehicles, equipment and all other facilities that may be needed.
• Supporting all activities that are planned to enhance the success of the exercise.
TEACHING PRACTICE COMMITTEE IN NOUN HEADQUARTERS The role of the committee includes the following: (i) Draw up the guidelines for organizing and coordinating the teaching practice.
(ii) Appoint Teaching Practice Supervisors, monitoring staff and external moderators, and forward this to the Vice Chancellor for approval.
(iii) Organize a seminar, which will involve everyone that has a role to perform in the exercise; namely: relevant academic staff, study centre managers and appointed supervisors.
The seminar will focus on the general guidelines for the administration of the teaching practice.
Among other things the seminar will educate the participant on the proper conduct of supervision.
It will also be a forum for clarifying all related issues; including: (i) Supervising duties (ii) Assessment procedures (iii) Strategies for monitoring activities (iv) Supervising guide which will spell out the duties of specific groups involved in the teaching practice e.g.
duties of supervisors, duties of monitoring staff and duties of the external moderators etc.
THE STUDY CENTRE MANAGERS  As the representative of NOUN for his/her own zone, the study centre manager should ensure proper conduct of teaching practice in his/her own zone.
He/She should therefore see to the following: (i) Replicate the teaching practice seminar held at NOUN headquarters in his/her own centre for stakeholders in his/her own zone.
(ii) Properly educate supervisors and students teachers on all aspects of the teaching practice exercise.
(iii) Make arrangements to get students teachers absorbed in schools for their practical teaching.
(iv) Assist in securing release of student teachers and supervisors from their employers.
(v) Produce and make available all teaching practice guidelines and other information from NOUN to supervisor, external moderators and student teachers where they are concerned.
(vi) Provide a comprehensive list of student teachers to be supervised (in his/her zone) to supervisors.
Such list must include names and addresses of schools to which they are posted, classes to teach the list should get to the supervisors at least two weeks before the commencement of the teaching practice.
(vii) Ensure that teaching practice takes off at the same time in his zone.
(viii) Ensure that supervisors adhere to the dates fixed for supervision visitation.
(ix) Ensure that forms for student supervision and head teachers are completed, signed and submitted to him/her.
SUPERVISORS AND THEIR ROLES Supervision is the core of teaching practice exercise.
Valid information on student teachers' performances is obtained only through the supervision of their live teaching.
The role of supervisors therefore is of great importance.
NOUN's facilitators of Education courses in the participating study centre may serve as supervisors where the available staffs at the headquarters are not in sufficient number.
In addition, qualified personnel would be sourced from close-by College(s) of Education, Institute(s) of Education and Faculty(ies) of Education of Universities.
The NOUN's teaching practice scheme expects that the supervisors should be practicing teacher educators.
Ideally, a supervisor should supervise student teachers in his/her area of specialization.
For instance, a student teacher in Mathematics Education programme should be supervised by a Mathematics teacher educator.
However, where specialists in specific subject areas are not available, teacher educators in other subject areas could serve as supervisors.
It is  also ideal that each student should be observed by two different supervisors.
The score given by these supervisors are then aggregated to get a mean which becomes the final score.
NUMBER OF TIMES FOR SUPERVISION It is expected that every supervisor should visit and supervise the student teachers assigned to him/her at least three times.
The supervisor should never inform the student teacher(s) of the day he/she is visiting.
He/She must be at the school where the student teacher is teaching in time to ensure full observation and supervision of the student.
This will ensure that what the supervisor records is as he/she has observed.
The following are the important tips that every supervisor must bear in mind in his/her supervising role.
The supervisor should ensure that he/she: (i) is well acquainted with the NOUN's teaching practice guidelines and apply these professionally; (ii) obtain from the Study Centre Manager: (a) the names of students he/she is supervising and their schools of posting; (b) copies of teaching practice assessment instrument.
(iii) is always on time to supervise each student; (iv) visits and supervises a student at least three (3) times; (v) is objective in the assessment of each student; (vi) gives immediate feedback to the student after each supervision exercise.
Feedback is to be based on the supervisor's observation.
Supervision/Observation should focus on: (a) the student's lesson notes covering such areas as: appropriateness of format, adequacy and coverage of topic taught; appropriateness of use of language; etc.
(b) on the student's delivery of the lesson covering such areas as: introduction of the lesson, teaching of the topic, conclusion of the lesson and use of language; (c) signs and dates the student's lesson notes after completing a, b, and c above.
(vii) signs and dates the Assessment Instrument immediately after each supervision exercise; (viii) ensures that any student who is not found at his/her teaching post does not have a final assessment score; (ix) ensures that the final assessment given to a student is as objective as possible, all things being equal.
Feedback on (a) and (b) above should constitute post-teaching supervision conference between the supervisor and the student.
The supervisor must be as objective as possible in his/her discussion with the student.
He/Her comments must move from the student's areas of strength to areas of weaknesses.
The supervisor should ensure that the student is guided during this conference to identify his/her strengths/weaknesses.
The student should be given the chance to explain his/her reasons for what he/she did or did not do.
EXTERNAL MODERATORS AND THEIR ROLES The external moderators will be academics of the rank of senior lecturer and above.
These will be drawn from close-by College(s) of Education, Institute(s) of Education, Faculty(ies) of Education in Universities.
External moderators will do the following: (i) Observe a student teacher at least once and record his observation.
(ii) Moderate the supervisor's assessment as reflected in the teaching practice assessment instrument.
(iii) Give professional advice/guidance to the student teacher based on his/her observation as well as on the supervisor's comments on the student teacher's lesson notes and the supervisor's records in the teaching practice assessment instrument.
(iv) Write a report on the teaching practice exercise and forward this to the School of Education for consideration.
This report will subsequently be forwarded to the Senate by the School.
STUDENT-TEACHERS  Student-teachers are the ultimate beneficiaries of the teaching practice exercise.
They must therefore be fully and responsibly involved to ensure the success of the exercise.
To this end, each student teacher must ensure that he/she: (i) pays the required fee to allow him/her participate in the exercise; (ii) is duly registered before the commencement of the exercise; (iii) obtains before the commencement of the exercises, the necessary documents such as the NOUN Teaching Practice Manual, Student Teachers Personal Assessment Format and CD on Teaching Skills.
(iv) Reports to the school he/she is assigned to.
(v) Carries out his/her teaching assignment responsibly.
4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING
