 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE : EDU782 COURSE TITLE: BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS EDU782 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Course Team Igbinoba, M. O.
(Writer) - FCT(T), AKOKA Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Developer) - NOUN Dr. Udoh Anthony Abasido (Editor) - ABU Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Coordinator) - NOUN ii EDU782 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-644-X All Rights Reserved iii EDU782 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ........................................................................... 1 Course Aims.......................................................................... 1 Course Objectives.... .
.
.. .
.
.
............................................... 1 Working through this Course ………………………..…….. 1 Course Materials ………………………………….……….. 2 Study Units ………………………………………..……….
2 Textbooks and References …………………………..……….
3 Assessment ……………………………………..………….
3 Tutor-Marked Assignment ….…………………………….. 3 Final Examination and Grading …………………………… 4 Course Marking Scheme ………………………….……….
4 Course Overview ……………………………..…………… 4 How to Get the Most from this Course ………….………… 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials …………………………….
6 Summary ………………………………………………….. 6 iv  Introduction EDU782 is a one semester two credit units 600 level course.
It is designed for Business Education students.
The course consists of twelve units which cover a general introduction to Business Education of which business studies is a part, objectives of business studies, underlying theories to teaching methods, special methods of teaching business studies, lesson planning and development.
The material has been developed with local examples suitable for Nigerian students.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how to work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
You are advised to attend the tutorial classes to discuss your difficulties with your tutors.
Course Aims The course is designed to expose you to business studies and the various methods of teaching it.
Its goal is to: • Enable you to have an understanding of the concept of business studies.
• Help you to acquire skills needed for the teaching of business studies to junior secondary school students.
and • Enable you to achieve, through knowledge and practice, effective teaching and learning of business studies.
Course Objectives There are objectives to be achieved in each unit of the course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
It is expected that by the time you have finished studying this course you should be able to: • Understand the terms “teaching and learning”.
• Acquire the skills needed for the teaching of business studies to junior secondary school students • Understand how to choose good business studies methods • Effectively plan and develop lessons in business studies Working through this Course To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, read recommended books and other materials provided by NOUN.
Each unit EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS contains self assessment exercises, and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take you about twenty weeks to complete.
You will find all the components of the course listed below.
You have to allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: • Study units • Textbooks • Assignment File • Presentation Schedule Study Units There are fourteen study units in this course, as follows: Module 1 Key Words and Concepts Unit 1 Concept of Business Studies Unit 2 Underlying Theory to Teaching Method Unit 3 Good Teaching Method Module 2 Methods of Teaching Business Studies Unit 1 Teacher Centred Method Unit 2 Learner Centred Method Unit 3 Individualised Teaching Method Unit 4 Use of Audio Visual Aids Module 3 Special Business Studies Methods Unit 1 Teaching Shorthand Unit 2 Teaching Typewriting Unit 3 Teaching Office Practice Unit 4 Teaching Commerce Unit 5 Teaching Book-Keeping Module 4 Lesson Planning and Development Unit 1 Planning To Teach Unit 2 Lesson Development ii EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS The first unit of Module one explains the concept of business studies.
The second unit explains some underlying theories to teaching method while the remaining unit examines the characteristics of good teaching methods.
Module two presents general methods of teaching and use of audio visual aids.
Module three presents special methods of teaching business studies while Module four deals with lesson planning and development.
Each study unit consists of one week’s work and includes specific objectives; directions for study, reading material, self assessment exercises.
Together with tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Textbooks and References Certain books are recommended for the course.
You should purchase them yourself and read them where you are so directed before attempting the exercises.
Assessment There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked assignments and a written examination.
In doing these assignments, you are expected to apply information gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There is a tutor marked assignment at the end of every unit.
You are required to attempt all the assignments.
You will be assessed on all of them but the best ten performances will be used for your continuous assessment.
The ten selected would come from all the areas covered in the course namely: the brief historical background of business education covering Unit 1; underlying theories to teaching methods and choice of teaching methods covering the rest of Module 1 Units 2 to 3; the general methods of teaching and use of audio visual aids covering Module 2 Units1 to 4, special teaching methods covering Module 3 Units 1 – 5 and finally, lesson planning and Development covering Module 4 Units 1-2.
The assignment carries 10% each.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutorial facilitator.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutorial facilitator on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, iii EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS contact your tutorial facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDU782 will be of two hours duration and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the kinds of self assessment exercises and the tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self assessment exercises and tutor- marked assignments before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-32 (the Ten assignments, 3 marks per one.
Totaling best ten of all the 30% assignments submitted) Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course Overview Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Module 1 1 Assignment 1-2 1 Concept of Business Studies 2 Underlying Theory to Teaching 1 Assignment 3-5 Method 1 Assignment 6-9 3 Good Teaching Method Module 2 1 Assignment 10-12 1 Teacher Centred Method 1 Assignment 13-15 2 Learner Centre Method 1 Assignment 16-17 3 Individualised Teaching Method 1 Assignment 18-20 4 Use of Audio Visual Aids iv EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Module 3 1 Teaching Shorthand 1 Assignment 21-21 2 Teaching Typewriting 1 Assignment 23-24 3 Teaching Office Practice 1 Assignment 25-26 4 Teaching commerce 1 Assignment 27 5 Teaching Bookkeeping 1 Assignment 28 Module 4 1 Planning to Teach 1 Assignment 29-30 2 Lesson Development 1 Assignment 30-32 Revision 2 Examination 1 Total 18 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the study materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
Self assessment exercises are interspersed throughout the units and answers are given at the end of the course.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self assessment exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
There will be examples given in the study units.
Work through these when you have come to them.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials v EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutorial facilitator, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutorial facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter, as well as provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor marked assignments to your tutorial facilitator well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if you need help.
Contact your tutorial facilitator if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the self assessment exercises.
• You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will gain a lot from participating actively.
Summary EDU782 intends to equip you with the skills of teaching business methods to junior secondary school students in order to ensure effective learning.
I wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
vi EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Course Code EDU782 Course Title Business Education Methods Course Team Igbinoba, M. O.
(Writer) - FCT(T), AKOKA Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Developer) - NOUN Dr. Udoh Anthony Abasido (Editor) - ABU Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA vii EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-644-X All Rights Reserved viii EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Key Words and Concepts………………………….
1 Unit 1 Concept of Business Studies…………………..…… 1 Unit 2 Underlying Theory to Teaching Method ………..… 6 Unit 3 Good Teaching Method…………………………….. 19 Module 2 Methods of Teaching Business Studies………….… 29 Unit 1 Teacher Centred Method…………………………….
29 Unit 2 Learner Centred Method…………………………….
33 Unit 3 Individualised Teaching Method……………….…… 36 Unit 4 Use of Audio Visual Aids……………………….….. 39 Module 3 Special Business Studies Methods…………….….. 44 Unit 1 Teaching Shorthand………………….……..……… 44 Unit 2 Teaching Typewriting……………………….……… 51 Unit 3 Teaching Office Practice…………………….……… 58 Unit 4 Teaching Commerce………………………….…….. 62 Unit 5 Teaching Book-Keeping……………………..……… 66 Module 4 Lesson Planning and Development…………….….
69 Unit 1 Planning to Teach…………………………….…….
69 Unit 2 Lesson Development……………………………….. 76 ix NoneEDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS MODULE 1 KEY WORDS AND CONCEPTS Unit 1 Concept of Business Studies Unit 2 Underlying Theory to Teaching Method Unit 3 Good Teaching Method UNIT 1 BUSINESS STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 An Overview of Business Education in Nigeria 3.2 Concept of Business Education 3.3 Objectives of Business Studies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Business education is divided into two viz, education for business which is obtained at the senior secondary schools and tertiary institutions; education about business which is obtained at the junior secondary school as business studies.
Business studies is one of the compulsory subjects offered by junior secondary school students in Nigeria.
It is a prevocational subject which is expected to expose the students to general business knowledge and to have basic ideas about business.
Its components are shorthand, typewriting, office practice, commerce and bookkeeping.
Students at this level are not being trained for a profession.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention the components of business studies and their relationship • list the objectives of business studies.
1 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 An Overview of Business Education in Nigeria Business education which is currently being offered in Nigerian universities, polytechnics, colleges of education, private commercial and secretarial colleges and as business studies in secondary schools, is, according to Gana (1987) as old as the History of Education in Nigeria.
Over the years, efforts of various groups and individuals have contributed in no small measure to the development of business education programmes in schools.
For instance, the Phelps-Stolkes report of 1920 and the report of the Ashby Commission of 1960 encouraged the establishment of business education courses in higher institutions of learning in Nigeria.
It also encouraged the introduction of technical subjects into secondary school curriculum.
Business education which started in private secretarial/commercial schools is currently being offered in Universities, Polytechnics as well as secondary schools in Nigeria.
3.2 Concept of Business Education Business education is an aspect of vocational education, which equips individuals with the necessary skills, and theoretical knowledge needed for performance in the business world either for job occupations or for self employment.
Business education is education for business and about business.
Vocational/business education is offered at both the formal and the non-formal setting.
Formal education here refers to educational programmes offered at the secondary schools and higher institutions aimed at providing vocational skills to children and youths.
On the other hand, non-formal vocational education refers to educational programmes offered outside the formal school system aimed at providing, developing and improving vocational skills and general knowledge for children and youths who dropped out of the formal school system for one reason or the other.
The formal school system, as provided for by the Federal Government in its National Policy on Education (1981), (1998) and (2002) offers business studies which comprises of shorthand, typewriting, commerce, office practice and book keeping.
It is a compulsory subject at the Junior Secondary School level of Education.
According to the JSCE syllabus, each of the components of business studies is taught as units and they are examined either in objective questions form or essay or both as the case may be.
2 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS The national policy on education (NPE) further provides that on completion of the junior secondary school, students should be streamed into senior secondary school, the technical college, vocational training centre and the apprenticeship scheme on the basis of 60%, 20%, 10% and 10%.
Education for business is obtained at the senior secondary level and it is the type of education that gives specific business knowledge.
Vocational education at this level includes shorthand, typewriting, book-keeping, commerce etc which are taught as separate subject with emphasis on practical training.
This enables students to acquire skills either in accounting, secretarial or office administration/marketing respectively.
One of the aims of secondary education is that secondary school leavers should be able to make a useful living for themselves within the society (NPE 2002).
According to Fafunwa (1991), the purpose of education is functionalism.
Vocational/business education provides practical skills for occupational purposes.
On completion of the senior secondary school, students seek admission into higher institutions to study courses that are of interest to them.
Universities and Polytechnics in Nigeria offer a four year course in business education while colleges of education offer a 3-year course in business education.
3.3 Objectives of Business Studies At the secondary school level, business studies is intended to enable students acquire basic knowledge of business studies, as well as help them develop basic skills in office occupation and for personal use.
It is also expected to prepare them for further training in business studies.
As for those who intend to work immediately, it is also expected to provide them with the orientation and basic skills with which to start a life of work.
However, the objectives of business studies as stated in the JSCE syllabus include enabling the students to:- a. appreciate the role of commerce and its relationship with the other aspects of production b. appreciate and understand the basic concepts and principles relating to commercial activities with practical situations, especially, in a developing economy.
3 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS c. identify types of transactions and open the necessary books of accounts they pass through in the modern business activities.
d. acquire the ability in office procedure or practices e. acquire skill in typing mailable letter at a determinable speed/time as well as knowledge of the ethics of an office/organization f. acquire skill in writing correct shorthand outlines by its theories and transcription of simple shorthand passage(s) into long hand with correct spellings at a determined speed and time g. prepare for further work in commerce, book-keeping, office practice/procedure, typing and shorthand.
Business skills acquired at the secondary school level enable individuals to make useful living for themselves as well as prepare students for higher education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
In a listing form, state the concept of Business Education.
2.
List the objectives of Business Studies.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION Business studies as a subject is very valuable to secondary school students.
This is because it exposes students to the world of commerce and industry and enables them to appreciate modern business activities.
5.0 SUMMARY Business studies which comprises of typing, shorthand, office practice, commerce and book-keeping is a compulsory subject at the junior secondary school level.
Its objective is to enable students appreciate the five components and how they relate to each other.
Students’ knowledge and understanding of the role of commerce in the economy of the nation; of the basic concepts and principles relating to practical commercial activities; acquisition of office and book-keeping skills (aural, mental and manual) help to prepare students for the business world.
4 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the components of Business Studies.
2.
What are the objectives of Business Studies?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1991).
History of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NPS Educational Publishers Limited.
Gana, F. Z.
(1987).
Business Education in Nigeria.
Past, Present and Future, BUSINESS EDUCATION JOURNAL II, 1, 4-7.
JSCE syllabus National Policy on Education (1981).
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Lagos: NERDC Press.
National Policy on Education (1998).
Federal Republic of Nigeria .
Lagos: NERDC Press.
National Policy on Education (2002).
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Lagos: NERDC Press.
5 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 2 UNDERLYING THEORY TO TEACHING METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Teaching and Learning 3.2 An Overview of Some Learning Theories and Their Implications to Teaching and Learning 3.3 Mcgregor’s Theory X and Y 3.4 Implications of Mcgregor’s Theory on Teaching Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A teacher is effective only if the students learn more and learn with greater ease and permanence than they would without his help.
To know how to teach, it is necessary to know how students learn.
Many psychologists have carried out experiments on how students learn and came up with theories which have greatly influenced teaching and learning.
You need to be familiar with major theories of learning which would enable you understand your students, their interests, mental attitude, individual differences, their readiness level, those things that motivate them to learn as well as a variety of learning experiences which the students could be exposed to and made to participate actively in.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the terms “teaching” and “learning” • explain the conditions necessary for learning • explain major theories of learning propounded by psychologists of different schools of thought • explain McGregor’s theory x and y as a basis to teaching style.
6 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Teaching and Learning Teaching involves many activities, behaviours and processes.
There are varied definitions of teaching.
According to Russon and Wanous (1973), teaching is the process of directing or guiding learning.
It is the art of causing another to learn.
Teaching can also be seen as the arrangement of situations which will lead to desirable and satisfying ends.
Ifeagwu (2000) defined teaching as a two-way traffic system involving exchange of ideas between the teacher and the students.
He further defined teaching as a series of activities geared towards helping students “learn how to learn”.
From the above definitions, it can be seen that teaching involves a teacher, learner(s), learning/teaching materials, learning activities and effective communication between teacher and learner.
The goal of teaching is to bring about desired learning in the students.
This study will like to emphasise here that your success at teaching is measured by the achievement of your students.
If they learn what they are supposed to learn under your direction, then you have successfully taught.
If not, then you have failed.
According to Canning (1976), the most important aspect of good teaching lies in discovering and applying the best ways of learning.
We shall at this stage consider the concept of learning, how students learn and hindrances to effective learning.
There is no one kind of learning.
It is therefore not easy to define it.
Many scholars and educationists have made several attempts to define learning.
Generally, learning can be defined as a relatively permanent change in behaviour that comes from reinforced practice.
It must be mentioned at this point that reinforcement plays a vital role in a learning process.
Re-inforcement may be defined as any condition that exists to promote learning.
In a classroom setting, reinforcement could be seen in immediate knowledge of the results of students’ efforts which encourage them (students) to continue.
Knowledge of scores, words of encouragement or praise or monetary rewards are all examples of reinforcement that work.
According to Ifeagwu (2000) learning can be defined as the behavioural change that takes place at the end of a teacher-student interaction in a classroom setting.
In order words, learning is the experience gained from interactions.
As Daugherty (1974) puts it, learning is a change in an individual through some form of experience.
This is sometimes referred to as a desirable change in the behaviour of the human being.
Learning is therefore, a modification of behaviour.
It is a process which involves changes in perception and behaviour.
Farrant (1964) says 7 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS learning is the process by which we acquire and retain attitudes, knowledge, understanding, skills and capabilities that cannot be attributed to inherited behavioural patterns or physical growth.
From the above definitions, it can be observed that learning involves the acquisition of knowledge, habits, skills, attitudes and patterns of behaviour that are desirable through some form of experience or interactions.
It must be emphasized here that the concept of change is inherent in the concept of learning.
If there is any change in behaviour it means that learning is taking place or has taken place.
Two major characteristics inherent in human learning are the active and continuous nature of behavioural changes.
Learning is an active process in the sense that the learner has to be involved in the learning activities.
Learning is continuous in the sense that it takes place from cradle to the grave – before school, in school, outside of school and all through life.
What is therefore expected of you as a teacher is to understand how you can influence the student to change his behaviour through various educational experiences.
Your objective should be to guide your students through appropriate learning experiences that would bring about desirable changes in them.
Domains of Learning Many psychologists have attempted to classify learning.
This is because it is generally believed that the type of learning expected determines the method of teaching to adopt.
The most popular classification of the domains of learning is that given by Bloom and his associates in 1956.
They are, the psychomotor domain which refers to development of manipulative or motor skills which require efficient co-ordination between our brains and muscles; the cognitive domain which refers to intellectual skills and abilities – it is achieved by mental processes such as reasoning, remembering and recall; the affective domain which refers to changes in interests, attitudes and values which influence our personalities.
In practice, there is to some extent an overlapping from one domain to the other.
All forms of learning are in these three domains.
It is your responsibility to select appropriate learning experiences and provide classroom activities using appropriate techniques that would facilitate learning.
Factors Affecting Learning An understanding of factors that affect learning will be of great help to you as a teacher.
According to Daugherty (1974), differences in abilities, readiness, motivation and interest affect learning.
As a teacher, according to Farrant (1964), you must know the pre-requisite for efficient learning, which are readiness, motivation and involvement.
8 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Ideal learning conditions therefore include mental, physical and social readiness of the learner, motivation and activities.
According to McNicol (1964), students are likely to learn, when they are willing, curious, inspired, have a goal to achieve, derive satisfaction from learning, have capacity to learn, are actively involved, have favourable social atmosphere and classroom conditions are satisfactory.
Differences in Abilities A typical class for instance would normally consist of low achievers, average achievers and high achievers.
You must be careful to provide for individual differences in a way that will provide for growth of each individual student according to his/her ability.
If you do not provide for individual differences, some students would be left behind or unnecessarily slowed down.
Such neglect hinders learning.
Motivation The degree of motivation a student has for the learning task could affect his learning.
The desire to learn is inherent in all normal persons.
You must motivate your students to use their innate ability.
You should apply incentives and arouse their interest for the purpose of causing them to perform in a desired way.
Remember your goal is to bring about a desired change in the behaviour of your students.
You must devise as many ways as you can to create within each student, the desire to learn.
This is basically what teaching is.
Such ways include award of grades, rewards, tests, praise or blame, competition etc.
Some devices that could be negative include sarcasm, ridicule, public criticism, unfriendliness, too much work, blame, misused or destructive competition etc.
These are demotivating and could make the students withdrawn, resentful and even hostile which make less positive learning to take place.
If you allow students to actively participate in realistic activities they would be highly motivated.
Interest Although interest in a subject does not guarantee success in the subject, studies have however shown a very high degree of correlation between interest in a subject and success in learning.
It is true that learning can take place without apparent interest.
It is also a known fact that interest in a subject makes the learning to take place easier, faster and more lastingly.
Arouse your students’ interest and sustain it through the use of a variety of teaching techniques.
Readiness This refers to the physical, mental, emotional or social maturation of the learner as well as the accumulation of experience as a foundation for the building of new learning.
You should endeavour to recognize readiness in your students.
Readiness in a student can often be seen by the way he responds eagerly to the learning task with which he is presented.
Once learning has begun, you can be sure that such a student will make rapid progress.
Lack of readiness in a student may be 9 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS attributed to lack of maturation or insufficient preparation of the student in those foundations of learning upon which the new learning will be built.
If a student is being taught when he is not ready he will make slow progress or may not even make any progress at all.
Activities You should involve your students in learning activities that would arouse their enthusiasm and concentration.
Such activities should be meaningful.
3.2 An Overview of Some Learning Theories and Their Implications to Teaching and Learning Learning theories are creative attempts to find out how learning takes place in the learner and the means by which it can be improved.
According to Daugherty (1974), learning is a change in an individual through some form of experience.
It is a known fact that learning takes place easier, faster and lastingly under some conditions than others.
Teaching methods are the strategies adopted and used by teachers in transferring learning in a classroom teaching-learning process.
They are techniques, ways, principles or strategies that enable the teacher to communicate the lessons.
Empirical principles and laws of learning have emerged from various theories of learning to serve as guidelines for the teacher.
It is essential that you familiarize yourself with the works of some notable psychologists and the theories they propounded.
Learning theories which have dominated educational thinking today can be traced to four major schools: classical behaviourists (the stimulus-response bonds group), purposive behaviourists, cognitive theorists and Gestalt theorists The theories of learning propounded by Psychologists such as Pavlov, Thorndike, Tolman, Skinner, Dewey and Ausubel, and Gestalt theorists to mention a few shall be mentioned here.
However, those of Thorndike and Tolman shall be examined as well as their significance to business education of which Business Studies is a part.
Classical Behaviourists (Pavlov and Thorndike) Major proponents of the S-R(stimulus-response) theory are Pavlov, Thorndike and Skinner.
Pavlov studied the nervous system of animals.
He observed the salivation of the dog when the bell rings and food is offered to him.
This led to the discovery of the techniques of the conditioning of behaviour.
Pavlov came up with principles of learning such as generalization and discrimination.
The S-R theory is the basis for the “part method” of presenting subject matter to students.
The stimulus is the formal presentation of subject matter that has been 10 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS selected on the basis of the educator’s idea of its value to the students.
Correct response is elicited by offering rewards such as grades, social acceptance of passing, as well as by fear of withholding these rewards.
The stimulus which is the instruction is repeated until the proper response (passing standards) is made by the student.
Edward L. Thorndike (1874-1949) is well known for his laws of learning.
One of his major laws of learning includes the law of effect.
This law states that an act which results in an animal’s experiencing satisfaction in a given situation will generally become associated with that situation so that when it recurs that act will also be likely to recur.
The idea is that pleasure and pain as consequences of our acts are important determination of behaviour.
We all do those things that give us pleasure and naturally avoid those things that give us pain.
The Law of effect arose as a result of an experiment which he carried out using a hungry cat locked up in a cage with a tempting morsel of fish outside.
The only way to unlock the cage was by pulling a string hanging inside the cage.
The cat was able to discover this after several attempts of making frantic efforts to find its way out.
Its effort was rewarded by the door opening and its being able to get at the fish.
The test was repeated several times and it was discovered that it took the cat shorter and shorter time to open the door of the cage and reach the fish outside.
After several studies, Thorndike concluded that it was not by the cat’s reasoning nor by his instinct that he learnt to pull the string rather it was due to the gradual stamping in of the stimulus response connection between seeing the string and pulling it.
That is to say, if a stimulus was followed by a response and then by a satisfier, the stimulus-response connection would be strengthened.
If however, a stimulus was followed by a response and then by an annoyer, the stimulus-response connection would be weakened.
Thus, satisfying and annoying effects of responses determined whether the stimulus-response connections would be stamped in or stamped out.
The Law of effect was later modified to read the Law of exercise.
This simply means that satisfying consequences serve to re-inforce stimulus- response bonds.
It was further modified to read the law of readiness.
This law states that a learner’s satisfaction is determined by the extent of his “preparatory set” that is readiness for action.
Thorndike’s theories are of great importance to the teacher.
The emphasis on the S-R bond reminds teachers of the importance of viewing all his activities as contributions to the learning process; lesson planning, instruction and evaluation of learning.
11 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Contribution to the Teaching of Business Studies Thorndike’s theories have contributed immensely to the teaching of Business Education (Business Studies) in the following ways.
Practice Business studies which consists of shorthand, typewriting, bookkeeping, commerce and office practice is geared towards skill acquisition.
The skills can only be acquired through practice.
In the Thorndike’s experiment, the cat was able to perform less random activity with subsequent trials until it operates the release mechanism once it finds itself in the cage.
According to Isiaka and Dagosta (2001), this is analogous to the theory of vocational education which states that training should help the trainee to capitalize his interest and abilities to the highest possible degree.
In other words, incorrect experiences will diminish and the correct ones get fixed with constant practice.
Business studies is rooted in acquisition of skills and as such learning cannot be effective by watching someone else perform the action.
In business education, we learn to do things by actually doing them.
Thorndike emphasized the importance of doing and repetition in the learning process.
Motivation Thorndike’s theories contain element of motivation.
Motivation is a learning process which is constantly applied in business education instruction.
This is a way by which an individual is energized so as to learn better.
In Thorndike’s experiment, the visible food was a propelling force for the cat to perform random activities in order to get at it while in the cage since it was hungry.
When a good and stimulating instructional and occupational environment is provided in the classroom, students will be motivated.
It is important to say here that your personality, efficient methods of instruction and techniques which you use are also motivating factors in the learning of business studies Need for Students to Work at Their Own Pace Another useful outcome of the stimulus response theories is the need for students to work at their own pace.
This means that your students’ stages of development, maturation and environmental differences should be taken into consideration when teaching.
Skill subjects for instance should be taught using individualized teaching method.
12 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Need to Learn the Specific Behaviours That are Necessary Through Discrimination Thorndike’s learning theories emphasize the necessity to discriminate between different behaviours.
Thorndike’s cat was able to discriminate between different structures in the cage and capitalized on the release mechanism whenever it wants to obtain food.
Therefore when teaching, ensure that you emphasise the need for your students to learning specific behaviours that are needed for efficient job performance.
Teach them the need to discriminate against certain actions at the beginning to avoid failure.
You can do this through the use of suitable methods of teaching.
Reinforcement Reinforcement is one of the key principles of learning.
Food reinforces response so as to occur again.
This also applies to learning business studies.
Reinforcement is a way to encourage what has been learnt in order to make it part of the individual and this is achieved through constant practice.
Praise always follows a job well done and deep appreciation for efficient mastery of skills has always been part of teaching/learning process for business studies.
Purposive Behaviourists (Skinner and Tolman) Skinner’s experiments led him to the conclusion that an organism learns by producing changes in its environment.
At the basis of his view of the nature of learning process is the concept of reinforcement.
He believes that the strength of learned response is generally determined by the amount of reinforcement it receives.
Behaviour he says can be shaped by reinforcement.
His work led to the development of programmed learning technique.
Edward Tolman, (1886-1959) a psychologist opposed the views of S-R associations.
He favoured the cognitive approach.
His major work was “purposive behaviour in Animals and Men” published in 1932.
He believed in objectivity, the precise measurement of behaviour and faith in the improvability of man.
His argument was that we do not simply respond to stimuli, we act on beliefs, express attitudes and strive towards goals.
He pointed out the need to come up with a theory that recognizes these aspects of behaviour without sacrificing objectivity.
Tolman therefore went on to create what has been called purposive behaviourism.
Tolman emphasised on the relation of behaviour to goal.
He advocated that stimulus guides us towards the goal.
The search for the goal he said is what gives unity and meaning to our behaviour.
Behaviour, he 13 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS claimed should be studied wholistically (MOLAR) and not in part (molecular).
We need to understand the whole so that we can understand how the sequence is put together, and how the end is achieved.
Importance to the Teacher Tolman’s emphasis on purpose, drive and motivation in many ways correspond to the importance attached by practicing teachers to a curriculum and lesson scheme organized around the needs of the learners.
Tolman’s theory is the reason why good teaching environment is emphasized in the teaching of business studies.
Such include adequate classroom space, adequate ventilation, quiet environment, adequate equipment, etc.
Just as has been explained earlier, motivation plays a great role in the teaching of business studies.
You must also in the course of teaching, link every topic and subject to the course.
Students must be made to realize how every topic and every subject relate to the attainment of their goals and aspirations in life.
That is the only way; your lesson will become more meaningful to them.
Cognitive School (Dewey and Ausubel) John Dewey’s theory emphasizes that learning has to meet two criteria, viz.
principle of continuity and principle of interaction.
The principle of continuity or growth means that one form of experience should lead to even wider experiences.
Any experience which does not lead to further experiences by way of interaction is capable of distorting growth.
Hence there should be a critical element which is continuity.
He also believes that learning should have retentive and transfer value and must have purpose that relate to life situations.
On the issue of curriculum, John Dewey argued that learning should relate to previous experience.
Learning should lead to further learning.
Teachers should use elements in the environment to teach students.
That is, use concrete examples as illustrations.
What is taught should not be beyond the capacity of the learner.
Learning should arouse interest and sustain it.
The teacher should be a facilitator of knowledge.
He should use problem solving techniques to teach students.
He sees education as problem solving and that learning occurs as a result of knowing and perception as well as reflective thinking.
He advocates active participation of learners in classroom activities to sharpen their reflective thinking.
He advocates a teaching approach which is based on scientific method.
John Dewey formulated the thesis of functional education.
This study must not conclude without mentioning that John Dewey played a significant role in the 1915 law of technical/vocational education.
14 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Ausubel’s work identified principal factors which influence meaningful learning retention.
He identified substantive content of the learner’s structure of knowledge and the organization of that structure as factors influencing meaningful learning retention.
He also pointed out that background knowledge of concepts and principles are essential for problem-solving; previous experience with related problem is necessary for a learner to deal successfully with new situation.
He believes that learning could be rote and still be meaningful if any particular point being taught is related to any point you have mastered earlier on.
He also believes that previous knowledge is very important for present knowledge.
Therefore, if there is no previous knowledge, create one.
The Gestalt School (Koffka, Kohler, Wertheimer and Lewin) The Gestalt psychologists believe that a whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
In order words, before we assess the part, we must look at the whole.
They believe that the response to a stimulus is a function of various internal and external factors.
Mere association of reward or cessation of pain would not elicit the same response from singular stimulation.
This is because the animal in Pavlov’s experiment experienced a broad field of stimulation not a singular stimulation.
For example, though Pavlov’s dog was conditioned to expect food upon the ringing of a bell, its salivation was greater or lesser depending upon the degree of hunger, comfort, frustration etc.
the animal experienced at the time the stimulus was received.
They also believe that an animal’s response to a situation is not a sequence of acts learned by trial and error through repetition but through adaptation to the situation and through insight on the part of the learner.
The field or Gestalt theory is behind “whole method” of teaching subject matter.
When presenting a subject matter, give a global view of it before going into the specifics.
If your students have global view of a subject or concept, they will find it easier to learn.
It also leads to the premise that an individual would not respond to the same stimulus in the same manner if he were emotionally upset, hungry, ill etc.
Your student should be related to as a whole being because psychological and physiological factors influence the receptivity of his mental processes.
Today, the principles derived from all these notable psychologists are employed in the classroom.
15 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.3 McGregor’s Theory X and Y McGregor propounded theories x and y which explain the nature of man as viewed by different schools of thought.
Ifeagwu (2000) summarized them as shown below.
Theory x 1.
The average human being has an inherent dislike for work and will avoid it if he can.
2.
Because of this, most people must be corrected, controlled, directed, and threatened with punishment to get them put adequate effort towards the achievement of organizational objectives.
Theory y 1.
The expenditure of physical and mental effort in work is as play or rest.
2.
External control and the threat of punishment are not the only means of bringing about efforts towards organizational objectives.
Man will exercise self direction and self-control in the service of objectives to which he is committed.
3.
The average human being learns, under proper conditions not only to accept but to seek responsibility.
4.
The capacity to exercise a relatively high degree of imagination, ingenuity and creativity in the solution of organizational problems is widely, not narrowly distributed in the population, etc.
3.4 Implications of McGregor’s Theory on Teaching Method The theory x teacher will use the carrot and stick approach to motivation because he believes that the potentials of students are static, unimprovable and unimpressive.
Using the stick approach, he will discipline, control, threaten, cajole and carry out constant monitoring of students’ work.
Using the carrot approach, he will reward, praise, and blame students.
The theory y teacher is concerned with students’ potentials for growth and development than with their abilities.
He sees the student as a person to be considered and nurtured.
He seeks to encourage students to 16 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS attain greater heights and achieve their best.
He constantly makes changes and innovations in his method of teaching.
He creates right conditions for students to find sufficient satisfaction in their work to invest more time than if forced.
The theory y teacher has a wider range of methods and strategies on the situation on ground.
In order words, he could be autocratic, totally permissive or in between while aiming at fulfilling specific objectives for the chosen topic.
His sensitivity to students’ needs makes him flexible in his teaching style.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State the various underlying theories to teaching methods.
2.
State the implication of each of the theories in teaching and learning.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION We can see from the above discussion that Thorndike and Tolman’s theories of learning have contributed in no small measure to the teaching and learning of business education.
Various implications on the learning of business education were drawn from these theories.
These include the need for constant practice, motivation, individualized teaching, among others.
Teaching methods are very essential if learning is to take place effectively.
Teachers should however understand the nature of his students so as to be able to choose the most suitable method during classroom interactions.
5.0 SUMMARY Teaching refers to series of activities geared towards helping students learn.
It involves teacher-students interactions.
The relatively permanent change that takes place at the end of teacher-student interaction is known as learning.
You should ensure that students are mentally, physically and socially ready to learn.
You should make efforts to sufficiently motivate your students and involve them in life changing activities if you really want learning to take place.
Thorndike and Tolman’s theories of learning which have contributed in no small measure to the teaching and learning of business education were discussed.
Other psychologists such as Pavlov, Skinner, Dewey and Ausubel whose theories have also influenced teaching and learning were mentioned.
Various implications on the learning of business 17 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS education were drawn from these theories.
These include the need for constant practice, motivation, individualized teaching, among others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Attempt a definition of ‘teaching’ and ‘learning’.
2.
List 3 conditions that are necessary for learning.
3.
From John Dewey’s theory, outline 5 implications on teaching and learning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adigun, A. O.
(1997).
Introduction to Vocational and Technical Education (With Principles and Methods of Teaching Skills).
Lagos: Raytel Communications Nig.
Ltd. Canning, B. W. (1976).
Teaching Office Skills.
London: Pitman Publishing Limited.
Daugherty, A. S. (1974).
Methods of Basic Business and Economic Education Cincinnati Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. Farrant, J. S. (1964).
Principles and Practice of Education.
England: Longman Group Ltd. Ifeagwu, D. (2000).
Special Methods Teaching Practice for Students and Teachers in Africa.
Lagos: DIC Publishing Company.
Isiaka, B. T. and Dagosta, F. A.
(2001).
Vocational and Technical Education Methods.
Lagos: Alografiks Kommunikations Company.
McNicol, G. (1964).
Teaching Shorthand and Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Limited.
18 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 3 GOOD TEACHING METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of Good Teaching Method 3.2 Choice of Teaching Methods 3.3 Psychological Guides to Teaching and Learning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teaching methods according to Daugherty (1974) are the broad pattern of thinking which a teacher follows to help his students reach the goal set for the course.
In other words, they are the strategies adopted and used by teachers in transferring learning in a classroom teaching- learning process.
They are techniques, ways, principles or strategies that enable the teacher to communicate the lessons.
There are attributes expected of a good teaching method which is to be used to teach a specific lesson.
A method that is appropriate to one kind of material may not be suitable for another.
Therefore an appropriate teaching method needs to be carefully selected.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define teaching methods • list and explain the characteristics of a good teaching method • list factors to consider when choosing teaching methods • discuss at least 10 psychological guides to teaching.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of Good Teaching Method There are certain characteristics which make a teaching method good.
Okeke (1997) as cited by Ifeagwu (2000) lists some of these characteristics which will be discussed briefly here.
19 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS A teaching method is considered good when you provide useful activities that would help the learners to discover facts and contribute effectively to the learning activities.
A good teaching method takes into consideration all the varying groups of learners in the class that is, the above average, the average and the below average learners.
Your teaching method should allow you to present the subject matter beginning from known to the unknown; from simple to complex; to build new facts and ideas on students’ previous experience or knowledge and make learning meaningful to the learners by achieving the stated objectives.
This means that what you teach should be relevant to students’ needs and situations.
That is only when it would make sense to them.
A good teaching method should not aim at teaching too much or too little at any given lesson.
What you have prepared should be adequate for the lesson period.
What should determine the content of a lesson include the age, interest, ability, maturity of the learners as well as the nature of the subject matter to be taught.
3.2 Choice of Teaching Methods There is no one best method of teaching.
Choice of method depends on many factors which include the following.
1.
The method chosen should be such that can most effectively present the teaching material to meet the objective of the lesson as well as the depth of learning to be achieved.
2.
School policy on teaching method is also a factor to be considered when choosing teaching method.
3.
The age, abilities, backgrounds, mental, physical, and emotional health of the students are factors to consider when choosing teaching method.
4.
The students’ previous experience/knowledge/achievement are essential factors to be considered.
5.
The nature of materials to be taught whether is abstract or concrete, complicated or easy, familiar or new should influence choice of method.
6.
If the method you want to use requires the use of equipment such as typewriters, visual aids and other facilities, their availability as well as the adaptability of the room to the method would 20 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS determine ultimately whether or not you could use that particular method.
7.
If the use of the method requires extra cost to the school, the student or to you, the availability of money would enable you decide whether or not to use the method.
8.
The teachers personality as well as his ability to use various methods and facilities that are available.
9.
Number of students in a class, and the level are important factors to be considered.
10.
Your knowledge, experience and preparedness in the use of the method will also determine your selection of method.
11.
The stage of the subject whether at its introductory, intermediate or advanced stage, etc.
will influence your choice of method.
12.
Availability of adequate time for the method – especially those that are time consuming – will affect the selection of a teaching method.
13.
Interest and motivation are other factors that could influence the choice of teaching method.
Your concern should be that the method should be capable of arousing and sustaining the interest of students as well as motivate them to learn.
Whatever the method being used, it must emphasize students’ activities and actions rather than that of the teacher.
You need to have a high degree of expertise in methods of presenting a subject matter and to be able to vary classroom experience.
This is because the students themselves have a wide range of abilities which need to be developed with the right teaching method.
When you apply the right technique to vary classroom experience, it prevents monotony and boredom and keeps the learning situation fresh and stimulating.
A wide knowledge of teaching techniques will enable you to individualize the learning method and the content based on students’ needs.
If you continue to use one technique, even that which you consider most effective, with time, it would become ineffective.
This is because the element of surprise increases interest.
21 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.3 Psychological Guides to Teaching and Learning As a teacher, you should pay particular attention to the needs, interests, attitudes and capabilities of your students.
Failure to do this will surely bring about indifference on the part of students and frustration on your part.
Effective learning requires good teaching and good teaching is based on sound psychology.
We have considered the theories of how people learn which were propounded by a number of psychologists.
We also took a brief look at their implications to teaching and learning.
Professors Mort and Vincent of Columbia University as reported by Harms, Stehr and Harris (1972) developed and compiled the under listed 30 psychological guides to good teaching which emphasise the role of psychology in teaching and learning.
We shall briefly discuss them here.
1.
No one learns without some urge to learn This urge could be in form of fear, need, inborn drive, curiosity, challenge, importance, personal attachment, or any other motivating force.
A motivating force has to be present within the student for him to be sufficiently motivated to learn.
The more of such force resides in a learner, the more willing and ready he is to learn without being compelled to do so.
2.
What a person learns is influenced directly by his surroundings Whatever you are teaching, relate it to the environment of the learner.
Use concrete examples that the learner can identify with and be influenced by.
3.
A person learns most quickly and lastingly what has meaning for him Make your students understand how relevant/valuable what you are teaching them is.
That is, what will make them want to master the needed skill.
Give them a reason to learn by making your teaching meaningful.
4.
When an organism is ready to act, it is painful for it not to act; and when an organism is not ready to act, it is painful for it to act This means that you should take time to prepare your students to learn.
They have to be physically, emotionally and mentally ready to learn.
What you teach should relate or appeal to students’ experience.
Their  22 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS previous knowledge should be brought to bear on what is being presently taught.
5.
Individuals differ in all sorts of ways A typical class would normally consist of students with differing abilities and intelligence.
Identify and classify your students and relate to them using individual teaching method.
They should learn at their own pace but do not allow the weak students to lag too far behind.
Also do not slow down the fast learners unnecessarily.
Vary your teaching methods to meet individual student’s needs, 6.
Security and success are the soil and climate for growth This means that you should make all your students feel at home in your class.
Do not make them feel intimidated and do not be harsh on them when they are not doing too well.
Compliment them even for the little they have done well.
That will encourage them to do better.
Harsh words create a feeling of insecurity for the students and could be counterproductive.
Avoid the use of harsh words.
7.
All learning occurs through attempts to satisfy needs People learn because they have a need for it.
For instance some people may want to acquire education because they see it as a means of enhancing their social status and others, their economic power.
8.
Emotional tension decreases efficiency in learning If you want your students to acquire the desired skills and understand the facts as you present them in class, first create a friendly atmosphere, establish a good relationship with the students and make them desire success.
Avoid sarcasm and antagonism.
When there is emotional tension in class, learning cannot effectively take place.
9.
Physical defects lower efficiency in learning You should encourage your students to live healthy lives.
A sound mind can only dwell in a sound body.
It is your responsibility to try to determine the reason why a student is showing lack of interest or even hostility to learning.
If the problem is found to be physiological, you should refer him to the school nurse or doctor.
Absence or malformation of certain parts of the body could slow down the rate at which a student learns.
For instance a student who has lost some of his fingers may find typewriting difficult to learn.
However, severely handicapped students are usually catered for in special classes.
23 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 10.
Interest is an indicator of growth When students show interest in what you are teaching, that means that your teaching is effective and learning is taking place.
Therefore, make your teaching interesting by varying your teaching method so as to attract and sustain students’ attention.
11.
Interest is a source of power in motivating learning Interest is a powerful tool for motivating learning.
Once you are able to make your students interested in your teaching, they will be sufficiently motivated to learn.
You should know when interest and attention lag by observing the cues that students send through their voices, eyes, facial expression, posture, muscular tension and so on.
12.
What gives satisfaction tends to be repeated; what is annoying tends to be avoided Reward right actions and the students will be encouraged to repeat the action in order to gain mastery.
Wrong actions should be discouraged by withholding rewards or by punishment.
It should be noted here that rewards and punishments should be appropriate to the age and character of the individual student.
13.
The best way to learn a part is to play that part This is the apprenticeship idea.
Make them practice what you are teaching them the way they will be expected to perform when they start working.
This is where teaching methods such as simulation/ role play, drama, etc, come into play.
14.
Learning is more efficient and longer lasting when the conditions for it are real and lifelike Use facilities that are obtainable in the business world to teach so that students can easily fit into the world of work on graduation.
Attitudes, habits and skills for life are best learned when the activities are like real life situations.
Methods of teaching such as simulations, role play should be readily employed when teaching skill subjects.
15.
Piecemeal learning is not efficient Teach facts and skills in relation to their use – job, career, business – and not as isolated bits of a subject matter.
Teach sub skills in relation to the skill to be mastered.
24 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 16.
You can’t train the mind like a muscle This means that you should not isolate the things you want to teach from the real setting in which they belong.
17.
A person learns by his own activity This emphasizes the need to make students practicalise what is being taught.
In many schools, shorthand and typewriting are being taught without much practice.
This should be discouraged.
Skills can only be acquired when put into practice.
Students learn by what they do and in the process, they are able to gain insight as they learn to organize their activities.
The more extensive students activities are, the greater will be his learning.
Remember to give take home assignments or projects to students on what has been taught in class.
18.
Abundant and realistic practice contribute to learning This further underscores the need for you to provide your students with a lot of realistic practice exercises on whatever you have taught them.
19.
Participation enhances learning Involve your students in your teaching – right from the planning stage through lesson presentation to checking of results.
This will give the students a sense of belonging, arouse and sustain their interest as well as achieve effective learning.
20.
First hand experience makes for lasting and more complete learning Take your students on excursion to see and handle for themselves, what you have taught them theoretically.
That will enhance their understanding and retention.
For the teaching of office practice, for instance, your college should provide a model office with modern office equipment for students to learn with.
21.
General behaviour is controlled by emotions as well as by intellect Do not concentrate only on training the mind of the students; be concerned also about their emotional well being.
People’s behaviour is usually controlled more by their emotions.
Empathise with them and encourage them to put their emotions under control.
25 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 22.
Unused talents contribute to personal maladjustment Encourage your students to develop and use their talents positively.
Failure to do this will result in your dissatisfied, frustrated and neurotic individuals who would constitute a waste and a nuisance to the society.
23.
You start to grow from where you are and not from some artificial starting point Students should be made to achieve a certain standard before being promoted to the next higher class.
24.
Growth is a steady, continuous process, and different individuals grow at different rates You must realize that all students in a particular class level cannot move along together up to their graduating class without any dropping along the line.
People learn and make progress at their own pace.
25.
It is impossible to learn one thing at a time When teaching, so many things run through the mind of the learner – bits and pieces begin to fit together like a jigsaw puzzle – to give a whole picture of what you are teaching.
Therefore apply problem solving method of teaching and assign topics to students to investigate in order to enhance learning.
26.
Learning is reinforced when two or more senses are used at the same time Students learn better if they see with their eyes, hear with their ears and touch with their hands at the same time they are seeing with the mind’s eyes.
This underscores the need for you to use audio-visual aids in teaching in other to enhance learning.
27.
The average pupil is largely a myth Whatever standard you set for your students which you expect everyone to meet will still be difficult for some and easy for others.
Therefore a look at class performance will reveal a greater number of students scoring above and below average.
Only a few would actually be at the average point.
26 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 28.
If you want a certain result, teach it directly Do not expect your students to know everything they ought to know.
If they were not taught before coming to your class, teach them yourself.
Previous experience is very crucial to learning present concept.
If they do not have, create one.
Take them through the background to the topic.
29.
Children develop in terms of all the influences which affect them All the experiences that a child has in and out of school make him what he is.
A child’s development is greatly influenced by what he experiences at home, in school and in the community.
Exploit this by relating your teaching to outside experiences to enhance learning.
30.
It has been said that a person learns more in the first 3 years of his life than in all the years afterwards Home training during the early years of a child’s life is very important to the development of the child.
This underscores the effect of the home on the child.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State the characteristics of a good teaching method.
2.
List the factors that could influence choice of teaching method.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION Characteristics of good teaching method include provision of a variety of learning activities which would ensure effective learning.
Several factors need to be taken into consideration when choosing a teaching method.
No one teaching method is the best.
What is suitable in one instance may not be suitable in another instance.
It should also be suitable to varying groups of learners in the class starting from known to the unknown, such that at the end of the lesion, the stated objectives should be achieved.
This is essential if effective learning is to take place.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the characteristics of good teaching methods were discussed and factors to consider when choosing a teaching method were outlined.
Thirty psychological guides to good teaching and learning were outlined and discussed.
It was concluded that no one teaching method is the best.
27 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Rather a suitable method should be used to teach.
This calls for the need to be abreast with a variety of teaching methods which you can combine from time to time.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define teaching methods 2.
List and explain the characteristics of a good teaching method.
3.
Mention 5 factors to be taken into consideration when choosing a teaching method.
4.
Why is it important for the teacher to master as many techniques of presentation as he can?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Daugherty, A. S. (1974).
Methods of Basic Business and Economic Education.
Cincinnati Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. Harms, H.; Stehr, B. W. & Harris, E. E. (1972).
Methods of Teaching Business and Distributive Education Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. Ifeagwu, D. (2000).
Special Methods Teaching Practice for Students and Teachers in Africa.
Lagos: DIC Publishing Company.
28 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS MODULE 2 METHODS OF TEACHING BUSINESS STUDIES Unit 1 Teacher Centred Method Unit 2 Learner Centred Method Unit 3 Individualized Teaching Method Unit 4 Use of Audio Visual Aids UNIT 1 TEACHER-CENTRED METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Teacher Centred Methods and When Used 3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The teacher-centred method is a method whereby students play a passive role in the learning process.
He teaches all the time by talking while the students sit down quietly listening attentively and writing down whatever the teacher says.
Whatever the teacher says is taken as a rule, it is final and it is binding on all the students.
The approach is autocratic and authoritative.
It is a method that the theory x teacher is more likely to adopt when teaching.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you, should be able to: • mention and explain those methods of teaching that are teacher centred • explain where such methods are most useful • mention advantages and disadvantages of using such methods an • identify ways of improving on such methods.
29 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Teacher-Centred Methods and when Used Teacher-centred methods include lecture method, demonstration method, questioning techniques, textbook method, visual aids, and chalkboard technique.
In the typical lecture method, the teacher does all the talking while the students remain passive listeners.
In the demonstration method (by the teacher), the teacher demonstrates the techniques without giving the students the opportunity to do so.
The teacher centred questioning technique is such that only the teacher asks the questions while the students merely answer.
They are not given the opportunity to ask the teacher questions on grey areas.
The textbook approach is such that the teacher teaches from the textbook.
He actually reads to the students from the textbook cover to cover while the students are passive listeners.
In the visual aids method, the teacher shows the visual aids to the students without students’ active participation.
The chalkboard approach is such that the teacher writes notes on the board as he talks while the students copy the notes in their books.
The teacher centred method has its usefulness.
It is useful where the audience is large, where the students are matured and their level is advanced, when introducing new topics, treating subject matter with lots of dates, data and facts and electronic media channeled lesson i.e.
through the radio or film.
3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages The teacher centred method of teaching has its advantages.
It is less expensive to use in terms of equipment/resources.
Once you can place equipment on a demonstration stand, all the students can see it although they may not be able to touch and use it.
In other words, the students are passive listeners which is a disadvantage.
There is savings in time and you can deliver your lesson without interruptions from the students.
Lack of interactive sessions with the students is a disadvantage.
The method brings about savings in resources in that they are limited only to your use.
Instead of providing one item to one, two or three students, only one or two may be provided for a class of 60 or 100.
It is good for presenting factual information and clarifying issues from the point of view of the teacher.
It also enables the syllabus to be covered faster and for large information or data to be presented without interruption.
It promotes good listening ability and good concentration among learners.
30 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS On the other hand, slow learners could be left behind as attention is not paid to individual students.
Once some students are able to answer questions correctly, it is taken that everybody is following and that everybody understands.
No room for individual differences.
General learning rate is low as everybody is being carried along at the same time.
The teaching appeals to only two senses i.e.
hearing and seeing, to the neglect of the other three senses.
The method does not give room for students to exercise their initiative.
As a matter of fact, it could kill students’ initiative.
The method cannot sustain students’ attention for long and thus, those with low attention span, would suffer.
The method is monotonous and makes the lesson boring to learners which often send many to sleep.
Because there is little or no interaction with students, any wrong information given by the teacher would go unchallenged.
How can the method be improved?
You could use a variety of audiovisual materials to attract and sustain students’ attention as well as enhance learning.
Active participation of students in the lesson presentation should be encouraged through the use of debates, dramatization, breaking students into discussion groups and allowing them to ask questions and express their views.
This should be done at intervals and carefully controlled so that it does not get out of hand and become rowdy and noisy.
Tutorial materials and handouts should be given to students to supplement the lecture method while note taking should be encouraged in class.
Explain clearly the objective of the lesson, maintain eye contact when teaching, try to know and call your students by name and do not speak too fast when teaching.
Articulate your points one after the other and give a good summary and conclusion.
Also give ‘take home’ assignments and insist that this is done.
These are ways of improving the lecture method SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State the characteristics of a teacher centred method.
2.
List the advantages and disadvantages.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION The lecture method has its uses, advantages and disadvantages.
The disadvantages will not be too serious if you take time to improve on the method.
Try to shift attention from yourself to the students by involving them in your lesson presentation.
Teaching should be an interactive 31 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS session between yourself as the teacher and your students as the learners.
You would be amazed how much you can learn from the students yourself.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the lecture method of teaching was explained as one in which the teacher does all the talking and demonstrations with little or no contributions from the students.
The advantages and disadvantages were discussed.
These include the fact that much time and materials are saved using this method.
Although the method is useful for teaching large classes, slow learners are usually left behind as they get lost in the crowd.
No particular attention is paid to them.
Although the method allows for syllabus to be covered fast, understanding is usually sacrificed for speed.
Since students are not allowed to make contributions, their initiative could be stifled.
Ways of improving this method were given which include allowing students time and opportunity to actively participate in the lesson presentation and using a variety of audio-visual materials for teaching to attract and sustain interest thereby enhancing learning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention three teacher centred methods of teaching.
2.
Mention 5 advantages and 5 disadvantages of using teacher centred methods of teaching.
3.
Identify 5 ways of improving on teacher centred method of teaching.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ifeagwu, D. (2000).
Special Methods Teaching Practice for Students and Teachers in Africa.
Lagos: DIC Publishing Company.
Mebaanne, J. O.
(2004).
Methods of Teaching General Business Subjects at the Secondary/Vocational Institutions, A Course Text on Special Methodology, Generic Science and Calculation for the Improvement of Teaching and Learning of Technical, Vocational and Business Subjects.
Lagos: FCE(T).
32 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 2 LEARNER CENTRED METHOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Learner Centred Method 3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The learner-centred method is a method whereby students are opportune to participate actively in the teaching-learning process while the teacher plays a more passive role.
There is room for discussions, debates, and for questioning by students.
This method is best used when the class size is small no matter the age of the learners.
It requires adequate funds with which to provide necessary teaching aids, equipment and resources.
It is time consuming.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention and explain those methods of teaching that are students centred • explain where such methods are most useful • mention the advantages and disadvantages of using such methods • identify ways of improving on such methods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of learner-Centred Method Learner-centred methods according to Mebanne (2004) and Ifeagwu (2000) include, discussion, practical, dramatization/role playing, field trip/excursion, project method, tutorial, inquiry method/discovery method, programmed instruction, group study and seminar.
Learner-centred methods are best used when the class size is small.
The class could be made up of adults, adolescent or children.
It is best used 33 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS when there is adequate time and available resources to purchase necessary teaching aids, training facilities, audio visual equipment and materials.
3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages Advantages of the learner-centred method are numerous.
It arouses and sustains students’ interest, motivates them to learn as well as gives room for individual differences.
Students are able to compete favourably with each other, thereby improving their skills.
This method is best used for teaching skill subjects.
The method encourages creativity as much time is given to students to express themselves.
It is easy to evaluate students and give immediate feedback since class size is small.
It allows for free flow of information between the teacher and the students and vice versa.
It allows for the use of the five senses in learning unlike the teacher centred method which allows for only the hearing and seeing senses alone.
Since they are involved with various learning activities, it removes boredom and encourages long retention.
However, the method is expensive in terms of the money needed to purchase learning materials/equipment.
It is time consuming as the teacher has to guide each student in learning at their own pace.
Unless students’ activities are meaningful, it may well serve as another jamboree.
Discussion and debates could get out of control if not well monitored.
In some learning centred methods, there could be failure due to poor planning, transportation hazards during field trips and frequent equipment breakdown due to over use or misuse.
How can this method be improved?
This method could be improved if it is adequately funded, if there is effective class management, if students have access to learning materials, if field trips/excursions are carefully planned for and road worthy vehicles used in transporting students.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State the characteristics of learner centred method.
2.
List the advantages and disadvantages.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 34 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION The learner-centre method is best used when the class size is small and the subject is practical oriented and when there is adequate time and sufficient funds to use it.
The core of this method is the involvement of students in learning activities that would arouse and sustain their interest as well as achieve effective learning.
Different types of learner centred methods could be varied during the course of teaching to enhance understanding and facilitate learning.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, learner-centred method was explained as one in which the students are more active than the teacher.
We also said that it could be used for young and adult learners.
Various type of learner centred methods were also mentioned which include discussion, practical sessions, dramatization/role playing, etc.
Their advantages and disadvantages were highlighted as well as ways of improving the methods.
These were said to include provision of adequate funds and effective class management among others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention 3 learner centred methods of teaching.
2.
Mention 2 advantages and 2 disadvantages of using learner centred methods of teaching.
3.
Identify 3 ways of improving on learner centred method of teaching.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ifeagwu, D. (2000).
Special Methods Teaching Practice for Students and Teachers in Africa.
Lagos: DIC Publishing Company.
Mebaanne, J. O.
(2004).
Methods of Teaching General Business Subjects at the Secondary/Vocational Institutions A course Text on Special Methodology, Generic Science and Calculation for the Improvement of Teaching and Learning of Technical, Vocational and Business Subjects.
Lagos: FCE(T).
35 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 3 INDIVIDUALISED TEACHING METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Individual Teaching Methods and When Used 3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The individualized teaching method is a method where attention is paid to the individual learner.
It is a method highly recommended for teaching skill subjects because of the need for students to individually acquire practical skills.
This method requires the combination of other teaching methods which are suitable to the needs and dispositions of individual students.
For according to Ifeagwu (2000) this method uses methods that are good for the individual student’s learning style and ability.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention the different types of individualized teaching methods • discuss the different types of individualized teaching methods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Individual Teaching Methods and When Used According to Mebaanne (2004), individual learning methods include learning activity package (programmed learning); individual learning/counseling; supervised studies such as student industrial work experience scheme (SIWES); teaching practice (TP); manuals and student prepared notebooks; observation; reference reading; workbooks; practice and drills; self evaluation; projects; term papers, research; role playing; simulation and games.
In these methods, each learner is taken through the learning material level by level; each part of the learning material must be mastered before proceeding to the next level.
Each 36 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS student progresses at his or her own pace and get, immediate feedback on work done.
3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages The fact that each student is allowed to learn at his/her own pace and gets immediate feedback on work done is a strong advantage of the individualized teaching method.
The special attention given to the students by the teacher method instills in him, self respect and self esteem.
No one is left behind as both the fast and slow learners are given adequate attention.
The method is however expensive in terms of time and materials and the students could be denied the social and emotional benefits of group work.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State the characteristics of learner centred method.
2.
List the advantages and disadvantages.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION The individualized teaching method pays great attention to individual students and their special needs and they are carefully and patiently guided to meet these meets.
You should be able to co-ordinate the class in such a way that slow students are not left behind while the fast learners are far ahead of the class.
You need to identify and group those students whose paces are within the same range so as to effectively manage the progress of the class.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we mentioned the different types of individualized teaching methods, their uses, advantages and disadvantages.
We recommended it as a very valuable method of teaching skill subjects and emphasized the need to effectively co-ordinate and manage the progress of the class by identifying and grouping those students whose pace are within the same range.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is individualized method of teaching?
2.
Mention 2 advantages and 2 disadvantages of using the individualized teaching method.
37 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ifeagwu D. (2000).
Special Methods Teaching Practice for Students and Teachers in Africa.
Lagos: DIC Publishing Company.
38 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 4 USE OF AUDIO VISUAL AIDS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Audio Visual Materials 3.2 Points to Consider When Selecting Instructional Materials (A/V) 3.3 Classroom Use of Audio Visual Materials 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Audio/visual aids are instructional materials, which the teacher uses to supplement instruction.
They add to the sense impression of the learner, and easy assimilation of what is taught.
Audio (sound) equipment includes radio, tape recorder, record player etc.
The visuals (sight, vision) are charts & posters.
Examples of audiovisuals are close circuit TV & video and film (motion).
They are not meant to replace the role of the teacher but to enhance transfer of learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the differences among audio, visuals and audiovisual aids • state the importance of audio/visual aids • identify factors to consider when using audio/visual aids.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Audio Visual Materials Aroloye, (1985) states that information reaches the brain through the five senses.
These are sight, smell, taste, touch and hearing.
He rates their information transmission as follows: 1.
The seize of sight 75% 2.
The seize of hearing 15% 3.
The seize of smell 3-4% 4.
The seize of taste 1-2% 5.
The seize of touch 1-2% 39 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS From the above one can see that the sense of sight is the most powerful.
When you combine the sense of sight with the sense of hearing, you would have 90% rate of information transmission.
This underscores the importance of a combination of audio and visual aids in classroom teaching and learning.
Audio/visual materials save time when teaching.
Much information is communicated at a short time when you use A/V materials to teach.
Students will be attracted by the materials and if used effectively will sustain their interest, motivate them and accelerate their active thinking.
It is a good substitute for field trip as vivid pictures can be obtained which is as good as seeing the objects, physically.
It is indeed an effective teaching aid.
3.2 Points to Consider when Selecting Instructional Materials (A/V) Instructional material A/V should be carefully selected and used as an integral part of the process of instruction.
You source for and obtain a variety of instructional materials for use in teaching.
Your choice therefore will depend on your knowledge of available and suitable materials and your ability to use them.
When selecting instructional material (A/V) ask yourself the following questions.
1.
Do I need instructional materials to achieve the lesson objective?
2.
What specific properties of the materials will enable me achieve the lesson objective?
3.
At what stage of the lesson do I need to introduce the A/V material?
4.
What kind of response do I need from my students?
5.
What would be my students’ response to the use of A/V material?
6.
How will I assess the effectiveness of the A/V material?
Each A/V aid has its uses, advantages and disadvantages.
Charts, for instance, flow chart could be used to show the flow of process or the tracing of responsibility or work relationship in administrative sections or organizations.
Graphics could be used to help learners grasp quickly and accurately the specific meaning of masses of complex data.
Cartoons have the power to capture attention and influence attitudes and behaviour.
Posters help convey vividly information behind the illustration in an attractive and economical way.
40 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS The Chalkboard The Chalkboard as a visual aid deserves special mentioning here.
This is because it is the most frequently used of all visual aids.
The chalkboard comes in various colours and sizes, moveable and immovable.
Although chalkboards are durable you need to maintain them.
They need regular re-inking/repainting with chalkboard paint or renovator.
This is to avoid poor chalk impression as well as erosion of wooden boards.
When it becomes very bad, replace it.
3.3 Classroom Use of Audio Visual Materials As a beginner, before using the chalkboard, practice first on the chalkboard to avoid producing illegible and non-horizontally straight writings.
According to Ifeagwu (2000), divide chalkboard whose lengths are between 6-8 feet into two halves with a vertical line at the middle.
Those with 10-12ft should be divided into 3 equal sections before beginning to write.
When drawing illustrations or objects on the board, coloured chalks could be used to show sections or parts of drawings.
When students have finished copying or drawing your illustrations, maps, etc, wipe them off before going into the next stage or content.
This is to avoid distraction.
You can also use the chalkboard to display other A/V materials such as cardboards.
The following rules should be noted when using A/V materials in the class.
The most important rule perhaps is that you should never display A/V material before and after use.
You should only display them only when it is time to use them.
This is to avoid anything that would distract the students.
For the same reasons, keep all A/V materials covered from students’ view.
Charts and posters must be well clipped on the chalkboard.
You could use drawing pins or masking tapes for holding them on display.
All A/V materials should be displayed in such a way that they are visible to all students.
Collect all A/V materials previously distributed from students when not in use before proceeding to unrelated part of the subject matter.
Keep handy a purse for drawing pins, clips, cello-tapes, transparency markers and other items used in holding up or displaying A/V materials.
On how to effectively use audio/visual aids, Daugherty (1974) made the following general points.
1.
That audio/visual aids are teaching aids and not a substitute for teaching 2.
They must teach, not just to entertain or consume time 4 1 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.
They must be used as teaching and learning aid not simply as a decorative item or for casual viewing.
4.
Their use must be planned before, during and after the lesson.
5.
They must be carefully selected on the basis of adaptability to the unit, the students, the classroom and the teacher.
6.
They must be used for a definite purpose such as to stimulate and arouse curiosity to clarify and explain concepts, facts, ideas and 7. enrich the study of the unit, etc.
8.
They must be used at the proper time and They must be current.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify the criteria for the selection of audio visual aids.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, audio/visual aids are very useful to you as a teacher.
They supplement your teaching.
You need to carefully select and effectively use them.
Care should be taken not to use them to distract the attention of the students.
The chalkboard is most widely used visual aids.
You need to master the techniques of its use.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we considered the various types of audio/visual aids and their importance.
We also discussed techniques for selecting A/V materials as well as how they should be used in the class and we concluded that care should be taken not to use them to distract the attention of the students.
We also emphasized the need for you to master the techniques of writing on the chalkboard.
This is because the chalkboard is the most widely used visual aids for classroom instruction.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the advantages of using A/V materials for classroom teaching.
2.
What questions would you ask yourself in order to determine the most appropriate A/V material to use in your teaching?
42 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aroloye A.
(1985).
Audio Visual Aids Theory and Practice.
Ikeja: Index Publishing Company.
Daugherty, A. S. (1974).
Methods of Basic Business and Economic Education.
Cincinnati Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. Ifeagwu, D. (2000).
Special Methods Teaching Practice for Students and Teachers in Africa.
Lagos: DIC Publishing Company.
43 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS MODULE 3 SPECIAL BUSINESS STUDIES METHODS Unit 1 Teaching Shorthand Unit 2 Teaching Typewriting Unit 3 Teaching Office Practice Unit 4 Teaching Commerce Unit 5 Teaching Book-Keeping UNIT 1 TEACHING SHORTHAND CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Shorthand Teaching Methods 3.2 Inductive or Discovery Approach 3.3 Deductive or Telling Method 3.4 Reading Method 3.5 Writing Method 3.6 Demonstration Method 3.7 Repetitive Approach 3.8 Question and Answer Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We shall discuss the various methods of teaching shorthand.
Shorthand is part of the business studies curriculum in junior secondary schools in Nigeria.
It is also taught at the senior secondary and technical schools as well as in tertiary institutions.
Based on NPE (1998) and NCCE (2002), Shorthand is a skill subject which involves the use of the head, the heart and the hand in quick response to spoken sounds.
The sub skills involved in learning shorthand are listening, reading, writing, ability to recall what has been heard and language skills.
As has been said earlier on, teaching is the process of directing or guiding learning.
Good teaching involves discovering and applying the best way of learning.
We cannot but also appreciate the role of motivation in the teaching of shorthand.
As Canning (1976) puts it, right instruction plus right encouragement will increase the interest of students and motivate them to succeed.
This underscores the need for 44 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS you to adopt the right teaching methods together with motivational strategies that would arouse and sustain your students’ interest in shorthand.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention at least 4 methods of teaching shorthand • discuss at least 4 methods of teaching shorthand.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Shorthand Teaching Methods Adequate teaching facilities are essential for the development of shorthand skill.
Shorthand teaching facilities include, suitable furniture which are properly arranged such that the teacher can move around easily at all times to supervise students’ performance.
Other items include good notebook (preferably reporter’s note book) good quality and well sharpened pencil, ruled chalk board with preferably black surface, stop watch, display board, demonstration stand, Pitman shorthand textbook, Pitman shorthand dictionary, store or cupboard for note books, papers, sets of memos, reference books as well as tape recorder and cassettes.
Shorthand is a subject that allows students to develop skills at their own pace; therefore any teaching method adopted must take into consideration, students’ unique and differing characteristics.
These, according to Canning (1976) include age, sex, physical attributes, sensory endowment, intelligence, aptitude, level of intellectual attainment, temperament and personality, interest and motivation.
A combination of the following teaching methods could be used to teach shorthand to students.
3.2 Inductive or Discovery Approach One of the methods of teaching shorthand is the Inductive/Discovery approach.
In this method, students are induced to reason out shorthand principles which the teacher has planned to teach the students for that period.
The teacher writes some outlines on the chalkboard using a particular principle.
For example Only ………….neatly……………..until…………….unless…………… Kneel…………….unload…………..endless…………strongly………… 45 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS He would then ask the students to identify what common features they all have.
Thereafter, he would ask them what conclusions could be drawn from the way the outlines have been written.
Students would be expected to conclude that L is always written downwards after n, n halved and stroke NG.
This method is about three to four times as long as the deductive or telling method.
Although any principle learnt through this method has a more lasting effect on the students, it however, delays activity for too long.
It may be used occasionally to bring variety to the lessons.
3.3 Deductive or Telling Method The deductive or telling method is another method of teaching shorthand.
In this method, the teacher teaches the students certain principles.
He would then ask the students to apply them in similar circumstances or to explain how similar outlines could be written.
For example, past tenses are usually indicated by a disjoined t or d, depending on whichever one is sounded.
Paid………………faced………….dated…………developed………….
Students would then be asked to write out three or four similar outlines using the same principles.
3.4 Reading Method Another method to be considered is the reading method.
This is a method whereby students are made to read shorthand outlines either from printed material or from their own notes.
They could read as individuals, in pairs or in groups.
This method is very important in that constant shorthand reading has been found to have a considerable relevance to shorthand writing ability.
According to Harms, Stehr and Harris (1972), there are cases which show that shorthand was learned almost entirely by reading alone.
3.5 Writing Method Under the writing method students are made to copy shorthand notes from a text material, or to write from dictation.
They could be made to drill short forms, phrases and single outlines.
Constant practice is major to the attainment of high shorthand speed writing.
46 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.6 Demonstration Method Students learn a lot by watching how certain things are done.
The demonstration method is used to show the students, good sitting position, how to hold the pencil, how to turn over the notebook page, good outline formation, how to build mental storage etc.
The teacher could join the students during their practice periods in order to demonstrate to them how to write at speed.
The teacher demonstrates using the demonstration stand and by writing outlines on the chalkboard.
Chalkboard presentation inspires confidence.
3.7 Repetitive Approach The repetitive approach to shorthand teaching enables students to carry out meaningful repetitive drills.
It is important that the students be told the aim of the repetitive drill, that is, to be able to write the sentence at a particular speed later.
3.8 Question and Answer Method The question and answer method is used to consolidate the deductive method of teaching.
Students could be taught by being asked to explain why certain outlines are written in a particular way.
By so doing, they are being required to think and to sharpen and clarify their understanding of the practical application of the principle.
Whatever method is used, trainers should take note of the following important points- 1.
Ensure that your students adopt good sitting position.
2.
Teach them how to hold their pencils when writing shorthand.
3.
Help them develop good writing skills - outlines should be uniformly and legibly written.
4.
Teach correct outline formation.
5.
Teach theory and speed simultaneously.
6.
Don’t teach too many concepts at a time.
7.
Teach small units of theory and then ensure that they are 8. thoroughly practiced before moving on to another unit.
Teach principles of phrasing and do not demand that students 9. learn phrasing by heart.
When dictating, words should be clearly articulated but not exaggerated.
They should be spoken naturally.
Difficult words in a passage could be dictated first to the students to drill before the actual passage.
Seen and unseen passages should be used in class.
10.
Emphasise initial speed then accuracy of writing 47 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 11.
When you are less busy join students to drill and practice shorthand.
That will encourage them.
12.
Use words of encouragement, praise, monetary incentives and gift items such as reporter’s notebooks, pencil, good sharpener, shorthand drill book etc.
to reinforce students’ achievements.
13.
Give them immediate feedback on their performance as knowledge of results could be a good motivating factor.
14.
Positive attitude or performance of a student towards shorthand should be recognized and rewarded.
15.
Finally, you should help to build up your students’ English vocabulary as well as improve their command of certain aspects of the English Language which normally give students problems in shorthand.
These include spellings, punctuations and comprehension etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List the type of teaching methods that can be used in teaching shorthand.
2.
State the effect of each method in shorthand teaching.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION Good knowledge of the principles of shorthand is vital to good performance.
These principles should be presented in such a way that students’ interest will be aroused and sustained.
Since shorthand involves the development of reading and writing skills, make your students read from printed shorthand outlines and from their notes as much as possible.
This is because reading has been found to have a close relationship with proficiency in shorthand writing.
You should also make them drill shorthand outlines regularly in class.
Motivate your students by means of monetary and non-monetary incentives.
This is because, no matter how hardworking a student is if he lacks motivation, he may not be able to achieve his ultimate best even if all other learning conditions are favourable.
Recognize and reward positive attitude or performance of students through the generous use of words of encouragement and praises in a shorthand class.
You do not have to give expensive gift items to best students or students that participate most in class.
You may give reporters’ notebooks, pencil, good sharpeners and the like.
They are not so expensive in the shops.
One never knows to what extent these little gift items can motivate students.
Also the display of works of best students as well as the 48 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS progress chart of students on the display boards could serve as motivating factors too.
If you do not have demonstration stand in the class, suggest to the school authority to elevate the front of the class by 4 to 6 inches high.
Place a desk and chair on it so as to enable all the students to see you as you demonstrate good habit necessary for skill building 5.0 SUMMARY We have examined various methods of teaching shorthand which include the inductive method, the deductive method, demonstration method, writing method, reading method, question and answer method as well as motivational strategies which you should combine with your teaching method in order to bring out the best in your students.
We also emphasized that no one method is the best.
A combination of methods could be used depending on the situation.
We also pointed out the need for you to vary your teaching method depending on the needs of the class.
Research has shown that reading method of teaching shorthand is not too oftenly used by shorthand teachers.
This is not encouraging.
Do not tow this line because there is a strong relationship between reading and ability to write shorthand at speed.
No employer is interested in a secretary who can write shorthand outlines but cannot read and transcribe them.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention 5 methods of teaching shorthand.
2.
Mention 5 notable points to observe when teaching shorthand.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Canning, B. W. (1976).
Teaching Office Skills.
London: Pitman Publishing Limited.
Harms, H.; Stehr, B. W. & Harris, E. E. (1972).
Methods of Teaching Business and Distributive Education.
Cincinnati, Ohio: South- Western Publishing Co. Igbinoba, M. O.
(2004).
Methods of Teaching Shorthand and the Senior Secondary School A course Text on Special Methodology, Generic Science and Calculation for the Improvement of Teaching and Learning of Technical, Vocational and Business Subjects.
Lagos: FCE(T).
49 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS National Commission for Colleges of Education (2002).
Minimum Standards for Nigeria Certificate in Education.
(Voc.
and Tech.)
Edition.
National Policy on Education (1998).
Federal Republic of Nigeria (Revised Edition).
Lagos: NERC Press.
Russon, A. R. & Wanous, S. J.
(1973).
Philosophy and Psychology of Teaching Typewriting.
Cincinnati, Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. 50 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 2 TEACHING TYPEWRITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods of Keyboard Presentation 3.2 Methods of Teaching Typewriting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The goal of Technical Education includes the provision of vocational skills necessary for commercial and economic development as well as the individual’s economic self reliance.
Typewriting provides life long skills which enables the individual to become a useful member of the society.
In this unit, we shal take a look at the methods of keyboard presentation and various methods of teaching typewriting.
Typewriting according to Igbinoba (2000) is the act of printing on paper with the aid of a typewriter.
It is also an aspect of business studies which enables individuals to acquire practical typing skills.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain various methods of keyboard presentation • explain the methods of teaching typewriting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods of Keyboard Presentation The first few lessons in typewriting that a student receives is the mastery of the keyboard.
One method of teaching a student keyboard mastery is called the horizontal method.
This is a method, which introduces the student first to the home keys rol .
The student is asked to place his fingers on the home keys left finger beginning with the little finger on ASDF and right fingers beginning 51 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS with the little finger on ;LKJ.
After practicing how to type the home keys, the student is then introduced to other characters one after the other.
This is the most popular method of key board mastery in typewriting.
This method enables the student to put al his fingers into use from the start.
Right from the on set, the student is able to establish correct stroking of the keys; a technique which enables him to correctly reach out to other keys.
It also enables him to establish the correct hand position and provide the students with a firm foundation on which to build correct finger movement.
The second method is called vertical method.
It is the oldest method of keyboard instruction.
In this method keys are grouped according to the fingers used to operate them.
All fingers struck by the strong finger (the first and second) are presented first; beginning with the index fingers.
This is based on the principle of proceeding from the simple to the most difficult.
Progress is rapid with this method as easiest fingers are mastered first.
The problem with this method however, is that strong finger tend to be stressed more than the weak fingers.
Move time is spent practicing with the strong fingers while too little time is spent on the weak fingers which according to Russon and Wanous (1973) need more and not less practice.
Another method of keyboard presentation is the skill around method.
In this method the home row is taught first to give the student a base of operation in the home keys and create in the student a feeling of security.
Thereafter other keys are presented in haphazard order.
Vowel, punctuation marks and capitals are included at an early stage making it possible for students to type words and even sentences.
This method enables student to strike keys with the most convenient fingers.
The fact that students are able to type words, phrases at the first lesson; and sentences and paragraphs in the 1st week motivate student to learn more rapidly.
Practice that is meaningful creates interest and this in turn increases accuracy.
This method enables students to develop correct striking of keys.
It also reduces transposition errors, which arise as a result of using the right finger but the wrong hand.
Skill building in typewriting requires the use of a conducive typewriting room.
This means that the classroom should be noise free, wel ventilated, adequately equipped with functional typewriters, an elevated floor in front of the classroom with demonstration stand that has a typewriter, a chair and a desk for teacher’s use and well-lit classroom with clean environment.
Equal y important is the emotional atmosphere.
A student who feels awkward, inferior, angry, afraid or anxious requires an understanding and patient teacher.
You should do your best to use any of the motivational strategies earlier them discussed to assist them.
Helping your students build up their skills requires that you teach and emphasize the use of correct techniques when typing.
Give your students short intensive drills.
Such short-time typing will enable them prove to themselves that they can type at such and such a rate.
This should be fol owed by plenty of practices, which enable him to convert their gains into higher skil acquisition.
Encourage your students to practice often as practice 52 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS makes perfect.
They should however be encouraged to work at their own pace.
Give remedy practice exercises to your student based on errors in previous performance.
Usually, teachers lead students through the keyboard using the method adopted by the recommended textbook.
Whatever method is adopted, good teacher-student relationship needs to be established as this will inspire confidence from the students on the teacher.
This is very essential if effective learning is to take place.
Your students need sufficient practice to learn typewriting.
They should be encouraged to carry out regular practice exercises at their own pace.
3.2 Methods of Teaching Typewriting We have earlier discussed what teaching and teaching methods are: we also pointed out that the goal of teaching is to bring about desired learning in pupils and that if they learn what they are supposed to learn under the direction of the teacher, the teacher will be said to be successful but if students fail to learn, then the teacher has failed.
I must add that as a typing teacher, you must know how to type to be able to impart such a skill.
Teaching method that could be applied to typing include demonstration, apprenticeship, problem solving and discovery methods.
The steps in one method may sometimes overlap with the steps in another method.
You are expected to tailor your teaching procedures to fit the changing needs of your students.
It should be interactive for both teacher and students and should be personalized.
Demonstration Method Typewriting instruction is concerned with skill development, which is developed through the demonstration method.
Teach correct technique of reaching and striking keys and how to handle the operative parts of the typewriter by demonstrating it to your students.
You should also make them practice it while you guide them.
The demonstration method as defined by Russon and Wanous (1973) is one in which the teacher’s primary responsibility is showing the students how various response patterns are made.
The students’ responsibility lies in imitating the response patterns of the teacher.
In other words, the teacher demonstrates, the students imitate.
This is the best way typing skill can be developed.
53 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS When demonstrating, use a demonstration stand placed on elevated platform in front of the class so that all the students can see and hear you.
Let them know what new skill you want them to learn.
Read out the instructions clearly from the textbook, demonstrate the movement pattern, ask students to imitate the movement pattern, repeat demonstration-imitation process, evaluate students performance, point out errors, re-stress good points and direct practice until they acquire the desired skil .
When demonstrating, emphasize correct form and make your demonstration short.
Complex movement patterns should be broken down and demonstrated slowly as many times as possible.
Students like this method.
It commands and holds their attention.
It is very effective with poor and good students.
Goals are clearer and can easily be reached.
It involves both the teacher and the student in the learning activities and it is a quick method of teaching typing.
Apprenticeship Method This method is an adoption of the demonstration method.
It helps in guiding students in problem typing.
The difference between the demonstration and apprenticeship method is that in the apprenticeship method, students learn through the process of comparison.
In other words, they observe their teacher; that is the expert demonstrates and the production of such demonstration is compared with theirs.
As defined by Russon and Wanous, the apprenticeship method is one in which the teacher’s primary responsibility is in providing a model with which the student can compare their procedures and problem solutions.
If you are using the apprenticeship method, explain the problem you want to type from the textbook, let the student watch you type the problem while explaining the steps and techniques.
Evaluate your work and ask the students to type the problem fol owing your steps.
Thereafter, ask them to evaluate their work in comparison to yours.
Point out their errors and show them how they can improve on their work.
Give them further exercises until they have mastered the skill or technique you are trying to teach.
This method is very effective in helping students develop typing skills.
As with the demonstration method, select a short problem let your instruction be clear, concise and specific and provide adequate time for your students to compare their work with that produced by you.
This method is best with small and homogenous groups of advanced students.
It develops good work habits in students.
This is because students have to constantly compare their standards with that of the expert - the teacher.
Problem Solving Method 54 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Problem solving method is used to develop concepts and judgments relative to the arrangement of the copy, consistent style and other cognitive information.
When students are able to solve a specific problem, they can solve a whole range of related problems.
The solution of one leads to the correct solution of the others.
The problem solving method is defined by Russion and Wanous (1973) as one that involves the student in problem comprehension, attempted solutions, decision-making and the drawing of conclusion.
The emphasis here real y is not necessarily the solution but the skills acquired in the process of analyzing the problems and the methods used in arriving at the solution.
It enables the student to use his initiative and be resourceful.
Students are usual y actively involved in this method of teaching.
Through trial and error, they are able to acquire real understanding.
You can apply the problem solving teaching in any of these ways.
You may ask the student to centre an item vertical y and that they should ensure that top and bottom margins are equal.
Students may apply different methods at centering the item.
Ask them to explain the method they used.
Identity the correct method and demonstrate it for al to see.
Give them similar exercise and they will be able to solve the problem better.
It enables students to develop qualities such as resourcefulness, initiative and responsibility.
It arouses their interest and makes them willing and ready to learn.
The method is time consuming and slower students learn less wel .
The Discovery Method The discovery method of teaching is sometimes referred to as the experimental or laboratory method.
It has a close relationship with the problem solving method.
In this method the solutions to the problem is prescribed by the teacher and the students try out the solutions.
On the basis of the results certain conclusions would be drawn and generalization made.
Discovery method is defined by Russon and Wanous as one which provides for learning activity through the evaluation of evidence col ected in the process of solving problems.
When you use the discovery method, you are not only teaching the students how to type but you are also teaching them how to think.
This method appeals to student curiosity and adds variety to teaching.
It is also time consuming.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List the type of teaching methods that can be used in teaching typewriting 2.
State the effect of each method in typewriting teaching.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 55 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION Each of the methods of teaching typewriting explained above can be used in combination.
Whatever method or combination of methods used should depend on the nature of students; time available and other prevailing circumstance.
You should always bear the goal of teaching in mind.
That is to bring about the desired changes in the learners.
Therefore; whatever method is adopted or adapted should suit the learners.
It should contain teacher-students activities.
Research has shown that the teaching method mostly used by teachers is the demonstration method while the motivational method is the least used.
Do not deemphasize the use of motivational strategies when teaching.
One cannot overemphasise the role of motivation in teaching skill subjects.
No matter how good a teaching method is, if students are not sufficiently motivated, they can never attain the height of their potentials.
According to Igbinoba (2004) cash incentives, open praise, weekly display of practical work of best student in class, frequent tests, take home assignments, and knowledge of results (feedback) should form regular features of classroom experiences.
These will help to motivate students to greater heights.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed the vertical, horizontal and skip around methods of keyboard presentation.
We have also discussed the demonstration, apprenticeship, problem solving and discovery methods of teaching typewriting.
Their advantages and disadvantages were also discussed.
We however, concluded that you should vary your teaching methods to suit your students’ needs as well as accomplishing the goal of bringing about the desired changes in your students.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What method would you use to teach your student how to change ribbons on their typewriters.
2.
What steps must be taken by the typewriting teacher using the demonstration method of teaching?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ibigbami, D. B. O.
(2004).
Methods of Teaching/Learning Typewriting at the Secondary and Vocational Institutions: A course Text on Special Methodology, Generic Science and Calculation for the 56 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Improvement of Teaching and Learning of Technical, Vocational and Business Subjects.
Lagos: FCE(T).
Igbinoba, M. O.
(2004).
Low Motivation among NCE Business Education Students: A Challenge to Business Educators”.
Business Education Book of Readings Vol.1 (4).
Russon, A. R. & Wanous, S. J.
(1973).
Philosophy and Psychology of Teaching Typewriting.
Cincinnati, Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. 57 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 3 TEACHING OFFICE PRACTICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods of Teaching Office Practice 3.2 Demonstration 3.3 Simulation and Role Playing 3.4 Field Trip 3.5 Case Study 3.6 Lecture Method 3.7 Question and Answer Technique 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we shall discuss the various methods of teaching office practice that would enable you present theoretical concepts as well as provide opportunities for your student to see, touch and manipulate modern office equipment.
As you know there is the need to expose them to activities that would enable them to acquire skills needed in a business office.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify various methods used in teaching office practice • describe at least two methods of teaching office practice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods of Teaching Office Practice Office practice, according to Harms, Stehr and Harris (1972) is the connecting link between schools and business.
It is a course that exposes students to business practices and procedures, equipment and materials used in an office.
Equipment used in teaching are expected to be typical of those used in the business world.
Unfortunately, many schools do not have modern office equipment that students can see and manipulate.
To help the students visualize these equipments, you need to 58 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS use visual aids like pictures and real objects when teaching.
You would also need to organize excursions and field trips for the students.
Other methods of teaching include demonstration, case study, simulation and role-playing, question and answers technique as well as lecture method.
3.2 Demonstration This is a method which you can use to teach the students correct techniques of manipulating office equipment, receiving visitors, filing and other office techniques such as interpersonal and communication skills.
You could stand in front of the class and demonstrate how to operate office equipment such as the computer, photocopier or duplicating machine.
The students would watch and imitate your techniques.
Discourage wrong techniques and appreciate right techniques.
This method makes the class lively and interesting.
3.3 Simulation and Role Playing Simulation as defined by Daugherty (1974) is a learning construct in which students, through role-playing and social interaction experiences, learn to solve problems and make decision in realistic situations.
Simulation and role-playing are quite similar in that both involve life- like situations.
They can be used to teach interpersonal and communication skills.
Roles could be assigned to students who are left to use their own words in a playlet.
The playlet may be used to teach how a difficult boss or visitor could be handled and how an unpleasant office situation could be handled.
It could be used to correct an unacceptable action and to teach acceptable and correct actions.
Planning is essential and your students should be involved in the planning.
At the end of it all, they should be able to understand what the socio drama has been trying to teach.
Roles should be alternated to enable students view all sides of a problem.
This method helps to relate what has been taught to life–like situations they are likely to meet in the real world.
It also helps in the development of desirable attitude and attribute of an office worker.
An evaluation should follow the play- acting.
3.4 Field Trip The field trip enables you to use community resources to make learning meaningful.
Your students can learn about office procedures and business practices when you take then to visit business organizations where they can observe first hand, how office staff works.
The place to be visited should be related to the unit being studied and not just as a form of entertainment to the students.
59 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS The students may see it as an opportunity to get away from school work and may not really learn anything.
A visit could be organized for instance to business organisations that sell modern office equipment where their operations could be explained and demonstrated to the students.
To ensure that the field trip is beneficial to the students, you will need to explain to them where they are visiting what they should look out for and special notes they must make.
You must seek permission from the organization to be visited and from the right authority.
If students will miss other lectures during the process, let other teachers know and also ensure that their parents are duly informed of the trip and their permission and co-operation sought.
Arrange transportation and ensure that road worthy buses are used in other not to endanger the lives of the students.
Follow up the excursion with a discussion with the students in class and evaluate the trip.
Finally, write a letter to thanks the business organization for being of great help to you and your students during the visit.
3.5 Case Study The “case” is usually a problem situation hypothetical or real presented to the student whereby they would be expected to select from their experiences and previous learning or study an answer or a course of action that would best solve the problem.
The case may be selected from a textbook or from a business or the community relating to behaviour in a business situation.
It could be a personal or consumer problem.
During the discussion, evidence would be weighed and characters and situations examined to help the students develop a sense of judgment.
3.6 Lecture Method Much has been said on this method earlier.
It could be used to teach concepts and principles in office practice.
It is ideal for teaching a large class.
As a matter of fact using the lecture method will enable you cover the syllabus on time.
However, the teaching of office practice requires the use of a combination of methods.
Audio visual aids could be used to support this form of teaching to make it interesting and less boring.
3.7 Question and Answer Technique This method is one of the most versatile teaching-learning techniques.
You can use this method to determine a new starting point in a unit from the answers the students have given you on their previous knowledge.
It is adaptable to almost any teaching-learning situation.
It could also serve as basis for a discussion.
It can be used to maintain attention of the students during class or to motivate them to prepare their assignments.
You can use it to involve non responsive students in class activity, 60 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS review work covered, prepare for test, motivate students to read assignments and to reveal students’ difficulties, work habits, interests and levels of development.
Questioning however requires a great deal of skill which must be developed through practice.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List the type of teaching methods that can be used in teaching office practice.
2.
State the effect of each method in office practice teaching.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION It is important that you master as many techniques of teaching as possible, which are consistent with your personality.
When you use a variety of techniques you will be able to keep the interest of your students high.
This is because the element of surprise heightens interest 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the various methods of teaching, which could be applied to office practice.
The methods that are best for the presentations of theoretical concepts and principles were pointed out as well as those that are best for the teaching of office skills.
We concluded that as good as these methods are, it is best to combine and vary methods so as to arouse and sustain student’s interest as well as enhance learning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the purpose of field trip and how should it be planned?
2.
Mention five uses of the questions and answer technique of teaching office practice.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Daugherty, A. S. (1974).
Methods of Basic Business and Economic Education.
Cincinnati Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. Harms, H.; Stehr, B. W. & Harris, E. E. (1972).
Methods of Teaching Business and Distributive Education.
Cincinnati, Ohio: South- Western Publishing Co. 61 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 4 TEACHING COMMERCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods of Teaching Commerce 3.1.1 Demonstration 3.2 Simulation and Role Play 3.3 Field Trip 3.4 Questions and Answer Technique 3.5 Lecture Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we are going to discuss the methods of teaching commerce.
They are not in anyway different from those used in teaching office practice which we have earlier discussed in the previous unit.
They include demonstration, simulation and role playing, field trip, questions and answer technique and lecture method.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify various methods of teaching commerce • describe at least five methods of teaching commerce.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods of Teaching Commerce 3.1.1 Demonstration When teaching commerce, you could use demonstration method to emphasise important points to the students.
Demonstration provides visual experience which goes beyond verbal explanation.
According to Daugherty (1974), showing the students how to perform an activity as well as telling them about the activity stimulate both visual and auditory responses and therefore accelerate the learning process.
This method 62 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS does not always require extensive equipment or laboratory techniques.
It does not have to be time consuming.
You could also ask the students in groups or individually to devise diagrammed illustrations of how raw materials find their ways to the consumers’ tables as finished goods.
The illustration could be on cardboard paper.
Some of the students or group leaders could be asked to explain their illustrations to the class.
Their classmates may challenge the accuracy of the explanations and earn points for themselves.
3.2 Simulation and Role Play This method could be used to teach commerce.
You could for instance when teaching your students different types of business organizations assign roles to the students.
An individual could be made to raise funds and buy an item for sale in the school during break time.
He could buy a bag of pure water for sale.
You could ask 2 – 5 persons to put money together to buy items to be sold to students during break.
You could make some students to also set up a ‘limited liability company’ which they will ‘register’ with you.
Other students will be encouraged to buy shares in the ‘company’.
From the money realized from capital ‘sale of shares’ they could embark on toast bread production and sold to students during break time.
This could go on for a period of time after which they would be made to report to the class about their experiences.
You could use these experiences to emphasize or clarify some points.
There are several topics which could be taught through simulation and role playing to facilitate understanding and enhance learning.
3.3 Field Trip According to Harms, et al (1972) educators have granted certain values to field trips such as: to enable students see concrete illustrations of classroom theory; to reinforce understandings develop from reading and discussion; see, smell, and touch or hear the objects or processes previously described; to enter into conversation with people who are actively engaged in business; to ask questions that may not arise in the classroom.
As has been earlier mentioned, there should be adequate preparation for the trip and notes should be carefully made of things observed during the trip which you must have earlier on described to the students in class.
As soon as the trip is over, you should guide the entire class in evaluating the results so that maximum educational value can be derived from the trip.
A visit could be made to manufacturing concern to see first hand how raw materials are converted to finished products.
63 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.4 Questions and Answer Technique This method could be used as oral quiz technique to stimulate discussion.
In the process you could uncover certain attitudes, needs and interests as well as problems which could give direction to areas where you need to focus on when teaching.
It is essential that you observe good questioning techniques when asking questions.
You could direct the questions to the entire class or to a particular student whom you call by name first before asking the question.
Let your questions be widely distributed among all students.
Do not concentrate on one half of the class.
If a student is inattentive, call him by name and ask your question.
That will keep him on the alert.
Vary your tone and phrasing to avoid monotony.
If a student failed to answer a question correctly, go back to him at another time with a similar question.
Avoid multiple forms of questions.
They must not be ambiguous.
Avoid questions that require chorus answers from the students or give them room to guess an answer.
3.5 Lecture Method The lecture method has been extensively discussed before now.
We would only like to say here that when combined with chalkboard illustrations, it could be an effective method of teaching commerce.
The lecture method is useful when presenting facts, figures, concepts and theory.
Since interruptions from students are minimal, you can cover a lot of grounds within the lecture period.
It is ideal for large class size.
However, it is advisable that you combine the method with other methods in other to make the lecture less boring.
This method however is ideal for students in higher institutions of learning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List the types of teaching methods that can be used to teach commerce.
2.
State the effect of each method in teaching commerce.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION We have mentioned the various methods which could be used to teach commerce.
It must be emphasized here that since the level of students we are considering here is at the junior secondary school level, whatever method is chosen should be adaptable to their ages.
64 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the various methods of teaching commerce which include lecture, simulation and role playing, field trip and question and answer methods.
We also emphasized the fact that whatever method is chosen, it should be student centred.
It should be varied and made interesting.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss three methods of teaching commerce.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Daugherty, A. S. (1974).
Methods of Basic Business and Economic Education.
Cincinnati Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. Harms, H.; Stehr, B. W. & Harris, E. E. (1972).
Methods of Teaching Business and Distributive Education.
Cincinnati, Ohio: South- Western Publishing Co. 65 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 5 TEACHING BOOK-KEEPING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods of Teaching Bookkeeping 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Bookkeeping is an important aspect of business studies.
Its knowledge provides the basis for a sound economic education and for an understanding of economic policies of all levels of government.
It is therefore necessary to understand and carefully select appropriate and effective methods for its teaching.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention three methods of teaching bookkeeping • discuss three methods of teaching bookkeeping.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods of Teaching Bookkeeping The methods of teaching bookkeeping according to Olatoke (2004) include the developmental approach, the teaching and learning by principle approach, the inductive or rule discovery/problem solving approach, the facts process approach and the lecture method.
In Developmental Approach, the lesson presentation proceeds logically and sequentially from the simple to complex and from known to unknown.
This approach enables the students to get a holistic view of the place of each activity and problem in the scheme.
The Teaching and Learning by Principle/Deductive/Problem Solving Approach is such that you would present the relevant principles to the students and allow the students to apply them in solving problems.
This approach is very suitable for secondary school teaching.
66 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS The Inductive or Rule Discovery Approach is a method whereby you use one principle of account to teach another principle of account.
That way, the students would be able to see the relationship between both accounts.
The Facts Process Approach is a method generally used for students in higher institutions.
This method makes students to think and in the process discover more facts for themselves.
It depends on Questions and Answers Techniques.
You can ask the students some questions, allow them to ask their own questions and sometimes allow them to provide answers themselves.
The Lecture Method is ideal for teaching students in tertiary institutions of learning where you have large classes of matured students.
However, the simulation and role playing method could be used in teaching bookkeeping.
Here you could use the method to paint a picture which reveals of the relationship between transactions and the records necessary in the books of accounts.
For instance you could dramatize the concept of debit and credit entries.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State the different methods of teaching book-keeping.
2.
State the effect of each method in teaching book-keeping.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION Care should be taken to carefully select the most appropriate method of presenting bookkeeping to your students.
The lecture method for instance is not the best method of presenting bookkeeping to junior secondary school students.
The question and answer method is usually used to supplement other methods of teaching.
You should however, ensure that you master good questioning techniques.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, various methods of teaching book-keeping were highlighted and discussed.
These we said include the deductive and inductive method, the lecture method, simulation and role playing, questions and answer techniques etc.
We concluded by saying that the lecture method is not the best method of teaching bookkeeping to young children.
The best method we said was the deductive /problem solving approach.
67 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention any three methods of teaching bookkeeping in the secondary school.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Olatoke, M. O.
(2004).
Methods of Teaching Accounting Courses at Secondary school.
A Course Text on Special Methodology, Generic Science and Calculations for the Improvement of Teaching and Learning of Technical, Vocational and Business Subjects.
68 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS MODULE 4 LESSON PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Planning to Teach Unit 2 Lesson Development UNIT 1 PLANNING TO TEACH CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Lesson Plan 3.2 Importance of Lesson Plan 3.3 Guide to Lesson Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we are going to discuss what a lesson plan is and how to plan a lesson.
Planning has been defined as deciding what to do, how to do it and when to do it and who to do it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what a lesson plan is • explain the importance of lesson plan • design and explain the four-way guide to lesson planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Lesson Plan Planning which involves both mental and physical activities may be done on a short-term or long-term basis.
Ehiametalor (1990) defined lesson as a series of interrelated activities geared to provide the learners a scope of capacity or skill.
Curzon (1980) defined a lesson plan as an instructional session designed and administered by a teacher, with the 69 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS intention of attaining a lesson objective through guided class activities involving a variety of teaching techniques.
Lesson plan represents a detailed analysis of a particular activity described in the unit plan.
The process of a lesson begins with the breaking down of a whole course content to syllabus for one year, then to scheme of work for one term or semester, then to unit plan of one week and finally to lesson plan for one lesson period.
A term is usually made up of 11-14 weeks while a semester is usually made up of a minimum of 16 weeks.
Several topics are usually assigned general topic.
This weekly general topic is further divided into specific topic for each day’s lesson.
A general topic can be broken into two, three or four specific topics depending on the duration for lesson.
There are basically two types of lesson plan - long-term and short-term lesson plan.
The long-term lesson plan covers a period ranging from one term to one year.
While the short-term lesson plan covers a period under one term.
The long-term lesson plan has a number of problems.
It is strenuous on the teacher to plan lesson to cover as long as 36 weeks.
Secondly, the long-term lesson plan may be affected by unforeseen development such as closure of school and lengthening and shortening of school calendar.
Another problem could be that of curriculum change or a change in the curriculum planner which could affect implementation.
The short-term lesson plan is usually more detailed and easily amenable to change.
This is why the short-term lesson plan is more preferable to the long-term lesson plan.
INSTRUCTIONAL OBJECTIVES Instructional objectives can be defined as the competencies and behavioural expressions of a programme.
Instructional objectives are usually expressed in general and specific terms and defined at the initial stage of instructional planning.
Statements which describe expected students learning outcomes in broad terms may be referred to as general, terminal, overall or primary objectives.
They state exactly what the students need to achieve at the end of the programme/course/unit.
Once general objectives have been formulated, the next stage is to break them down into enabling objectives.
Enabling objectives are sub-divisions of the general objective or objectives.
They provide a way of achieving the stated objectives.
The general and enabling objectives are usually stated carefully in the unit plan while specific behavioural objectives are usually stated in the daily plan.
Specific behavioural objectives are usually stated in terms of expected student performance.
This should satisfy three important criteria.
The 70 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS objective, according to Harms, Stehr and Harris (1972) should identify or describe • Expected student performance or what the student will be doing when he demonstrates that he has attained the objective • Conditions under which the student will be expected to demonstrate or show his achievement of the objective.
• Evaluate criteria or what are the minimum standards of performance expected of the student.
3.2 Importance of Lesson Plan On the importance of planning a lesson Russon and Wanous (1973) quoted a teacher as saying that planning is the secret of good discipline, productive classroom climate, meaningful day to day student experiences and the accomplishment of teacher-student objectives.
Lesson plan is of great importance to you as a teacher.
It reminds you of what you are going to teach and how you intend to teach it.
During planning you are able to take special note of what to ignore as well as potential difficulties and problems.
You should be able to develop the subject matter in a logical manner.
This gives you confidence when teaching.
It enables you to source for and provide what to use as concrete examples.
From the lesson plan, you are able to easily evaluate your teaching to see whether or not you have achieved your stated objectives.
3.3 Guide to Lesson Planning When planning a lesson you need to consider the characteristics of the learners, what they will be learning, how learning with be achieved and how to establish that learning has been achieved.
In other words, what is the intelligence level of the students?
What is their age range, and what previous knowledge do the students have?
The answers to these questions will enable you set lesson objectives and to determine what new material is to be introduced to them.
The lesson content in turn will also lead you to consider what strategy to use in presenting the learning material, and what type of class activities you intend to package for them.
Furthermore, you need to consider what types of instructional resources to use, and how to improvise where necessary.
At the planning stage, you will need to establish appropriate assessment criteria, which you will use to ascertain the extent to which your students have mastered the lesson taught.
All that we have been discussing can be summarized in Ekpenyong’s four-way guide to lesson planning shown below.
71 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS THE FOUR WAY GUIDE TO LESSON PLANNING Planning Question Marco Action Decision on objective based on learner’s capacity Who will be learning?
What will they be learning?
Selection of topics/subject matter How will learning be Selection of appropriate methods of instruction, achieved?
class activities, and instructional resources.
How will it be establish Exhibition of competency in what has been that learning has been achieved.
taught through relevant types of tests Competency in work and / or further, education: through Sammative evaluation Adapted from Prof. Ekpenyong’s lecture notes On the left hand side of the diagram are the planning questions while on the right hand side we have the macro plan statements which you can further breakdown to micro or more specific actions plan or blueprint.
Such a blueprint is produced below.
72 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS LESSON PLANNING BLUE PRINT Curriculum Content Your first task is to examine the curriculum content and unit topics and determine appropriate content and objectives for your lesson Decision on Lesson Objectives Your next task is to decide your lesson objectives in terms of expected learning outcomes Specific Order of Presentation Thirdly, you are expected to decide the order in which you intend to present your materials whether from simple to complex or from known to unknown.
You should also determine the type of learning you expect to take place whether psychomotor, cognitive or affective domains or a combination of domains.
This should be specified.
Designing Students’ Activities When designing students’ activities, you need to decide appropriate activities that the students are going to be engaged in.
Identification of Learning Resources The identification of learning resources requires that you decide on what learning resources to use, the stage at which you will introduce them, and the time allocated for instruction.
Determine the Methods for Assessing Student’s Performance This is the stage where you have to determine whether you are going to assess your students orally or in written form.
It could also be in form of quizzes, group work or student summarising what has been taught.
Evaluation of Teacher’s Performance This calls for the development of appropriate instrument which you intend to use to assess how well you have planned your lesson, how well you have taught and how well you have achieved your lesson objectives.
73 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS Design a Contingency Plan Designing a contingency plan entails planning how you intend to take care of unforeseen developments.
For instance if a particular arm of a class is lagging behind other arms for whatever reasons, what would you do?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE State the characteristics of a good lesson plan.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of a lesson plan to the teacher cannot be over emphasized.
It shows at a glance all the activities that are to take place in the classroom.
It helps in planning for a lesson as well as in its development.
Careful lesson planning is essential for effective delivery of a lesson.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed what a lesson plan is.
We highlighted its importance to the teacher.
We discussed the long-term and short-term lesson plan, the four-way guide to lesson planning and lesson planning blueprint.
We concluded that careful planning is essential for effective delivery of any lesson.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
“A lesson plan is of great importance to the teacher” Discuss 2.
Outline the steps to take when planning a lesson.
74 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Curzon, B.
B.
(1980).
Teaching in Further Education.
London: Cassel.
Ehiametalor, E. T. (1990).
Business and Economics Education.
Principles and Methods.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers.
Harms, H. Stehr, B. W. and Harris, E. E. (1972).
Methods of Teaching Business and Distributive Education.
Cincinnati Ohio: South- western Publishing Co. Russon, A. R. & Wanous, S. J.
(1973).
Philosophy and Psychology of Teaching Typewriting.
Cincinnati, Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. 75 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS UNIT 2 LESSON DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Lesson Plan Format 3.2 Developing a Lesson 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we are going to discuss how a lesson is developed, that is introduced, presented and evaluated.
Before you develop a lesson first of all prepare a lesson plan format, which is like a sketch or layout showing major segments of the lesson.
At a glance one can see a summary of the subject matter, the order of presentation, the method or presentation and evaluation as well as the audiovisual materials you would need to effectively deliver your lesson.
The lesson plan will be a useful guide to you when developing your lesson notes, which is a more detailed exercise.
Lesson development is done in class and it involves both the teacher and the students.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe two major types of lesson plan formats • write a lesson plan for the teaching of any business studies topics • explain the steps involved in the development of a lesson.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Lesson Plan Format There are two main types of lesson plan formats.
We have the vertical or single file format and the columnar (tabular) horizontal format.
The tabular format may have columns ranging from two to six depending on institutional or teacher’s preference.
Whether single file or tabular the first part, that is the preamble or general information section will bear the same type of information namely course title, level of students, class, 76 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS duration of the lesson, objectives, entering behaviour and teaching materials.
The choice of a particular format depends on factors such as teacher’s preference, common practice or what is approved in a particular school.
Some teachers tend to adopt the type they were exposed to in school or which they have seen in books.
As has been said earlier on, the preamble of both formats will have the following information: Section A Teacher’s Name Name of school Subject Title Date Subject Matter Duration Lesson Title/ General Topic Specific Topic Week Class Aim General Objective Specific Objectives Entry behaviour/Previous knowledge /experience Teaching method Instructional materials Section B Vertical Format Introduction Presentation Application Revision Conclusion The section B part of the tabular format is as shown below: Time Stage Content Teachers Student Instructional activities activities material 6 minutes Introduction Development 7 minutes Stage 1 7 minutes Stage 2 7 minutes Stage 3 5 minutes Summary 5 minutes Evaluation 5 minutes Assignment 5 minutes Reference Teacher’s signature and date Principal’s signature and date 77 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS LESSON FORMAT FOR A SKILL BASED OR PRACTICAL SUBJECT SUBJECT TITLE: CLASS: LESSON TITLE: DATE: LEARNING OBJECTIVE(S) DURATION OF LESSON: 45 Minutes INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS: MINS CONTENT DESCRIPTION STUDENT INSTRUCTIONAL TEACHER ACTIVITY ACTIVITY MATERIALS Introduction 1) Test of previous Question Use audio/ visual Lessons and answers aids Practical 2) Statements of activities lesson objective Presentation Copy from Chalkboard the illustration 6 Principle I Demonstration board/text; 6 Principle II Explanation Reading, Writing 6 Principle III Demonstration Typing Drawing Application 4 a. Recapitulation Points on major principles 5 b. Tests/Assessment Questions and answer on point of theory 5 c. Practice Unregulated/Regulated 2 Note errors d. Checking Assess success for 3 correction e. Final Practice Assess success 1 f. Homework Assignment from text Compare or prepared material with Previous attempt Adapted from Prof. Ekpenyong’s lecture notes 78 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS LESSON FORMAT FOR A SKILL BASED OR PRACTICAL SUBJECT SUBJECT TITLE: CLASS: LESSON TITLE: DATE: LEARNING OBJECTIVE(S) DURATION OF LESSON: 45 min Instructional Materials: MINS CONTENT DESCRIPTION STUDENT INSTRUCTIONAL TEACHER ACTIVITY MATERIALS ACTIVITY 7 Introduction Test/Review of Question and Chart Graphs previous lessons answers Explanation of lesson objective Presentation Exposition Copy Examples Chalkboard 6 Concept I Explanation Answering and Illustration/ use of asking graphs, cardboard 6 Concept II Illustration questions examination or 6 Concept III Question and concept or answers concrete Application materials 6 a. Recapitulation Dictation of short Take down notes short notes for guidance 9 b. Tests/Assessment Questions group work etc.
5 Conclusion 1) Revision, of main point of the lesson 2) Assignment relating to next lesson Adapted from Prof. Ekpenyong’s lecture notes The tabular format of the lesson plan is more elaborate than the single sheet format.
Although it takes longer time to prepare it contains more outline information relating to teaching and learning.
It can safely be said that it is more likely to result in very thorough lesson preparation.
79 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS 3.2 Developing a Lesson Introduction Stage Development of a lesson involves both the teacher and the students.
At the introductory stage of lesson development, you could ask some questions to test previous knowledge, you could in a few sentences, remind students of salient points in the previous lesson.
You could make your students carry out some practical activities on the previous lesson just to refresh their minds.
This is meant to help prepare ground for the new lesson.
Whatever method you use should arouse the curiosity of your students and sustain their interest throughout the lesson.
At the end of the introduction, it should be clear what the objective of the lesson is.
Every introduction should be relevant to the actual lesson.
Any irrelevant introduction can very seriously distort or hinder the realization of lesson objectives.
Presentation Stage The next stage is the presentation stage whereby the teacher with the involvement of students employs various teaching methods and instructional resources in presenting various concepts and principles to the students.
Teacher activities and concurrent student activities presentation must relate as well as lead to the achievement of the stated objectives of the lesson.
The presentation stage is the “Heart” or otherwise the central part of the lesson.
It demands a lot of experience and skill on your part to successfully carry it through.
It is the part of the lesson where you need to demonstrate certain skills, explain some points, question or clarify your points and at the same time engage your students in relevant learning activities that would motivate them and stimulate their interest.
Application Stage This is the stage in the lesson when you need to guide the students in applying the concepts taught, solve problems, answer questions or have their skills tested.
This stage requires a generous time allocation.
Conclusion Stage This stage is very important in the development of a lesson.
Unfortunately many teachers do not attach serious importance to this stage.
Do not rush it.
Many times teachers rush it because there is little 80 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS or no time left for the lesson.
While concluding, the need may arise to review the key concepts of the lesson.
When you ask questions, from students’ responses you would be able to obtain necessary feedback on how far the lesson objectives have been achieved.
You should end with specific statements that go a long way to reinforce the students’ knowledge of the subject matter or with an assignment that could give an insight into the next lesson.
It should be emphasized here that evaluation should be both progressive and summative.
Its aim should be to determine the effectiveness of a lesson in relation to goal attainment.
As has been previously said, a lesson plan is expected to facilitate your lesson development in class.
As a rule, you should plan your lesson well ahead of time.
However, you may suddenly be called upon to teach a class you were not prepared for because your colleague suddenly took ill or is absent for one reason or the other.
For an experienced teacher, who has taught the lesson over and over again in the past, he could teach the lesson without anybody knowing that he has not really prepared for the lesson.
However, this situation may not be so to a novice.
Thus, the following lapses according to Farrant (1980) are features of an unprepared lesson.
1.
Incomplete subject matter – he may not be able to recall all the important points.
2.
Incorrect facts 3.
Lack of detailed and illustrative material 4.
Disorderly presentation of information The secret of good class presentation is adequate planning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Itemise the process of developing a good lesson.
Share your answers in a group of five or ten 4.0 CONCLUSION Lesson plan formats vary from school to school.
Teachers’ preference and school choice as well as common practice influence the choice of format.
Although the tabulated format is more advantageous, whatever format is adopted by a particular teacher or school can also serve a useful purpose.
Development of a lesson should involve both the teacher and the students.
That way, students’ interest will be aroused and 81 EDU782 BUSINESS EDUCATION METHODS sustained.
The use of a variety of teaching methods in the development of a lesson will go a long way in making learning effective.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the importance of a lesson plan was mentioned.
We were also introduced to the two formats for lesson plan – the single sheet or vertical format and the tabular or horizontal format.
We were also introduced to lesson format for skill based or practical subject and the lesson format for theory based business subjects.
We went through the steps for the development of a lesson and emphasised the need to evaluate students progressively and at the end of the lesson in other to determine the effectiveness of the lesson in relation to goal attainment 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the steps involved in the development of a lesson.
2.
Mention three features of an unprepared lesson 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Farrant, J. S. (1964).
Principles and Practice of Education.
England: Longman Group Ltd. 82
