 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 713 COURSE TITLE: EDUCAT IONAL MANAG EMENTAND SUPERVISION  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE EDU 713 EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION Course Developer Mr. Timothy Ajadi Olugbenga School of Education, National Open Universit y of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Writer Mr. Timothy Ajadi Olugbenga School of Education, National Open Universit y of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Editor Dr. Ejieh, M. U.
C Faculty of Education Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife Programme Leader Dr.
I. O. Salawu School of Education, National Open Universit y of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator Mr. Timothy Ajadi Olugbenga School of Education, National Open Universit y of Nigeria, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE National Open Universit y of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open Universit y of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-330-0 All Rights Reserved iii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………..….. 1 What You Will Learn in this Course……………………….
1 Course Aims…………………………………………….….
2 Course Objectives……………………………………..…… 3 Working through this Course…………………………..….. 5 Assessment……………………………………………..….. 6 Tutor-Marked Assignment……………………………..….. 6 Final Examination and Grading………………………..….. 7 How to Get the Most from this Course……………….…… 7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials……………………….….
10 Summary………………………………………… .............. 10 iv  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Introduction EDU412: Principles of Educational Management is a 400 level, second semester course.
It is a two credit unit course for all students offering B.A (Ed), B.Sc (Ed) Education.
The course is also suitable for anyone who wants to learn about the management of education at any level.
The course exposes you to an understanding of many of the concepts of Educational management and its application in the administration of educational institutions.
It will also assist school administrators to be able to apply these concepts to the tasks and roles that they perform as school heads and chief executives in the education sector.
The course consists of sixteen units in three modules and a course guide.
The course takes you through the meaning and basic concepts in educational administration, the development of administration, leadership in educational institutions, supervision of instruction, educational law and control of education in Nigeria, organization of ministries of education, the functions of the state ministry of education, the functions of the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) and other boards of education in Nigeria, school plant, mapping and maintenance and planning of school plant.
So also the course take you through school records, the school time-table, school budget, discipline and the school – community relationship.
This Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using and how you will work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you should spend on each unit of the course for its successful completion.
The Course Guide also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignment which will be available at the end of every unit.
There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course at designated centers throughout the country.
You are advised to attend tutorial sessions at designated centre close to you.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of EDU412:Principles of Educational Management is to introduce basic concepts of Educational management and acquaint you with some important skills needed for the application of knowledge of educational management to the day-to-day activities in educational organisations.
An understanding of this course is vital because it serves as a framework for the application of educational management knowledge to administration and other i  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE activities in educational in stitutions.
From time-to-time, Educational administrators need to make de cisions, which may include interpretation of the policies and programmes of government of the country as they affect educational institutions.
During this course, you will learn about educational management as a concept and the roles expected of Educational Administrators in applying these concepts to daily school activities, such as school records, education law and control of education in Nigeria, functions of state primary education board and other boards in the education industry in Nigeria, school records and school budgets.
The course will expose you to an understanding of various types of management support systems available for educational managers which can assist in arriving at a decision without time wastage.
Specific reference will be made to other uses of educational management.
Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: to provide students with an understanding of the concepts which underline the use of the knowledge of educational management to enable educational administrators to evaluate the appropriate usage of management techniques, to analyze the influence of educational management to educational organisations, and to plan and manage the available records in the school.
The course also aims to explain: i. the meaning of Management and basic concepts of educational administration; ii.
the functions of school administrators and qualities of school administrators; iii.
the various types of school administrators; iv.
the various types of leadership styles we have; v. the factors influencing the choice of leadership style adopted by a school leader; vi.
the concept of supervision and inspection; vii.
the history of supervision in Nigeria; viii.
the reasons why instructional supervision is a must in Nigerian schools; ix.
the various forms of inspection; x the challenges of supervision of instruction in Nigeria; xi the evolution of education laws in Nigeria; xii the functions of the Federal and States ministries of education in Nigeria; xiii the reasons for the establishment of State Primary Education Board xiv the functions of NUC, NCCE, and NBTE; xv the meaning of school plant, school mapping and management of school plant; ii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE xvi the principle s of school plant planning; xvii the stages in volved in the provision of school plant; xviii the solutions to the problem of school plant maintenance; xix the importance of school records; xx the reasons for keeping school records; xxi the various types of records kept in the school; xxii the importance of school time-table; xxiii the meaning of a school budget and methods of preparing school budget; xxiv the importance and challenges of school budget; xxv the meaning and causes of acts of indiscipline in our schools; xxvi ways of controlling the act of indiscipline in the schools; xxvii the roles of the school to the community and the roles of the community to the school Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives at the beginning of the unit; you should read them carefully before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should also look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In doing so, you will be sure that you have followed the instructions in the unit.
Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • define management, administration, organization and educational administration; • explain the functions of educational administration; • distinguish between management and educational administration; • explain the characteristics of organisation; • enumerate the principles of organisation define leadership and leadership styles; • identify the various types of leadership styles that can be adopted by • educational administrator; • distinguish between supervision and inspection; • define supervision of instruction and explain the purpose of supervision of inspection; 3  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE • explain the various forms of inspection we have and the challenges facing supervision of instruction ; • suggests solution to the identified challenges; • distinguish between law and rule; written and unwritten law and statutory and customary laws • trace the history of education law in Nigeria; • distinguish between federal and state ministry of education; • draw the organogram of the federal and state ministry of education; • explain the functions of the federal and state ministry of education; explain the reason why SPEB is needed; • explain the importance of NUC, NCCE, and NBTE in Nigeria; • trace the historical development of NUC in Nigeria; • define school plant, school mapping and management of school plant; • give reasons why school plant must be maintained; • highlight the various types of school plant maintenance; • define school plant planning; • list the principles of school plant planning and the process of arriving at • logical school plant facilities; • mention the types of spaces expected to be provided for at the school site; • explain the constraints militating against school maintenance; • explain the meaning of a school record; • explain the reasons why records are kept in the school; mention the various records on the statutory and non-statutory lists; • list some vital records in the school and their uses • mention the usefulness of admission register; • define the school time-table; • mention the importance of the school time-table; • mention the various types of time-table; • highlight the guidelines to be followed in constructing a school time-table; • explain the steps to be followed by school head to ensure school • effectiveness through effective school time-table; • distinguish between budget and school budget; • list the purpose of a school budget; • explain the various method to be followed in preparation of a school budget; • highlight the challenges facing the school heads in preparing a workable school budget; • define indiscipline; • mention some act of indiscipline among Nigerian adolescence; • discuss the various causes of indiscipline in Nigerian schools; suggest what school heads can do to ensure discipline in schools; • 4  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE • give a brief definition of a school and a community; • list two types of communi ty; • highlight the roles of community to the school; • highlight the roles of school to the community ; discuss the factors influencing the school community relationship; • Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read all the study units in the study material, read other related books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit has self assessment practice exercises, and at regular intervals in the course, you are required to submit assignments/exercises for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, is a final examination.
The course should take you about 16 weeks in total to complete.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Units Titles of Work Number of Weeks to Spend Module 1 THE CONCEPT OF ADMINISTR ATION AND INSTRUCT ION Units 1 Definition and Interpretation of Basic 1 Concepts Unit 2 The Development of Administration 1 Unit 3 Leadership in Educational Institution 1 Unit 4 Supervision of Instruction (1) 1 Unit 5 Supervision of Instruction (2) 1 Module 2 EDUCATION LAWS AND SCHOOL PLANT Unit 1 Education Law and Control of 1 Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Organisation of the Ministry of 1 Education Unit 3 Functions of the State Primary 1 Education Board and Other Boards of Education/Commission in Nigeria Unit 4 School Plant, Mapping and Maintenance 1 Unit 5 Planning of School Plant 1 1 Module 3 SCHOOL RECORDS AND ADMINISSTRATION Unit 1 School Records (1) 1 5  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Unit 2 School Records ( 1) 1 Unit 3 The School Time- Table 1 Unit 4 The School Time-Table 1 Unit 5 Discipline and the School 1 Administration Unit 6 School – Communities Relationship Total 16 Each study unit consists of one to two weeks work, and includes introduction, objectives, reading materials, exercises, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignments (TMAs), references/further readings.
In general, these exercise/practice questions, test you on the materials you have just covered and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Together with the tutor- marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course; the first is the self assessment/practice, the second is the tutor-marked assignments; and the third is the end of the semester written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises/practices; you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines set by the authority of the National Open of Nigeria (NOUN).
The tutor-marked assignments you submit to your tutor will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of two hours duration.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You are to contact your study centre to collect the approved tutor marked assignment for the semester.
You are advised to attempt and submit all the tutor marked assignments given to you at the study centre, the best three will be counted for you.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions/Practice Exercises for the units in this course will be contained in the Assignment Folder.
You will be able to complete your 6  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE assignments from the informat ion and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
Howe ver, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the course.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with the TMA (Tutor-Marked Assignment) form, to your study centre manager/counselor who will hand it over to the instructional facilitator appointed for the course at the study centre.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your study centre on or before the deadline set by the authority of the National Open University Nigeria (NOUN) which will be made known to you through your study center manager/counselor.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your study centre manager/counselor before the assignment is due for submission to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date except in exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDU412 will be of two hours’ duration and have a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked assignments you previously attempted.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor- marked assignments and the comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study unit will tell you when to read other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, the study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate time.
Each of the units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
vii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Next is a set of learning objec tives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the tim e you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from a Reading Section of some other sources.
Self-assessment practices are interspersed throughout the end of the units.
Working through these practices will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and examination.
You should do each self- assessment exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous exercises given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your facilitator or send an e-mail which will be replied in less than 72 hours.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you when you need help, therefore do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to assist you.
• Read through this Course Guide thoroughly.
• Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the Course Overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available through the study centre.
You need to gather all these information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working through each unit of the course.
• Once you have created your own schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please keep your tutor informed before it is too late for help.
• Turn to Unit I and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the "Overview" at the beginning of each unit; you will always need 8  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE both the study unit you ar e working on and the one on your references, on your desk at the same tim e. • Working through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to read sections from your other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
• Well before the relevant due date, check your assignment file and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignment not later than the due date.
• Review the objectives for each study unit; confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your study centre for onward submission to the facilitator to mark, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your facilitator's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also on the comments written on the assignment.
Consult your facilitator as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are tutorial/facilitation hours provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of this tutorials/facilitation, together with the names and telephone number of your tutor/facilitator, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
9  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Your tutor/facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must submit your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor/facilitator well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor/facilitator and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor/facilitator if: You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings, You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercise, or You have a question or problem with an assignment you have a question with your tutor’s/facilitator’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials/facilitation provided by the NOUN.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor/facilitator and your mates and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials/facilitation, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary EDU412 ( Principles of Educational Management) intends to introduce the concepts and meaning of educational management to you.
Upon completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the important concepts of educational management and the importance of educational management to educational administration.
You will be able to answer these kinds of questions: • What is Management?
• What are the functions of educational management?
• What are the challenges of Educational management in Nigeria?
• What is supervision?
What are the nexus between supervision and inspection?
• What are the factors that influence the leadership styles adopted by any • leader?
• What are the challenges facing supervision in Nigeria?
• What are the differences between civil and criminal law?
• What are the functions of the Federal ministry of education?
10  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE • What are functions perfor med by SPEB in your state?
• What are the reasons for t he establishment of NUC in Nigeria?
• Mention the various types of school plant maintenance • What is school plant?
What is school mapping?
• What is management of school plant?
• What are the processes of arriving at logical school plant facilities?
• What are the constraints militating against school maintenance?
• List the principles of school plant planning?
• What are the solutions to the problems of school plant maintenance?
• What are the reasons why school records are kept by school heads?
• What is school time-table and its importance?
• What are the challenges facing the school head in the preparation of a • school budget?
• What is school – community relationship?
Indeed, the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above.
To gain the most from this course you should try to apply the principles and concepts of Educational Management to the practice of administration of educational institutions.
11  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE EDU 713 PRINCIPLES OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION Course Developer Mr. Timothy Olugbenga, AJADI National Open University of Nigeria Course Writer Mr. Timothy Olugbenga AJADI National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Dr. Ejieh, M. U.
C Faculty of Education Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife Course Coordinator Mr. Timothy Olugbenga AJADI National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xii  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-330-0 All Rights Reserved 13  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE PRINCIPLES OF EDUCAT IONAL MANAGE MENT EDU 713 CONTENTS Module 1 THE CONCEPT OF ADMINISTRATION AND INSTRUCT ION Unit 1 Definition and Interpretation of Basic Concepts Unit 2 The Development of Administration Unit 3 Leadership in Educational Institution Unit 4 Supervision of Instruction (1) Unit 5 Supervision of Instruction (2) Module 2 EDUCATION LAWS AND SCHOOL PLANT Unit 1 Education Law and Control of Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Organisation of the Ministry of Education Unit 3 Functions of the State Primary Education Board and Other Boards of Education/Commission in Nigeria Unit 4 School Plant, Mapping and Maintenance Unit 5 Planning of School Plant Module 3 Unit 1 School Records (1) Unit 2 School Records (2) Unit 3 The School Time-Table Unit 4 School Budget Unit 5 Discipline and the School Administration Unit 6 School – Communities Relationship 14  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE MODULE ONE THE CONCEPT OF ADMINIST RATION AND INSTRUCTION UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND INTERPRETATION OF BASIC CONCEPTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Meaning of management 3.2 Meaning of Administration 3.3 The meaning of Educational Administration 3.4 Meaning of organisation 3.5 Classification of organisation 3.6 Characteristics of organisation 3.7 Principles of organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction Management is often described as a ubiquitous concept, which is present in every aspect of human endeavour.
Whether in business, hospital, religion, or even at home, management is indispensable.
Therefore, management is not only necessary, it is also compulsory, as every organisation needs to be controlled, ruled or governed.
The absence of management in any organisation may not only lead to derailment of the objectives of the organisation alone, it may also lead to breakdown of law and order.
It is in this regard that Ogunsaju (1998) contended that management becomes a crucial function in every organised society, especially when there are complex assignments to be performed and when two or more people are involved.
1  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to (i) Define management (ii) Distinguish between management and administration (iii) Explain what organization is 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Meaning of management Everyone manages something, even if it is just themselves, and their personal finances.
The essence of management is to achieve a goal as efficiently as possible.
One can also plan for holiday by carefully planning how to spend every day and make better time and get more out of the holiday.
Management is like investment.
Managers have resources to plan with, their own time and talent as well as human and material resources.
The goal of management is to get the best return on those resources by getting things done efficiently and economically.
The term management means many things to many people.
In modern general saying, the term management implies the process by which a cooperative group directs action towards common goals.
But to a modern industrialist, management means “getting things done through other people”.
To the economist, management is just “one of the factors of production”; to the sociologist, management is “a class or status system”.
However, in the modern organized context, management is viewed as a social process which is designed to ensure the cooperation, participation and involvement in the effective achievement of a given objective.
Management, to Peter Drucker (1999), is an organ of institutions, the organ that converts a mob into an organization and human efforts into performance.
Peretomode (1991) also defines management as the performance of executive duties, the carrying out of policies or decisions to fulfill a purpose, and the controlling of the day-to-day running of an organization.
Nwadiani and Sokefun (1999) conceive management as a process concerned with creating, maintaining, stimulating, controlling and unifying (formally and informally), organising human and material, energies with a unified system, designed to accomplish pre-determined objective of the organisation.
Sherlekar (1984) defined management as the guidance, leadership and control of the efforts of a group toward some common objectives.
It is a social/interactional and economic process involving a sequence of coordinated events- planning, - 2 -Page 2 of 132organising, coordinating and controlling or leading – in order to use available resources to achieve a desired outcome in the fastest and most efficient way.
From the foregoing, management may be defined as a process of coordinating human and material resources is order to achieve an organisation’s objectives.
It can also be said that management is a process of assessing and maintaining an environment in which individuals working together in groups, can accomplish pre-selected mission and objectives effectively and efficiency.
2  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The definition of management above has the following implications: 1.
Function: Management implies that managers have functions to perform within organisations.
Even though such functions may vary from one organisation to another, the process involved is likely to be the same.
Several authors like Henri Fayol, Elton Mayo identified the five basic functions performed by management of all organizations as planning, organising, directing, coordinating and controlling.
Some scholars have added budgeting, leading, communicating and educating as other functions of the manager.
2.
Productivity: The essence of management is to produce.
It is interesting to note that most of the enterprises whether private companies, government agencies, or educational institutions (either profit or non – profit oriented) are set up to produce either goods, product, people or services.
The ultimate objective of a manager is to create surplus.
In raw economic term, this is referred to as profit maximization.
Management therefore would want to use people and materials very efficiently to achieve this goal.
3.
General Application: Management applies to all kinds of organizations owing to the wide distribution of the enterprise which of course includes all kinds of organisations goal might vary, materials used could be different and people within the organization may differ in age, sex, qualifications.
Whatever the differences, the essence of management is to put them into efficient and effective use.
Therefore, management as an organized body of knowledge provides clear insight as to how to apply management techniques to achieve organizational goals.
4.
Applicable to all levels: Managements applies to all levels of organizational life.
It is pertinent to observe that within each organization, there is a mapped out structure.
The structure so to say depicts the organizational hierarchy.
Both the structure and the hierarchy therefore depend on individual responsibilities and authorities to perform.
The performance of these therefore, at any level requires management.
Interestingly, not all groups believe that they need management, but it is undisputable that management is essential in all organized cooperation as well as at all levels of organization in an enterprise.
Self Assessment Exercise From what you have learnt, what is the meaning of management and what are its implications to a manager?
3.2 Meaning of Administration Administration is the ability to mobilize human and material resources towards achievement of organizational goals.
Ogunsaju (1998) opines that administration is concerned with a variety of tasks.
Nwankwo (1987) in his own view describes administration as the careful and systematic arrangement and use of human and material 3  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE resources, situations and opportu nities for the achievement of specific objectives.
However, Campbell, Bridges & Ny strand (1984) said the main purpose of administration in any organization is that of coordinating the efforts of people towards the achievement of its goals.
Peretomode (1991) defines administration as the performance of executive duties, the carrying out of policies or decisions to fulfill a purpose, and the controlling of the day-to-day running of an organisation.
From all the above, administration is a process and it is sometimes used synonymously with management.
Beach (1975) corroborate the statement by saying that administration is a part of management which is concerned with the installation and carrying out of the procedures by which programmes, plans and targets are laid down and communicated, and the progress of activities regulated and checked against them.
Administration may be defined as a process of coordinating human and material resources in order to achieve organisational goals.
3.3 Meaning of Educational Administration The concept of educational administration may not be totally different from what we are familiar with in the concept of administration.
In Nigeria, education at different levels has its objectives as stated in the National Policy on Education, the most important of the objectives that cut across all the levels of education is teaching and learning.
It is the function of the school to produce educated and enlightened human beings who would be able to contribute positively to the development of the society.
This formed the opinion of Olaniyi (2000) who describes school as a social institution which does not exist in a vacuum.
He said further that a school is a micro-community, existing within a macro- community to mould the habits, interest, attitudes and feelings of children and transmit from one generation to another.
The school also comprises certain personnel i.e.
teaching and non-teaching staff as well as the students.
These human resources in the school work with some materials, such as instructional materials, equipment, and financial resources in order to achieve the objectives of the school as stated in the National Policy on Education (2004).
Administration is very germane to the realization of the school’s objectives – indeed, the success of the school system depends largely on the administration of the school is handled.
The teachers, students, non-teaching staff and resources must be efficiently arranged, monitored and controlled, so that they would work harmoniously according to (educational plan).
Even the National Policy on Education (2004) emphasizes the success of the entire educational system on proper planning, efficient administration and adequate funding.
School administration is the process by which principles, methods and practices of administration are applied in educational institutions to establish, maintain and develop such institutions in line with the goals of the institutions.
Akinwumi & Jayeoba (2004) define school administration as the scientific organisation of human and material resources and programmes available for education and using them systematically and meticulously to achieve educational goals.
4  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Basically, educational administration implies the arrangement of the human and material resources and programme available for education and carefully using them systematically for the achievement of educational objectives.
Thus educational administrator, whether in the ministry of education, the schools board, or in a school is essentially the organiser, the implementer of plans, policies and programmes meant for achieving specific educational objectives.
The educational administrator may contribute, one way or the other, in planning, policy – making and programme designing, yet his major role rests with the effective and efficient implementation of such plans, policies and programmes for the benefit of education.
Viewed from this angle, educational administration is concerned with organization and implementation – it may be categorized under broad areas of i) Planning and Policy ii) Implementation Although such a categorisation is essentially arbitrary and broad and these aspects of management are closely tied, inseparable and inductive, it is possible to separate the functions of administration from that of planning and policy – making in education.
For example the administrator at the ministry of education (essentially a planner and a policy maker) is concerned with formulating general plans and policies for education.
Self Assessment Test Distinguish between administration and school administration.
3.4.
The meaning of Organisation Every human being belongs to one organization or the other.
In Nigeria, government workers spend one third of the day i.e.
8 hours (except weekends) out of the 24 hours in the organisation where he/she works for a living.
All over the world, groups of people who share common interests tend to come together to plan and arrange for how they can actualise such interests.
Any such group of people working together in a coordinated manner to accomplish group results is known as an organization.
Organizations are not new creations.
The Pharaohs used organization to build the pyramids in Egypt; in modern world, there are many organizations established to cater for daily needs of the society.
.
The word ‘organization’ has as many definitions as there are perhaps writers in management.
Scholars define the concept differently depending on individual circumstance, experience and / or background.
To Frame and Horton (1996) organizations are social constructs created by groups in society to achieve specific purposes by means of planned and coordinated activities.
These activities involve using human resources and other inanimate resources in order to achieve the aims of the organization.
Organisations most times are corporate and they have definite purpose (s) to achieve.
They also has some types of structure that delimit and define the behaviour of their members.
5  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Schein (1972) defined an organisat ion as the rational coordination of the activities of a number of people for the achievement of some common explicit purpose or goal, through division of labour and functions, and through a hierarchy of authority and responsibility.
From the foregoing an organisation could be said to be a collection of human beings with a common goal.
It is a network of relationships among individuals and activities; it involves a process of executive function aimed at ensuring that resources, activities and authority relationships are so coordinated to achieve a common goal.
It can also be said that organisation is a collection of people who have united together to pursue and achieve a common aim through collective effort and the pooling of resources.
Organisations are essential to modern life for a number of cogent reasons.
First, organisations enable us to accomplish things which we cannot achieve as individuals.
Second, organisations help in providing continuity of knowledge through the keeping of records, and third, they provide jobs or careers.
Consequently, every modern man or woman, for most of his/her life, is obliged to belong to one organisation or the other, be it an age group, a town or ethnic union, a school or other educational institutions, a religious or civic society, a branch of the armed forces, 3.5.
Classification of Organisations Organisations may be classified into three types: i.
Formal Organisation: this is type of organization that has been intentionally planned and structured in such a way that its membership, the rights and obligations of members, degrees of authority, mode of operations and activities are well defined and guided by laid down rules and regulations which are often documented and known to members.
Formal organization in the education industry includes Federal and State Ministries of Education and their different parastatals.
Others include all institutions of higher learning e.g.
colleges of education, polytechnics and universities, and secondary schools, technical colleges and primary schools.
Formal organisations comprise groups of people with definite identity, rules, authority and responsibility.
In essence every formal organization is set up for the explicit purpose of achieving specific goals and can therefore be distinguished by its task, position and authority relationships.
Each formal organisation is characterised by: (i) a specific task or mission for which it is established, (ii) a single executive head, (iii) a mechanism for planning and coordinating the human and materials resources available to it, (iv) a rational decision making mechanism, 6  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (v) the institutio n of documented rules and regulations for facilitating and enhancin g discipline and common organisation behavioural standard, (vi) the practice of stimulating and motivating members for optimal performance, and (vii) a structure with well defined positions, authority relationships and jobs.
ii.
Informal Organisation: An informal organization is the set of evolving relationships and patterns of human interactions within a formal organization which are not officially prescribed.
These are informal groups which emerge within the formal organisation with a desire to protect the interest of members within the formal organization.
Factors that led to the formation of informal groups are the nature of work, the location of the staff, poor condition of service, government/management insensitive to workers needs etc.
Examples of informal organisations are trade union, pressure groups within the formal group.
To be a member of an informal organisation, one needs to first be a member of a formal organization.
Unlike the formal organizations, informal organizations are usually flexible in that they rarely have clearly stipulated and documented rules and regulations to control their activities and operations.
Since the emergence of informal organisations within the formal organisations is inevitable, they constitute an integral part of every organisation.
They are therefore important in that they could both be beneficial as well as harmful to the host organisation.
For example, since they grow out of the informal relationships and interactions among members across the structure of the formal organisation, they can also assist in: (i) promoting cooperation among departments that have indirect points of official contact, (ii) providing additional channel of communicating though the grapevine (iii) removing or correcting weakness in the formal structure, (iv) getting work done, (v) helping members to satisfy their social needs, and (vi) providing emotional support for organization members.
It should be noted that informal organisations could have negative influences on the formal organsation by: (i) pursuing goals which are contrary to the goal of the formal organization, (ii) participating in acts that can increase the time required to complete formal organisational work, and (iii) operating as a protective shield against the management of the formal organisation 7  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iii.
Social Organisation – This group arises out of spontaneous feeling without any hard and fast ru les of behaviour and there are no clear cut objectives or goals.
This group comprises groups of people with the same social interest.
Example of social organizations are group of friends, landlord association in a community, social clubs etc.
3.6.
Characteristics of Organisations The following are some of the characteristics shared by organisations i.
Purpose, Objective or Goal: Organisations are set up to pursue certain objectives, goals or purposes.
This serves as a rallying point for all activities of its members.
Apart from serving as a common bond for unity, goals/objectives are means of ensuring organisation performance.
ii.
Task or Activity: There are jobs or tasks to be performed or carried out.
Every organisation carries out a major task of one kind or the other that has a relationship to it and is directed towards the realization of its objectives/goals.
iii.
Resources: Organisations make use of human and natural resources to transform raw materials into finished products to achieve the set goals.
Human materials in an organization include both skilled and non skilled workers or teaching and non-teaching staff in educational industries, while the material resources include physical facilities, school plant, instructional facilities, laboratories, libraries, etc.
iv.
Division of Labour: There is a structure within which various tasks are to be executed by these interacting individuals/groups based on the concept of division of labour.
For the achievement of desired goals, division of labour can be vertical or horizontal.
It is vertical when somebody preferably a superior staff is appointed by the organization to coordinate group’s work.
It is horizontal if at least two people work together to achieve the same objectives.
v. Dependence on Environment/Community: No organisation can survive without the community.
All organisations depend largely on external environment both for the resources to use, and the consumers that would consume the product/services rendered.
Any organization that does not live in harmony with the host environment/community will find it very difficult if not impossible to survive.
vi.
Sub-Units: There must be sub-units in form of departments, divisions or units which are responsible for specific objectives and tasks.
The activities of various sub-units within the organization are well coordinated towards a pre- determined goal.
3.7.
Principles of Organisation 8  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE There are some principles that are c ommon to all organizations.
They are highlighted and discussed below: i.
Unity of Objective – to avoid conflict between the employers and management staff of any organisation the objectives of the organisation must be clearly defined.
Any organisation that wants to remain relevant in the society, shall clearly define the objective, and the recognition of these objectives is given serious attention in large and complex organisation because one of the principal functions of the chief executive of an organisation is to coordinate activities, interest and assignment.
ii.
Stability – the policies and programmes of an organisation must not be a toy in the hand of chief executives.
There is the need for continuity of the organisation’s policies/programmes for a reasonable length of time before it is assessed.
An organization that changes its policies and programmes frequently is an ineffective one.
iii.
Flexibility – there is the need to allow simplicity and flexibility in an organisation.
It should be simple to make it manageable and it should be flexible to pave way for quick decisions when there is the need to take urgent decisions.
The organisation policies should be stated in terms broad enough to permit reasonable flexibility in management.
This will also allow policies that have been in place a long time to be assessed and for necessary amendment to be made.
iv.
Cooperation – for efficiency and effectiveness, there is need for all the members of the organisation to cooperate with one another.
This cooperation can be secured from organisation members voluntarily or by force.
If cooperation is lacking in any organisation such organisation will fold up in short time.
v. Division of Labour - the policy of the organization should provide for maximum homogeneity in the major divisions of work.
If there is no appropriate division of labour, cooperation and coordination becomes very difficult.
For realistic division of labour, attention must be given to individual competences and interests.
vi.
Evaluation - the policies of the organization must be evaluated at regular intervals to determine whether the objectives of the organization are being achieved or not.
If yes, there is need for improvement and if no, there is need to adjust.
An Organisation that does not evaluate its policies and programmes frequently may not be able to meet the current challenges.
4.0.
Conclusion 9  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE From what we have explained so far, management is a process of coordinating human and material resources towards the achievement of organisational goals while administration is the ability to mobilize resources towards the achievement of organisational goals.
The words management and administration are sometimes used synonymously because they mean the same thing.
5.0.
Summary In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of management, the meaning of administration, the meaning of educational administration, and the meaning of organisation.
We also classified organisation into formal, informal and social organisations, we also discussed the characteristics and principles of organisation.
The principles discussed include: unity of objectives.
stability, flexibility, cooperation, division of labour and evaluation.
6.0.
Tutor marked assignment (i) Distinguish between management and educational administration (ii) Explain the characteristics of organisation (iii) Enumerate the principles of organisation.
7.0.
References/Further Readings Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004): National Policy of education, Lagos: NERDC Farham, D. & Horton, (1996).
Managing the new public services (second Edition).
Lagos Macmillan.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004): National Policy of Education, Lagos: NERDC Nwakwo J.I (1987).
School administration.
and human learning in school.
In E.E Ezewu eds.
Social psychological factors of human learning in school.
Onitsha; Lead Way Bks Ltd. Nwadiani, M and Sokefun O.A.
(1999).
Towards greater efficiency in educational administration in the 21st century.
In P.O.
Adesemowo eds.
Basics of Education, Lagos: Triumph books publishers Ogunsaju, S. (1998).
Leadership theory and the administrative process.
In S. Adesina and F.O.
Fagbamiye, eds.
Educational Administration.
Ibadan; University press ltd. Peretomode, U.F.
(1991).
Educational Administration, Application, Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives, Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Limited 10  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 2 THE DEVELO PMENT OF ADMINISTRAT ION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The development of Administration 3.1.1 Administration as an Art 3.1.2 Administration as a Science 3.2 Types of School Administrators 3.3 Functions of School Administrators 3.4 Qualities of a School Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction Administration is one area where, because of its basic and general applicability to ever y organisation, competence is claimed by all and most people therefore tend to rate it low.
This is one of the reasons why various organisations which tended not to recognise the specialty and professionalism of administration do not perform efficiently and effectively.
Even though all human beings carry out administration in our daily lives, there is still the need to be conversant with the principles, procedures and practices which make administration a profession.
11  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE It is therefore a must for all who intent to become administrators in whatever form or capacity to have a comprehensive k nowledge about the history, development, principles, procedures and practices of administration which in modern times has become scientific.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) define administration (ii) explain why administration could be a science / or an art (iii) highlight the functions of school administrators (iv) mention the qualities of school administrators.
3.0 Main Content Administration is often described as a ubiquitous concept which has been an indispensable feature of human society for as long as one can remember.
It is present in every aspect of human endeavour.
Whether in business, hospital, religion, politics, education or even at home, no one can do without administration.
As a result of this administration is not only necessary, it is also compulsory because of the need to control every organization.
Miewald (1978) opined that administration is the means by which formal goals are achieved through cooperative effort.
To Adams (1913), it is the capacit y to coordinate many and often conflicting social energies in a single organisation so adroitly that they shall operate as a unity.
3.1 The Development of Administration Over the years, different organizations and different schools of thought have viewed administration differently.
Some viewed it as a practical exercise requiring no special study or effort.
Others feel that administration as a discipline only exists in theory and in the minds of people.
Others still regard administration as a technology which requires not only sound theory but also specialised principles and techniques.
It is not feasible for us to pursue the arguments of the various camps here.
But the major camps shall be examined.
The camps are those who view it as art and science.
3.1.1 Administration as an Art.
Those who view administration as an art believe that administration like art (painting, drawing, sculpture, etc.)
belongs to those who have the natural gifts, traits or abilities for it.
This “trait” point of view holds that only those who have the in-born qualities and traits for the practice of the art of administering succeed as administrators.
Therefore, one becomes a good administrator not by training or the mastery of any special techniques of administration but by possessing the essential in-born traits of administration.
As one prominent university administrator argue ‘the successful administrator has skills which have not been reduced to order and codified in textbooks.
Administration is an unqualified art.
Therefore, the only way to learn administration is to administer’.
This implies that good administrators are not trained in any educational 12  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE institution, rather they are born adm inistrators.
The problems of organisations, therefore, are how to identify and select g ood administrators rather than how to train them.
However, recent developments and many studies on administration tend to show that “successful” administrators today need more than inborn personality traits to manage modern complex organisations.
Obviously, those who have the in-born capabilities for administration are blessed, but they, in addition, need appropriate training and techniques to properly utilize these natural traits in the modern complex organisation/society.
3.1.2.
Administration as a Science The view that administration is a science and not art emanated from the conception of administration as a “technology” – a matter of applying administrative principles and rules to the solution of management or organisational problems.
Exponents of this view - point, characterize the administrative process by such terms as human or social engineering, human management, resources optimization, or just “management”.
It was argued that as a scientist, the administrators must know and apply the rules – the “Dos” and “Don’ts” of administering.
Scientist administrators must know what action leads to what result and what rule fits what action.
Those who viewed administration as a science believe that administrators are made through scientific selection and training not through in-born traits or hereditary factor.
Even the exponents of administration as a science contributed more to the development of administrative practice.
It is clear that not all administrative issues and problems can be reduced to the rule of the thumb.
Hence, it is currently being argued rather than talk of administration as a science, it may be better to talk of the science of administration.
3.2 Types of School Administrators In Nigeria, there are three main categories of educational administrators; they are as mentioned and discuss below: (1) Local School/Primary Administrators: This group consists of heads of school and their assistants at the primary, secondary, teacher training and technical schools.
They are appointed as the chief executive of their schools.
At the primary schools, they are known as the headmaster/mistress and assistant headmaster/mistress, while at the secondary school level, they are known as the principals and the vice principals so also at the teacher’s training and technical colleges.
Both the assistant head teacher/mistress and vice/deputy principals assist the school head in executing the enormous administrative tasks.
(2) State and federal Ministry of Education Officials/Intermediary Level: This group comprises officials of state and federal ministry of education.
They re external bodies working for the ministry of education to ensure that schools comply with educational policy and curriculum set by the government.
They are intermediary between the government and the school.
They are Local 13  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Inspectorate of Educat ion (LIE) and Education Officers who monitor activities of teachers at both the primary and secondary schools, The LIE monitors activities at the primary schools while the education officers at state/federal ministries of education monitors activities at secondary schools, teachers training and technical colleges (3) Officials of Institutions of Higher Learning: This group comprises chief executives in institutions of higher learning for example, colleges of education, polytechnics, and universities.
They are known as Provost at the College of Education, Rectors at the Polytechnic, and Vice-Chancellors at the Universities.
These are chief executives of their various institutions and are appointed by the owner (usually the government except the private owned institutions) of the institutions.
They are also assisted by their Deputies.
3.3 Functions of School Administrators Obemeata (1984) referred to a school head as an administrator who is responsible for running a school and also responsible for policy decisions, and determining the direction and objectives of the school.
The function of a school head, according to Obemeata, is more than mere controlling the staff of the school, its finances and curriculum; it also includes the management of resources towards the achievement of educational goals.
Fadipe (1990) however, highlighted the major functions of the school head as: interpretation of policy, execution of instructional programmes and the selection, induction and retention of personnel, and in Cranston (2002), the duties of the school administrators include: the demonstration of a variety of management and leadership abilities and, making complex decisions in collaboration with other staff in the school.
The function of the school administrators could be summarized as follows: (i) production and management of resources (human and materials) needed to support organizations and its programe (ii) supervision of instructional activities in the school system (iii) obtaining and training personnel (iv) providing leadership for curriculum (v) maintaining peaceful co-existence between the school, the community and the external agencies (vi) influencing staff behaviour (vii) discerning and influencing the development of goals and policies (viii) evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency or otherwise of the school (ix) initiating work activities (x) grouping the tasks into activities (xi) defining the task to be done (xii) taking remedial action if the objectives are not being met (xiii) supplying incentives to stimulate productivity.
3.4.
Qualities of a School Administrator 14  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE After discussing the functions of the school administrator, there is also the need to discuss some of the imperative qualities which a school administrator must possess in order to achieve an efficient school administration.
(i) H/Shee must be tactical: the school administrator needed some tactics to deal with the subordinates under his/her direct control in the school e.g.
the teaching and the non-teaching staff, and the superior office at the ministry of education level whom the school head is responsible to.
He must be tactical in dealing with the political office holders; he must not be confrontational in his approach at any time.
(ii) He/She must be capable of making decisions quickly: the school administrators are confronted with many issues to decide on, some or many of which require urgent.
He decides on personnel, circulars, students and co-curricula matters on daily basis.
He must be versed in accurate facts and figures on issues relating to school enrolment, student- teacher ratio, drop-out rate, school facilities etc., and must also be able to cope with the daily tasks as the head of the school.
(iii) He/She must delegate responsibilities and authorities: the school head has so many functions that he cannot single-handedly handle everything alone.
To avoid a vacuum, there is need to adequately involve every member of staff in the administrative machinery of the school by delegating various responsibilities backed by authorities to avoid unnecessary problems and avoidable delays.
As a matter of fact, democratization of school administration should be encouraged as this is an avenue for training future leaders/heads of schools.
(iv) He/She must be resourceful: the school head must at all times be looking for better way(s) of doing a particular job.
He/She must be looking for new ways of working, tapping new ideas, suggestions and must be willing to assist others with his/her wealth of experience.
(v) He/She must have good human relations: there is need for school head to maintain peace and good relationship between the school and various groups in the school as well as between the school and the host community.
Other qualities expected of a school administrator are: high degree of enthusiasm, and ability to command respect and confidence.
4.0.
Conclusion No organization be it business or education (private or government owned) can do without administration.
The concept ‘administration’ has been viewed differently y 15  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE different school of thought.
Some view it as an ‘art’ while some view it as a ‘science’.
Those that viewed it as an art believes that for anyone to be a good administrator, he must have the inbuilt qualities, trait, natural gift and or natural abilities for it, while those who viewed I as a science believes that good administrator are made through selection and training, hey believes that administrator are made through education and training not through in-born or any form of hereditary factor.
5.0.
Summary In this unit, we have learnt that administration could be art or science.
It is art when those who administer are those who have the in-born qualities to lead without necessarily going for leadership course in any educational institution and administration could be a science when those who administer are those who are scientifically selected and trained in educational institution.
We also discussed various types of school administrators: local/primary administrators, state/federal/intermediary administrators, and officials of institution of higher learning.
So also we also considered the functions of school administrators as well as the qualities of school administrators.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment (i) Write short notes on three levels of school administration in Nigeria.
(ii) What are the qualities of a good administrator?
7.0 References/Further Readings Akinwumi, F & Jayeoba, A.O (2004).
Principles and Practice of Educational Management.
Ibadan: Bash-Moses Printing Co. Cranston, N.C (2002).
School-based management, leaders and leadership: change and challenges for principals.
International studies in educational Administration.
Vol.30(1)pp2-12 Fadipe, J.O (1990).
Utilizing the teaching manpower in the secondary school system.
A necessary administrative function for better productivity in Udoh, S.U and Akpa, G.O eds.
Management for Quality education in Nigeria.
Jos: Ehindero Nig.ltd.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC Press Nwankwo, J.I (1991).
‘Eduational Administration: applied concepts in School’.
In Ezewu, E.E (eds), Social Psychological Factors of Human Learning in Schools.
Onitsha: Leadway Books ltd. Obeamata, J (1984).
Secondary school headship in Nigeria context.
In S. Adesina, and S Ogunsaju.
(eds).
Secondary Education in Nigeria, Ile-Ife: University of Ife Press Ltd. 16  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ogunsaju, S. (1988).
Leadership th eory and the administratives process, In S. Adesina, and F.O Fagbamiye, (eds) Educational Administration: Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Peretomode, V.F (1991).
Educational administration.
Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. UNIT 3 LEADERSHIP IN EDUCA TION.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Leadership Styles 3.1.1 Autocratic Leadership 3.1.2 Bureaucratic Leadership 3.1.3 Charismatic Leadership 3.1.4 Democratic/Participative Leadership 3.1.5 Laissez -Faire Leadership 3.1.6 People – Oriented/Relations – Oriented Leadership 3.1.7 Task – Oriented Leadership 3.1.8 Transactional Leadership 3.1.9 Transformational Leadership 3.1.10 Situational /Contingency Leadership 3.2 Positive and Negative Approaches 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction.
In every organization, be it education or industry, the prime mover is the leadership.
It is the duty of the leader to see that he/she manages the organization while at the same time keeping the subordinate/followership happy, satisfied and motivated.
In educational 17  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE institutions, there are various leve ls of leadership; the headmaster is a leader at the primary school level, the principa l is a leader at the secondary school level, while provosts, rectors and vice-chancellors are leaders at the colleges of education, polytechnics and the universities.
So also at the local, states and federal government levels, we have local inspectors of education, commissioners of education and ministers of education as the leaders.
It is therefore imperative for educational administrators to equip themselves with leadership skills in preparation to assume positions of leadership to enable them fashion out their own styles or models of leadership.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to (i) Define leadership and leadership styles.
(ii) Identify the various types of leadership styles in organisation.
(iii) Mention the best leadership style that an institutional administrator could adopt and why?
3.0 Main Content Leadership is an important aspect of management.
The essence of leadership is followership; in other words there can be no leadership without followership.
Leadership is a process of influencing people by providing purpose, direction, and motivation while operating to accomplish the mission and improving the organization.
Army (1973) defines leadership as a means of getting people to do what you want them to do.
It is the means or method of achieving two ends: operating and improving.
In educational institutions, there must be a force to manage both the human and material resources towards achieving educational goals.
A force is needed in schools to guide the activities of teaching, non-teaching staff and students towards achievement of the institution’s goals.
Leadership provides the needed force.
At the primary and secondary levels of education, the force is provided by the headmaster/ headmistress and principal while it is provided by provosts, rectors and vice-chancellors in the colleges of education, polytechnics and universities respectively.
3.1 Leadership styles Whether you are managing a team at work, captaining your sports team or leading a major corporation, your leadership style is crucial to your success.
Consciously or subconsciously, you will no doubt use some leadership styles.
Leadership styles are the manner and approach of providing direction, implementing plans, and motivating people.
There are a number of different styles to leadership and management that are based on different assumptions and theories.
The style that individual leaders use will be based on a combination of their beliefs, values, and preferences, as well as the organisational culture and norms which will encourage some styles and discourage others.
Self Assessment Exercise 18  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Mention and explain the various lea dership styles you are used to.
3.1.1 Autocratic Leadership.
This is a leadership style in which a leader exerts high levels of power over his/her employees.
People within the team or employees are given few opportunities for making suggestions, even if these suggestions would be of advantage to the organisations interest.
This style is used when leaders tell their employees what they want them to do and how they want it done, without getting the advice of their followers.
Some people tend to think of this style as a vehicle for yelling, using demeaning language, and leading by threats and abusing their power.
Many people resent being treated like this, because this leadership style often leads to high levels of absenteeism, and high staff turnover.
Also, the team’s output does not benefit from the creativity and experience of all team members, so many of the benefits of teamwork are lost.
However, for some routine and skilled jobs, this style can be adopted and it remains effective where the advantages of control outweigh the disadvantages.
The leader that adopts this style does not consider the interest or views of the employees but that of him/herself alone.
He treats his/her employees as tools/machines that are there to be used to affect his perceived goals.
He/She passes down orders and has no feelings for them.
3.1.2 Bureaucratic Leadership This type of leadership works ‘by the book’, ensuring that their staff follow procedures exactly the way it is written down.
This is a very appropriate style for work involving safety risks e.g.
working with machinery with toxic substances or at heights or where large sums of money are involved e.g.
cash-handling.
In other situations the inflexibilit y and high levels of control exerted can demoralise staff, and can diminish the organisation’s ability to react to changing external circumstances.
3.1.3 Charismatic Leadership This leadership style is similar to a transformational style; the leader injects huge doses of enthusiasm into his or her employees and is very energetic in driving others forward.
Charismatic leaders believe more in themselves than in their employees.
This can create a risk that a project or even an entire institution, might collapse if the leader were to leave.
In the eye of their followers, success is tied up with the presence of the charismatic leader.
As such a charismatic leader carries a lot of responsibilities, and needs long-term commitment from the followers.
3.1.4 Democratic or Participative Leadership This style of leadership invites one or more members of the team with him/her self to make decision(s) (determine what to do and how to do it) for the organization.
This style does not only increase employees job satisfaction, by involving them in what is going on, 19  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE but it also helps to develop peop le’s skills.
Employees feel in control of their own destiny, and so are motivated to wor k harder.
This style is normally used when the leader has part of the information, and the employee has other parts.
Note that a leader is not supposed to know everything; this is why the leader employs knowledgeable and skillful employees.
As participation takes time, this style can lead to things happening more slowly than using autocratic approach, but often the end result is better.
It can be most suitable where team working is essential, and where quality is more important than speed to market or productivity.
Using this style is of mutual benefit and allows the employees to become part of the team and also allows the leader to take better decisions.
3.1.5 Laissez-Faire Leadership Laissez-faire is a French phrase ‘non-interference in the affairs of others’.
This is used to describe a leader who leaves his/her employees to get on with their work without his interference.
Laissez - faire leader allows the employees to make decisions.
However, the leader is still responsible for decisions that are made.
This style can be effective if the leader monitors what is being achieved and communicates this back to his or her team regularly.
It can also be effective when employees are able to analyse the situation and determine what needs to be done and how to get it done.
No leader can do everything, a leader needs to set priorities and delegate certain tasks.
Hence, it works for teams in which the individuals are very experienced and skilled self-starters.
However, it is not a style to use in order to blame others when things go wrong.
Rather it is a style to be used when you fully trust and have total confidence in the people working under you.
It can be referred to as situations where managers are not exerting sufficient control over the employees.
You should not be afraid using this style but it must be used wisely.
Self Assessment Exercise Apart from the leadership styles you have read in this unit, mention other leadership styles that we have.
3.1.6 People-Oriented Leadership or Relations-Oriented Leadership This style of leadership is the opposite of task-oriented leadership; people-oriented leaders are totally focused, supporting, motivating and developing the employees or those in the leaders’ team.
This leadership encourages participative decision – making which leads to good team work and creative collaboration.
However, if it is taken to the extremes, it can lead to failure in achieving the organizational goal.
In practice, most leaders do not use this style alone.
Where it will be used, it is advisable to combine it with task-oriented style.
20  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.7 Task-Oriented Leadership A task-oriented leader focuses only on how to get the job done; this type of leader can be quite autocratic.
He or she will actively define the work and the roles required by the employees, and will also put structures in place, plan, organize and equally monitor the work.
Task-oriented leaders care less about the well-being of the employees; they are more concerned with how to get the job done.
This approach can also suffer many of the flaws of a leader that adopts autocratic style of leadership.
He will also have problem of motivating staff as well as high rate of staff turn-over.
3.1.8 Transactional Leadership This style of leadership starts with the premise that the employees agree to obey their leader totally when they take up the appointment.
The ‘transaction’ is that the organization pays the employees, in return for their effort and compliance.
As such, the leader has the right to punish employees if their work does not meet the predetermined standard.
It is a process through which the tasks and human dimensions of organization are reconciled and integrated.
Nwankwo (1980) said transactional leadership style is the leadership style that is most popular in Nigeria and it is resulting in high staff performance.
This leader tries to match organizational needs with those of the employees of the organization and strives to attain them.
The employees can do little to improve their job satisfaction under transactional leadership.
The leader shows the employees some measure of control of their income/reward by using incentives that encourage even higher standards.
Alternatively a transactional leader could practice ‘management by exception’ whereby rather than reward better work, he or she would take corrective action if the required standards were not met.
3.1.9 Transformational Leadership A leadership who employs this style of leadership is a true leader who inspires the employees with a shared vision of the future.
Transformational leaders are highly visible, and spend a lot of time communicating with the employees.
They do not necessarily lead from the front, as they tend to delegate responsibility amongst their teams.
In many organizations, both transactional and transformational leaders are needed.
The transactional leaders ensure that routine work is done reliably while the transformational leaders look after employee’s initiatives and add new value.
3.1.9 Situational Leadership or Contingency Leadership A situational leader is a leader that adopt the best leadership style or combination of styles to every situation he/she is dealing with, it also depends on the type of forces involved between the followers, the leader, and the situation, the time available, the relationships between employer and employees, the level of training of employees, the 21  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE type of tasks and laws that establis h the organization.
A situational leader believes that there is no single leadership style that suits all situations, the situation demands he type of style to adopt.
Self Assessment Exercise What are the factors that influence the choice of leadership style adopted by any leader?
3.2 Positive and Negative Approa ches There is a difference in the ways leaders approach employees.
Positive leaders use rewards, such as praise, commendation, financial rewards etc., to motivate employees, while, negative leaders emphasize penalties.
The negative approach must be used carefully due to its high cost on people’s morale.
Negative leaders are domineering and superior with people.
They believe the only way to get things done is through penalties, such as threat, loss of job, days off without pay, reprimand of employees etc.
They believe their authority is increased by frightening everyone into higher level of productivity.
Yet what always happens when this approach is wrongly used is fall in employee’s morale, which of course leads to lower or fall in productivity.
However, it should be noted that most leaders do no strictly use one or another, but are somewhere on a continuum ranging from extremely positive to extremely negative.
People who continuously work out of the negative approaches are bosses while those who primarily work out of the positive are considered real leaders.
4.0 Conclusion Leadership has been defined as a method of getting people to do what the leader wants them to do.
Headmasters/headmistress, principals, provost, rectors vice-chancellors, commissioners, ministers are leaders of educational institutions at various levels.
There is no best style of leadership; the situation will determine which style of leadership to adopt or combination of styles – this is known as situational/contingency leadership style.
Though, we have many leadership styles which can be adopt independently or combined to suit situation a hand.
Such styles include autocratic, bureaucratic, charismatic, democratic, laissez-faire, people – oriented, task – oriented, transactional, and transformational.
A good leader should adopt leadership style(s) that can result in high staff performance.
He/she should also be able to match the need of the organisation with the need of the employees and work out how those needs could be achieved.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have treated the meaning of leadership as well as the meaning of leadership styles.
We also considered various styles that a leader can adopt.
In addition, we also treated the two approaches that a leader can adopt in approaching their employees.
The first one is the positive approach which is use to motivate employees such as rewards, praise, commendation, financial rewards etc., and the second one is the negative approach which is use o punish the employees.
Leaders that use the positive 22  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE approach encourages employees an d are not domineering, while the leaders that adopt the negative approach are domineering and bossy in nature, this type of leader believes the only way to get thing done is through penalties and various forms of threat 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment Mention and explain five leadership styles that an institutional administrator could adopt.
7.0 References/Further Readings Akanni, J.A (1987).
Management: Concepts Techniques and Cases: Ibadan, Julab Publishers Limited Ezeocha, P.A.
(1990).
Educational Administration and Planning.
Nsukka: Optional Computer Solution.
Mbiti, D.M.
(1974).
Foundations of School Administration.
Nairobi: Oxford University Press 23  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 4 SCHOOL – COMMUNITY RELATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1.1 The concept of a School 3.1.2 The concept of a Community 3.2 Types of Community 3.3 School – Community Relationship 3.4 The Roles of the School to the Community 3.5 The Roles of the Community to the School 3.6 Factors Influencing School-Community Relationship 3.7 The Roles of School Head in School-Community Relationship 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor –marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to discuss the meaning of a school separately and the concept of a community separately.
After this, we are going to discuss the roles, of the school to the community as well as the roles of the community to the school.
Finally, in this unit we are going to discuss the various factors that can encourage mutual relationship between the school and the community.
3.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) give brief definitions of ‘school’ and ‘community’ 24  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) list the two ty pes of community (iii) highlight the roles of the school to the community (iv) highlight the roles of the community to the school (v) discuss the factors influencing the school community relationship (vi) explain ways of maintaining effective school-community relations.
3.0 Main Content Anywhere in the world, where there is no peace, there cannot be peace of mind, people cannot settle, cannot organise themselves into meaningful groups, because they will be thinking of safety at all times, hence there can not be development.
Let us look at what is happening in Somalia, Liberia, Iran, Iraq, etc.
since war broke out in those countries, development ceased, because war and development have no meeting point, they are two parallel lines.
Let us bring our mind back home to Nigeria; in some parts of the country for some years now, there has been various form of crisis.
For instance, in the Niger- Delta abduction, kidnapping, JTF attacks, and other forms of reprisal attacks has not allowed for any meaningful development in those areas as people in those areas will be running for safety of their lives and no reasonable investor will dream of investing in troubled areas.
For any school to function effectively, therefore, there is need for cordial relationship between the school and the host community.
The reason is not far fetched; the school depends on the community for its survival.
3.1.1 The concept of a school School has been defined in various ways.
It can be said that school is any organised educational institution where knowledge is transmitted from the teachers to the learners.
School can also be defined as a social institution that transmits the culture of the society from one generation to another.
We can define it as an agent of socialization.
Ottaway & Smith (1980) defined school as a social unit formally established by members of the society for the purpose of developing the younger members of their society.
Olaniyi (2000) defined it as a formal agency of education established by member of the macro- community/society to mould the habits interests, attitudes and feelings of children and transmit the societal norms, culture, value and tradition from one generation to another.
A school is a formally established institution by appropriate law and authorities where the knowledge, attitudes, and skills required for both personal and social development are acquired.
School is a place where people learn about the past, present and project the future of a society at large.
3.1.2 The Concept of a Community Towns, cities, states and even the country comprise different communities.
Community however can be said to comprise groups of people living in a particular place who share the same historical background, with common economic, cultural and social values.
25  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Mussazi (1982) defined communit y as a group of people living in the same place, with common value, history, bound to gether by multiple economic, social, religious, and kingship-ties.
To Bray (1987), community is a group of people who share the same social, economic and cultural interests.
From all the above, community comprises people who live together in a community and interact with one another, share the same interest and ideology.
It can also be said that community is a group of people living together in one place having common religion, race and similarity of attitudes or interests.
3.2 Types of Community i.
Rural Community Rural communities are found in the rural areas or in thinly populated areas.
Rural community is a close unit which comprises members with strong ties and lives a subsistence life.
These groups of people are less influenced by institutional or economic activities because these are less pronounced in rural area where rural communities are based.
ii.
Urban Community Urban communities are found in the urban areas or a densely populated area.
The community comprises number/group of people who have less in common with each others within the same community with weak lies.
They are highly influenced by many institutions in their socio-political and economic activities because the community where they live (urban community) may highly industrialize with presence and concentration of political and economic activities.
Self- Assessment exercise.
Distinguish between a school and a community 3.3 Schools - Community Relationships School- community relationship is cordial and mutual interactions that exist between the school and the community where the school is situated.
This relationship assists both the school and the community to achieve their set goals in a healthy atmosphere.
Bortner (1972) defined school-community relationship as planned activities and a way through which the school seek to learn about the community and interpret, when need be, the purpose, programme, problems and needs of the school; and involve the community in the planning, evaluating and management of school policies and progress.
26  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE School - community relationship is a two–way interaction that exists between the school and the community.
The school can not exist in isolation or independent of the communit y because the community provides and prepares the input into the school system.
The inputs from the community include educational objectives and curriculum, students, school personnel, funds and facilities; some of the inputs are residents of the/in the community.
The inputs are processed to output in the school through teaching, assignments, exercises, research studies, guidance and counseling etc.
The output from the school which consists of cultured, disciplined, and productive individuals cannot be consumed/retained by the school, but are sent back to the community to contribute their own contribution in various capacities based on the acquired knowledge from the school to the development of the community.
Where the outputs from the school perform below the standard set by the community, the community investment on the school is not worthwhile and vice versa.
Both the school and the community are interdependent and interrelated.
The community prepares the input (i.e.
students) needed by the school for survival, the output from the school (i.e.
graduates) also comes back to the community and assists in various capacities.
For the school - community relationship to be peaceful, healthy, mutual, cordial, worth while and productive; the school and the community must be willing to assist each other to achieve their respective set goals in conducive and loving atmosphere, where there is mutual trust, support and cooperation.
3.4 The Roles of the School to the Community The following are the roles of the school to the host community or the society at large.
1.
Provision of Education.
The school assisted the community to train the children and young pupils on how to write basic literacy/numeracy.
The curriculum used for the children by the school lay emphasis on the need and problems of the community and on how to assist the children contributes their quota to the development of the community.
2.
Preservation of Community Culture.
In the school also, the children are taught the community norms, values culture, tradition, beliefs.
Apart from teaching the children all these, school also ensure its transmission from one generation for another.
School also carries out research to improve on good culture of the community and to discourage the children from the bad or anti social character.
3.
Provision of Facilities for Community Use.
The school provides and makes available some school facilities for community use when needed by the community.
Some of the facilities made available for the community are the school playing ground (for community rallies, socials, religious and other activities), school halls and classrooms (for receptions and entertainments as well as for adult and continuing education classes’), school vans/buses (for social outings).
However there must be some rules governing the use of the school facilities by the community to ensure proper use 27  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 4.
Provision of Means of Livelihood to Members of the Community.
The school provides a means of livelihood to members of the community by employing them as teachers, administrative officers, day/night guards, drivers, cleaners, gardeners or any other available position qualified for by the member of the community.
The payment received for the service (s) rendered to the school are used as a means of livelihood and to cater for their own immediate and extended family.
5.
Manpower Supply.
There are various categories of manpower needed by the community to serve in the various sectors of the economy, for example, Medical Doctors to provide medical service, Lawyers to provide legal service, Bankers to provide banking service, Teachers/Lectures to teach in schools, Engineers to serve in the engineering units of the country, Computer Scientists to take car of the internet service and other information technology service of the country, etc.
There are so many other services needed to sustain the country which are provided by the school.
Without these manpower supplies in quality and quantity, there cannot be any meaningful growth and development in a country.
The school provides these, after giving the required training that makes them qualified and competent.
6.
Assist in Community Development Programme/Service.
Members of the school play active role in some project embarked on by the community.
The school students are engaged in various projects embarked the community.
Examples of communit y development projects are – road construction, road maintenance, they also render community service to the community where the schools are situated, and they serve as members of Road Safety Corps, Civil Defense Corps, Man-O-War, Red Cross Society etc.
3.5 The Roles of the Community to the School The community in appreciation of the roles of the school to the community and for mutual co-existence performs the following functions to the school.
1.
Provision of Funds.
The community generates funds for the development of the school through special levies.
Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) levies, donation by old students association, religious groups’, non-government organization, philanthropist etc.
2.
Provision of Land.
The community makes available landed property (either freely or at a reduced price) to erect school structure of various categories and also for gardening and farming purposes.
3.
Maintenance of School Plant.
Various artisan groups within the community such as carpenters, bricklayers, mechanics, etc assist in installation, maintenance and repair of school physical facilities at a reduced rate as at when needed and they are called upon.
4.
Provision of Facilities.
The community provides physical facilities which members of the school make use of.
Examples of the physical facilities; provided by the 28  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE community are public library, whi ch assist the student to pursue academic excellence, community halls which are used by the school for teaching and learning and social activities, hospitals and clinics which are used as first aid in case of the need to refer to a specialist or other hospitals.
5.
Provision of Accommodation The community provides residential accommodation to both the staff and the students of the school.
Most schools now have no befitting accommodation for their staff or even their students.
This makes the school and/or the staff concerned explores opportunity of getting an accommodation in the community where the school is situated or nearby communities.
6.
Provision of Scholarship.
The communities make provision for scholarship to brilliant or indigent brilliant students or both of them depending on the fund available.
Some well meaning individuals (who appreciate education and educated citizens) within the community, e.g.
Philanthropists Religious groups, etc.
also awards various scholarship schemes to assist students within the community in primary, secondary or institution of higher learning.
The scholarship may cover school fees, books, others or all.
3.3.
Factors Influencing School – Community Relationship It is necessary for the school head to be familiar with the factors influencing the school- community relationship to facilitate cordial relationship between the school and the community.
Some of the factors are discussed below.
i.
The Location of the School.
The location of a school within the community goes a long way in influencing the school - community relationship.
For example parents are more likely to visit a school more frequently if it is located at the heart/centre of the community than if a school is located at the outskirt of the community.
A school that is also attractive, safe, accessible with opportunity for future expansion will enjoy patronage by the community members.
However, if the location of the school is at the outskirt of the town, the school head can use his initiative/power to be organizing meetings and activities which will be bringing members of the community into the school at regular intervals to see the school, know what the school has and school’s needs.
ii.
Facilities Available.
The type of facilities available in the school will determine the level of cordial relationship the school receives from the community.
For example, a school that has a good hall for conferences/wedding receptions, classroom for adult education/extra mural studies, playground for community rallies and meetings and make it available for community use at a subsidized/lower rate will enjoy more cordial relationship between the school and the community because, the community benefits from the use of these facilities and will want good relationship to continue to be able to continuing to enjoy the facilities, but where these facilities are not available for community use or available at expensive rate, the school community relationship cannot be/may not be as cordial as when those facilities are available for community use at no cost or at subsidized rate.
29  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iii.
Communication.
Effective communication between the school and the community at all time will enable community members to assist the school and give them good advice.
It is compulsory that the school head should integrate members of the community into the school system by giving them feed back on school activities through effective communication.
The school head must communicate effectively with the various governing/regulatory/voluntary agencies Governing Board, PTA, and Old Student Association members in the community regularly.
In a situation where there is poor communication between the school and community, the result is unhealthy or poor school- community relationship.
iv.
Leadership Style.
The type of leadership style adopted by the school head will go a long way in enhancing positively or negatively the relationship between the school and the community.
For example, a school head that adopts democratic leadership style will enjoy better cordial school-community relationship because he will be approachable and listen to community view at all times than the school head that adopted autocratic/laizzez-faire leadership style.
This is because, the school head that adopted democratic leadership style will involve people in his administration and consult with them and other members of the community if need be, before arriving at major decisions.
This strengthens mutual understanding between the school and the community.
However the school head that adopts autocratic leadership style does not consult with people or community members before arriving at decisions.
He decides single- handedly and enforce his opinion on people.
This situation creates a gap and distance between the school and the community and also create suspicious environment.
The school head that adopted liazzez - faire is also the uncared type, who shows no concern for the work force and the community will not also enjoy the full support of the workers neither will he be able to create/maintain cordial relationship between the school and the community.
It is only the school head that adopts democratic leadership style that enjoys the full support and maximum cooperation of the community.
v. Attitude of School Staff.
The attitude/behaviour of the school head and his staff toward the members of the community will either enhance their relationship or otherwise.
If the school head and the staff are accessible to and approachable, friendly and fair in dealing with the members of the community, there will be a cordial relationship, but if they make themselves inaccessible and or unapproachable, unfriendly to the members of the community, the community will be hostile to them and confrontational because of the type of attitude and behaviour they put up against the community and this will not enhance good/cordial relationship between them.
However, for the school to enjoy cordial relationship with the community there is the need for the school head and the staff to project good image of the school through their own good attitude and behaviour towards the community members.
Self Assessment Exercise Why is it necessary for mutual relationships to exist between the school and the community?
30  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.7 The Role of School Head in School - Community Relationship.
To achieve the set goals for schools, healthy relationship is a must between the school and the community.
Therefore, the school head needs to ensure that there is love, understanding, trust, mutual trust between the school and the community.
To ensure this, the school head need to take the following measures: i.
He should establish a functional PTA.
The head should make the PTA a functional one rather than making it an income generating association alone.
The members be allowed to have a say/contribution in the running of the school.
For example, they can be involved in the school promotion exercise, maintenance of discipline in the school, school plant and management.
If the school head can allow a functional PTA, it will facilitate healthy relationship between the school and the community, but when he/she refuses to make the PTA functional, there is the likelihood of having various crises between the school and the community.
ii.
He should be accessible.
The school head must make himself accessible to members of the community such a the PTA chairman or other executive, the parent, the chiefs, religious leaders and members of old student association and other visitors that may visit the school occasionally from the community.
The school head must be a good listener, nice, humble, and approachable, to enhance and sustain healthy relationship between the school and the community.
iii.
He should involve members of the community in the school activities.
Members of the community where the school is located must be involved in the school activities, because the school is within the community, hence the need for the school head to involve the members of the community in the school activities.
For example, members of the community should be allowed to play active role in the school’s sporting activities and socials such as: end of the year get-to-gether, founder’s day, christmas carol, valedictory service, and other social activities of the school.
This type of involvement will enhance cordial relationship between the school and the community.
iv.
He should make himself available.
The school head must make him/her self available to the members of community, the parents, PTA executives, old students group, chiefs and religions leaders.
He should not be the type that administer in absence or have a lot of bureaucratic procedures before he can be seen by members of the community.
A school head that makes himself available at all times will attend to the community needs timely and he/she will enjoy the support and healthy relationship from the community v. He should avoid realistic politics in the community: the school head and staff members should avoid taking part in the political activities in the community to avoid bad blood between the school and the community, the school head should ensure that he/she do not represent any political party within the school to achieve some political goals.
This will enable the school head to be neural on all issues at all time.
4.0 Conclusion 31  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The school is a social unit formally established by members of the society to transmit the societal culture to younger generation.
The community is a group of people living together and sharing the same social, economic and cultural interests.
School – community relationship is the type of relationship that exists between the school and the society.
There is need to ensure cordial and healthy relationship between the school and the community because none of the two can exist in isolation and both will benefit more if there is cordial relationship between them.
When there is no cordial relationship between the school and the community, the goals of the school will not be achieved as expected and the community will not also enjoy the benefit expected from the school.
For the parties to enjoy themselves the school head must ensure cordial relationship between the school and the community by establishing a functional PTA, having good attitude towards members of the community, being accessible and involving community members in school activities.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have discussed the meaning of a school, a community, the two types of communities, the meaning and need for good school-community relationship.
We discussed the roles of the school to the community as well as the roles of the community to the school.
We also took a look at the factors influencing school-communit y relationship and the role of the school head in ensuring cordial school-communit y relationship.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment i.
What are the responsibilities of a school to the host community?
ii.
Does the host community have any duty in the school?
iii.
The role of the school head cannot be over estimated in ensuring a peaceful co- existence between the school and the community.
Do you agree and why?
7.0 References/Further Readings.
Ajayi, I.A (2007).
Issues in School Management.
Lagos: Bolabay publishers Bray.
M. (1987).
New resources for education community management and financing of Schools in less developed counties.
London: Commonwealth secretariat Mussazi, J.C.S (1982).
The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd. Olaniyi, W.O.
(2000).
School community relations in the 21st century in J. O. Fadipe, & E. E. Oluchukwu (eds) Educational Planning and Administration in Nigeria in the 21st century Ibadan.
National Institute Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA).
32  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ottaway, A.K .C & Smith, W.O.L ( 1980).
Education and Society.
London Routledge and Keegan Paul Ltd UNIT 5 SUPERVIS ION OF INSTRUCT ION (1) 1.0 Introduction.
2,0 Objectives 3.0.
Main Contents 3.1 Evolution of Supervision in Nigeria 3.2 The meanings of Supervision and Inspection 3.3 Purpose of Supervision of Instruction 3.4 Techniques of Supervision 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0.
Introduction The primary objective of educational institutions set up all over the country is to train and teach the pupils the needed skills, societal norms and values in preparation for adulthood and membership of the larger society.
However, you would agree with me that there is need to supervise the type of instruction to be delivered in the classroom to make sure that the right instruction is delivered to the right people at the right time.
Education is becoming more expensive day-in-day out.
Parents are spending so much on their wards; education and government is also spending so much on the recurrent and capital items in our educational institutions.
Hence the need to ensure that the financial provisions for the system by government, parents, and individuals are efficiently utilized and accounted for.
A venture like this which is of such magnitude in terms of finance must be appropriately monitored and controlled to ensure that it achieve its stated objectives.
2.0 Objectives 33  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE At the end of this unit, students sho uld be able to: (i) define supervision (ii) define inspection (iii) distinguish between supervision and inspection (iv) define supervision of instruction (v) explain the purpose of inspection and (vi) explain the various techniques of inspection.
3.0 Main Contents The Nigerian government recognized the need to monitor not only the financial management of the school, but also the teaching of students.
Educationists at the Ministries of Education both at the federal and the state levels have set up quality control divisions in their respective ministries to ensure that quality education is maintained.
It has been established that quality and standard could be maintained in the educational institutions through regular inspection and continuous supervision of instruction in the schools.
Supervision and inspection have been identified as very germane to the day-to-day activities of educational institutions.
The supervisor assesses and records the performance of teachers, their ability and consistency in carrying out the classroom activities and keeping of high quality records.
The activities of supervisors include the following: inspecting, monitoring, rating, assisting, recommending etc.
All these activities if carried out by professional supervisors are aimed at improving instructional delivery and quality of teaching in the educational institutions.
However, not all the appointed supervisors by ministries of education (federal and state levels) are trained, this accounts for the reasons why the quality of work of supervisors is very low.
3.1 Evolution of Supervisio n in Nigeria.
The introduction of Western education in Nigeria could be traced back to 1842 when the missionaries established the first primary school in Badagry.
At this time, the missionaries were responsible for supervising their own schools by the use of administrative supervision approach prevalent at that time.
During this period, the Catechist was also used as teacher by the missionaries while the layman in the church was used as supervisor or inspector of education.
However, in 1882, government started to demonstrate commitment to the standard of education by appointing Red Metcalf Sunter as the Her Majesty’s Inspector of Schools of the West Africa.
In 1889, Henry Carr, was appointed as the Local Inspector of Schools for Lagos colony.
This further showed the commitment of government to the improvement of the standard of education in Nigeria.
34  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE During the first quarter of the tw entieth century, the inspectorate service got another boost with the appointment of a Director of Education and three (3) Zonal Inspectors of schools in order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of school inspection.
This development was influenced by the prevailing scientific management approach to supervision.
The regionalization of education by the McPherson constitution of 1954 gave birth to the establishment of Western Region Inspectorate Service.
This inspectorate was able to make considerable impact on the educational standards of the Western Region.
In 1973, the federal government through the federal ministry of education established the federal inspectorate division within the ministry to supervise the quality of instructional delivery in schools.
Since 1975, when the government took over the provision of education in Nigeria, the same government is also responsible for the supervisory function.
The practice makes the government a judge on its own case.
The supervisors at this time being government agents were not taken serious because most of them were not professionally trained.
Gradually, supervision of instruction became very weak and more ineffective and generally degenerated to its present state.
3.2 The Meaning of Supervisio n and Inspection.
In the first instance, supervision is a concept that emanated from the American tradition while the concept of inspection emanated from the British tradition.
Not only that, supervision was a hand of assistance given to a professional colleague in the process of instructional delivery while inspection activities focused on school administration and finding faults as well as what was wrongly done by the teachers in order to punish them.
Inspection can be defined as a process involving regular school visits to check that everything in the school is satisfactory and that the school rules and regulations are obeyed by the school head, teachers and students while supervision can be said to be a process, facilitated by a supervisor, through which the supervisor assists the school head, teachers and the students, counsel each other, plan with each other and rub minds together on how to improve teaching and learning in the school.
Supervision can also be said to be an interaction between at least two people for the improvement of an activity.
School supervision is a process of bringing about improvement in instruction by working with people who are working with pupils.
Supervision in school is a process and coordination of activities which is concerned with the teaching and improvement of the teaching in the school.
Supervision and inspection are two different concepts that have been used at various times in management of education industry to mean the same thing.
But to some people they still means different things.
The school head, teachers, students and the parents view it from an angle at which each relates with the supervision.
To the school head, supervision may be inquisition or fault finding exercise; to a teacher it may mean challenge to his personality.
Mbiti (1974), defined supervision as one of the basic requirements of administration that concern itself with the tactics of efficiency and 35  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE effective management of human a nd material resources.
It is a way to advise, guide, refresh, encourage, stimulate, impr ove and oversee teachers with the hope of seeking their cooperation in order that they may be successful in the task of teaching and classroom management.
According to Ghiselli (1971), supervision involves directing the work of others, organising and integrating activities in order to ensure that the goals of the group are achieved.
However, Okoro (1994) defines inspection as an instrument with which the government through the ministry of education maintains the necessary content with the schools, teachers, pupils and the community and so ensure that the system is working satisfactorily.
In this sense, inspection is to be viewed as fulfilling a coordinating, controlling, and communicating role as guardian of educational standards.
It seems evident from both concepts that effective teaching and learning can be developed within the schools and that such development is essentially derived from the control of the nexus of connections among staff, pupils, parents and other stake holders within the school community with a view to developing a positive teaching and learning environment.
Self Assessment Exercise.
(i) Distinguish between supervision and inspection.
(ii) Trace the history of supervision of instruction in Nigeria.
From all the above, supervision does not mean inspection, because supervision is not fault finding exercise or inquisition but it means guidance, assistance, support, sharing of ideas by all those involved.
It is a help provided by a professional supervisors to the teachers and learners to realize their full potentials in school.
In modern day, we talk more of instructional supervision or supervision of instruction in our educational institutions.
This concept: instructional supervision is focused on how to improve learning.
The objective of supervision of instruction is to improve the overall teaching process and to ensure that effective educational services are rendered by the teachers to the students.
Supervision of instruction is carried out by those designated to do so.
They are known by different names within and outside the school system; some are referred to as supervisors, some are called superintendents, principals, vice-principals, heads of department, deans, provosts, rectors, vice-chancellors etc.
Supervision of instruction takes place in educational institution which is a social system with a number of interacting sub-systems.
These sub-systems are the teaching sub- system, the school management sub-system, the counseling and co-curriculum sub- systems etc.
It can also be said that supervision of instruction is a professional, continuous and cooperative exercise that covers all the aspects of the life of a school.
It covers all the sub-systems of the school and influences them.
The main purpose of influencing all the sub-systems in the school is to ensure improvement in teaching- learning situation and also to ensure quality teaching and learning in the school.
36  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ofoegbu (2004) defined instructi onal supervision as a process of ascertaining that teachers carry out the task of teach ing to an expected level, according to the stipulated guidelines, which control the educational system.
It is a way of persuading teachers to desist from application of wrong teaching methods and procedures in instructional delivery.
Supervision of instructional is a concept that emphasises the improvement of instructional delivery methods.
3.4.
Purpose of Supervisio n of Instruction The purpose of supervision of instruction is to ensure that the right instruction is passed to the students with the right method by the right people at the right time.
This will influence the attainment of the major instructional and educational goals.
Other reasons for carrying out supervision of instruction in schools are as follows: (i) assess and establish the performance of the teachers in the school, (ii) provide specific assistance to teachers with deficient teaching methods, (iii) discover teachers with special teaching skills and qualities in schools, (iv) ascertain and assess teachers classroom management skills, (v) provide level play ground for teachers growth and development, (vi) provide both knowledge and encouragement to young and inexperienced teachers, (vii) provide teachers with professional magazines, journals or references that would enlighten, motivate and encourage them to be familiar with changes in the instructional delivery methodologies, (viii) ensure the conformity of the dissenting teachers to the appropriate instructional delivery methods through directional leadership, (ix) organize induction programme to new teachers on various teaching methods available and make available other staff development programme that should serve as incentives to improve incompetent teachers, and (x) Assess the overall climate of the instruction available in the school and identify some of its most urgent needs.
Self Assessment Exercise.
(i) Define instructional supervision (ii) Why is instructional supervision a must in our educational institutions?
3.5.
Techniques of Supervisio n There are various techniques of supervision.
Before any strategy can be applied by the supervisor, the supervisor must respect the worth and dignity of the supervisee.
Modern supervision is cooperative and is focused on the aims and objectives of education, instructional materials, methods of teaching, staff and students and the entire school environment.
It involves all those who are involved and engaged in the task of solving the problems in the school and improving instruction.
The following are the techniques of supervision: 37  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (i) Classroom Visitation and Observation Technique: this is a live systematic observation of a teacher at work.
The supervisor visits the classroom in an actual situation and observes how the teacher teaches, manages and controls the students in the classroom.
The supervisor that adopts this technique focuses on planning and preparation of the lesson, presentation of the lesson (teachers voice, speech and habit clarity, appropriateness of language,), teacher and students relationship, students participation in the lesson, appropriateness of the instructional aids and methods, classroom management, teachers personality and knowledge of the subject content.
This technique has been recognized as a good technique for supervision, because it provides the supervisor the opportunity to see the teacher in action.
(ii) Inter-School/Teacher Visitation Technique: This technique involves teacher(s) in a particular school visiting teacher(s) in another school and observing them while teaching.
Inter-school/teacher visitation can either be “inter-class visitation” or “inter-school visitation”.
It is inter-class visitation when teacher(s) in the same school visit another teacher teaching in another class within the same school, and it is inter-school visitation when teacher(s) in one school visit another teacher in another school teacher in the class.
Apart from the fact that this technique enhances interaction among teachers within and outside the school, it also assists the beginning teachers to learn class management.
It also helps both the experienced and in-experienced teachers to plan effectively and make judicious use of available resources.
Inter-school visitation involves pre-visitation planning to bring about the desired results.
(iii) Workshop Technique: The use of this technique involves organizing various workshops, seminars, conferences with intention of rubbing minds together on current and other issues that could lead to improvement in teaching and learning condition in the school.
This technique has recently become a very useful tool and method of supervision.
It affords teachers the opportunity to exchange ideas, foster good spirit and relationship among professional colleagues and acquaint them with the new and special problems that they might be confronted with in the school.
A good workshop, seminar or conference is planned several weeks before commencement and it may run into several days or weeks depending on the objective(s).
A god degree of flexibility is necessary in the planning of a workshop.
38  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iv) Demonstration Technique: This technique involves the presentation of pre-arranged series o f events in form of teaching by a ‘master-teacher’ to a group of teachers to see.
This technique is used to enhance individual teachers’ growth and skill on the job.
The viewers should be given enough notice because of importance of attendance and they should be adequately involved in the exercise.
This technique should be realistic and practicable.
Video tapes and guided practice can also be used to enhance the effectiveness of this technique (v) Micro-Teaching Technique: This technique is adopted when a teacher is teaching a group less than the normal classroom population with time that is equally less than the normal 40 minutes for a period.
For example, if a teacher is to teach a group of 5-10 students within 5-10 minutes, this method is best suited.
This method allows the supervisors and teachers to identify, define, describe, point-out, highlight, and re-try certain teaching skills without the risk of teaching the actual class and also with a period that is less than 40 minutes.
The method gives room for immediate feedback because the group involved is very small in size, and more so it gives opportunity to student-teacher and supervisor the opportunity to watch and listen to his/her mistakes To effectively use micro-teaching technique, the following conditions must be met: (a) there should be a pre-conference meeting between the would be supervisee and supervisor to agree on terms (what to be taught and how it should be taught), (b) there should be audio and visual equipment e.g.
tape, video recorder, television, films etc., (c) there should be the actual teaching to be observed by the supervisor, and (d) there should be a post-conference meeting between the supervisor and supervisee, and the group to discuss on the strength and weaknesses of the supervisee.
(vi) Audio – Visual Technique: This technique is becoming popular in recent times; it involves the use of sound recordings through video tape, computers, and media or film to present ideas to one or more listeners in such a way as to assist in the development of skills.
Class activities are recorded and re-played too stimulate class discussion and improve teacher’s behaviour hence improvement in teaching and learning activities.
(vii) Guided Practice Technique: Peretomode (1995) referred to this technique as the type that is sometimes associated with inter-visitation and observation.
The technique stresses actual doing with the needed support rather than mere talking independently.
It may indicate the need for skill 39  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE development, and it may compliment a follow-up activity in which the supervisee develops the teaching plan to use in the class with direct assistance and support from the supervisor.
4.0.
Conclusion The introduction of Western Education could be traced back o 1842 when the missionaries established the 1st primary school in Badagry.
At this time, the Catechist were used as teachers while layman in the church perform supervisory duties.
However, since 1882, government started to demonstrate commitment to education standard by appointing Inspector of Schools of the West Africa, and in 1889, Inspector of Schools for Lagos colony was also appointed.
This showed that government was committed to improvement of standard of education in Nigeria.
The inspectorate unit got another boos in the first quarter of the twentieth century when government appointed a Director of Education and three (3) Zonal Inspectors of schools; this was also to improve the effectiveness and efficiencies of school inspection.
There was also the establishment of Western Region Inspectorate Service in 1954 to make considerable impact on the education standard of he Western Region, and in 1973 the Federal Government established the Federal Inspectorate Division through the federal ministry of education o supervise the quality of instructional delivery in schools.
5.0 Summary.
In this unit, we have discussed the evolution of supervision in Nigeria, various meanings of supervision, inspection, and supervision of instruction.
From our discussion in this unit, supervision and inspection are two different concepts.
Supervision from all the various meanings given was a hand of assistance given to a professional colleague in teaching exercise while inspection is a school administration focused on faults finding in order to ensure maintenance of standards.
We also discussed the various techniques of supervision e.g.
classroom, inter-visitation, workshops, demonstration etc.
It should be noted that no single technique can be applied in all circumstances, because teachers and teaching methods differ; so also do the students and the classroom environments.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment.
(i) Distinguish between supervision of instruction and inspection.
(ii) Mention and discuss any five (5) techniques that a supervisor could adopt.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ajayi, I.
A & Ayodele, J.
B (2001).
Introduction to Education Planning, Administration and Supervision.
Lagos: YPPS Anuna, M. C (2004) Educational Supervision.
The Nigerian Experience.
Owerri: International university press.
40  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Fafunwa, A.
B (1974).
History of E ducation in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Urwin.
Ofoegbe, F.I (2004).
Supervision and Inspection in the Nigerian Education System in Organisation and Administration of Education.
Perspectives and Practices.
Benin: Festa.
UNIT 6 SUPERVIS ION OF INSTRUCT ION CONTIN UED 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning of a Supervisor 3.2 Qualities of a good Supervisor 3.3 Types of Supervision 3.4 Challenges facing supervision in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we discussed the evolution of supervision in Nigeria which was traced back to 1842 when the missionaries established the first primary school in Badagry (CMS primary school).
During this time, it was the missionary that was responsible for supervising their schools.
In 1882, the government appointed ‘Inspector of Schools of West Africa’ and in 1889, local inspector of schools was appointed for Lagos colony.
Since that time, supervision has had expression in the Nigeria educational system.
We also discussed the meaning of supervision and inspection, the purpose of supervision of instruction and techniques of supervision.
In this unit we are going to discuss the various types of supervision and the problems of supervision in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) explain all the various forms of inspection (we have) (ii) identify the challenges facing supervision 41  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) proffer solutions t o the challenges facing supervisors/instructional a supervision in Nigeri 3.0 Main Contents Inspection as discussed in the last unit is a way to review the quality and quantity of educational inputs.
Such input includes the quality and quantity of teachers, the quality of instruction and the quality of its evaluation procedure.
Educational inspection could be described as a means by which the educational system ensures that the education it delivers will serve the purpose for which it is intended.
3.1 Meaning of a Supervisor A supervisor can best be described by the nature of the work performed and the services rendered, rather than according to any title.
Adams and Dickey (1953) opined that a supervisor may be a school head in a small system, the building principal in a large system, supervisor of a special field, such as physical education, art or music, the director of instruction in a country or city school system, the country or city school superintendent or a helping teacher.
Wiles and John (1975) posited that a supervisor is a person formally designated by the organisation to interact with members of the teaching behaviour system in order to improve the quality of learning by students or students’ learning.
Ogunsaju (1978) defined supervisors as officers performing supervisory duties.
They are mostly education officers working in the ministry of education and charged with the following responsibilities: (i) planning of school curricula, (ii) allocating funds and scholarships to students and needy student who demonstrated eligibility through competitive examination and Interview administered by the ministry, (iii) supervising teacher education and provision of textbooks and other instructional materials, and (iv) occasionally visiting schools to see how effectively their curriculum planning is working.
A supervisor could be said to be any professionally trained staff from the ministry of education and within the school system who can proffer advisory assistance to the teachers for the purpose of improving learning 3.2 Qualities of a Good Supervisor A supervisor in his own capacity is regarded a instructional leader.
He is expected to perform certain functions and to fulfill the expectations, aspirations, needs, and demand of the society in which he/she operates.
For a supervisor to be successful, he/she needs to possess certain qualities that will put him/her over those under his supervision: 42  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (i) He/She must be true to his own ideas (ii) He/She must be flexi ble (iii) He/she must be loyal (iv) He/She must command respect (v) He/She must be strong-willed (vi) He/She must be consistent (vii) He/She must be fair in dealings with other people (viii) He/She must be open-minded in making decisions (ix) He/She must respect others’ opinions (x) He/She must be teachable (xi) He/She must be sincere, firm, and approachable (xii) He/She must be ready to help people solve their problem 3.3 Types/Forms of Inspection Below are the various forms of inspection that we have: (i) Full General Inspection: This form of inspection involves a comprehensive assessment of all aspects of life in a school.
The inspection will include the subjects taught, the qualification and adequacy of teachers as well as adequacy of various resources compared with the established standards.
For a full general inspection to be successful, a large team of inspectors must be put together and this type of inspection usually last up to four to five days depending on the number of inspectors that make up the inspection team.
Prior to the inspection, the school head should be contacted to provide information on: the list of the subjects on the curriculum, staff subject analysis, a copy of the current class time table, individual teacher’s time table showing the teacher’s period and class, staff list with their ranks and qualifications and a copy of school daily routine.
The information supplied based on the request above will enable the inspectorate division to choose the right inspectors to form the team.
The team should have a team leader who should not be lower in rank than the school head of the school to be inspected and a reporting inspector who would produce the final inspection report.
(ii) Routine Inspection: This type of inspection is carried out to determine the adequacy of school facilities.
It is a visit organized to familiarize the inspectors to the day-to-day activities/management of the school.
The inspectors at the end of the visit report on the staff situation (whether under/over staff, or over/under utilized) with regard to approved standard/quota, the number in post, vacancies by subjects (if available), absentees, enrolment and attendance, drop-out, environmental sanitation, the school records.
43  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) Follow-Up Inspection: This is a type of inspection carried out a year after the full general inspection had taken place.
This is a repeat visit to find out how the suggestions or recommendations made for the school during the full general inspection have been effected.
This type of inspection is regarded as the on-the-spot assessment to see whether the action taken during the full inspection is achieving the desired results.
(iv) Special Inspection: This is the type of inspection that is carried out on special or specific problem identified by disciplinary or specific education committee.
Cases inspected by inspectors on special investigation visits range from minor cases of students disobedience, principal/teacher’s administrative mismanagement to serious cases like financial mismanagement/mis-appropriation, rape, student riot, robbery, arson, examination malpractice, immoral sex act and so on.
(v) Recognition Inspection: This is a special inspection carried out by inspectors to assess the number of subjects offered in a school as well as the number of human and material resources available in the school for purpose of accreditation by appropriate bodies or external examinations bodies like West African Examination Council (WAEC), National Examination Council (NECO).
The inspectors will assess the available laboratories and other expected infrastructure, textbooks, the number of teaching and non-teaching staff by grade, sex, qualification, and years of cognate experience.
All these will assist the school in the accreditation of courses in the school or recognition by the external examination bodies Self Assessment exercise Highlight the various challenges facing supervision of instruction in Nigeria.
3.4 Challenges of Supervisio n of Instruction in Nigeria.
It is pertinent to also discuss the challenges facing supervision of instruction in Nigeria since supervision is a vital tool in enhancing the standard and maintaining quality in Nigerian schools.
A lot of problems hinder supervision of instruction, but we are going to discuss the most fundamental ones.
(i) The dearth of qualified and trained personnel: Most of the personnel used as supervisors of instruction in most states in Nigeria do not have the pre-requisites teachers qualification and experience.
(ii) Inadequate funds for supervision of instruction: Funding has been a major challenge facing not only supervision of instruction but also education in general.
The available 44  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE fund to the inspectorate unit in the ministry of education is not sufficient to carry out the enormous task given to them.
It is becoming increasingly impossible for inspectorate unit of the education ministries to service and repair vehicles needed for supervision exercises and even to pay duty tour allowance (DTA) of supervisors where need be.
(iii) Lack of relevant supervisory competencies: Nigerian supervisors of education are deficient in relevant supervisory skills because there is no pre-professional or pre-practice training for the supervisors.
School heads need to be trained in order to acquire the relevant skills for performing the supervisory functions.
(iv).
Styles of supervision adopted by supervisors: Some supervisors still adopt autocratic, fault-finding styles of inspection.
This makes the school head and teachers become apprehensive.
This set of supervisors always assumes mastery of the subjects and expect the teacher to be subservient to hem.
They assume that supervisors have the knowledge and regard the teachers as inferior workers who should take instruction from them without questioning; this will always breed disdain and contempt instead of cooperation.
(v).
Low teachers’ morale: School supervisors, school heads and the supervisees do not receive corresponding or much incentive to enable them to be totally committed to their jobs.
The general belief by Nigerians is that teaching profession is of low esteem.
More than half of the teachers on the job are bidding their time to get alternative employment and opt out of teaching because they are dissatisfied with the job.
It is difficult for such a teacher with the mind set that teaching is a stepping stone to be totally committed to their job and this could greatly have negative influence on their teaching, thereby making supervisor work more tedious.
(vi) Inadequate transport facilities: Supervisors of education have often complained of inability to cover most of their areas of operation.
This is compounded by inaccessibility of some areas e.g.
riverine, nomadic and rural areas where schools are located.
The problem of transportation cannot be separated from poor funding of the inspectorate unit in the ministry of education and the state of all Nigerian roads.
(vii) Pre-occupation of school head with administrative duties: School heads are sometimes occupied with administrative duties to the extent that they have no time for academic leadership.
They 45  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE are more occ upied with obtaining information from the ministry of education; attend parent teachers’ association meetings, maintaining community – school relationship at the detriment of supervision of instruction which is one of their primary duties.
School heads prefer to travel most time because of self-gain in traveling.
This situation makes them toe the grip of the situation in their schools.
(viii) Attitude of ministry of education officials: During the colonial and post colonial era, funding of schools was based on the submitted reports by the supervisors of education about the development of the schools.
Funding schools in contemporary times does not depend on school performance in examinations.
Supervisor’s report is now worthless at the ministry because the reports are not being taken seriously by the ministry of education officials in the recent past as they were in the colonial period.
(ix) Policy instability: This has to do with frequent change in educational policy without adequate knowledge of the supervisors which often leads to confusion or uncertainty.
The supervisors are not carried along when policies affecting education are to be changed/amended For example, change of school calendar, abolition and re-establishment of bodies like NPEC, abolition and re-introduction of private universities etc.
In addition to all the above discussed problems, there are so many other problems facing instructional supervision in schools.
They are almost inaccessible in areas that include: the location of the schools, inadequate data, over utilization of facilities, religious and political problems.
These in addition serve as serious constraints to supervision in the Nigerian educational system.
4.0 Conclusion The need for supervision is pertinent to the growth and development of Nigerian education.
This is the main reason why Nigerian government should pay more attention to supervision.
The challenges of supervision on the morale of its agents should be seriously addressed.
The supervisors should benefit from regular in-service training in form workshops, seminars, conferences, and other relevant short and long term courses that would expose the supervisors to increased effectiveness and efficiency in supervision exercise.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have explained the various forms of inspection we have, they are: full general, routine, special, advisory, recognition and follow-up inspection.
We also discussed some of the problems facing supervision in Nigeria.
The following problems 46  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE are also discussed in the unit: the dearth of qualified supervisors, inadequate funding, lack of relevant supervisory compet encies, styles adopted by supervisors, pre-occupation of school head, attitude of ministry of education officials, policy instability and enrolment, the location of the school, inadequate data, over - utilized facilities, religious and political problems.
6.0 Tutor marked assignment (i) List and explain five forms of inspection (ii) Identify any five challenges facing of supervisory function in Nigeria and suggest possible solutions to them.
7.0 References/Further Readings.
Adam, J & Dickey, M (1953).
Basic Principles of Supervision.
New York: American Books Ajayi, I.
A & Ayodele, J.
B.
(2001).
Introduction to Educational Planning, Administration and Supervision.
Lagos: YPPS Anuna, M. C. (2004).
Educational Supervision.
The Nigerian Experience, .Owerri: International University Press.
Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1974).
History of education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Urwin.
Ofoegbu, F.I.
(2004).
Supervision and Inspection in the Nigerian Education System in Organisation and Administration of Education.
Perspectives and Practices.
Benin: Festa.
Ogunsaju, S (1978): Structural organisation and supervision of Nigerian primary and secondary schools.
Nigerian students international.
Vol.
No 2, pp.12-13 Wiles, K & John, T,L (1975): Supervision for Better Schools.
4th (ed), Engle-wood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-hall Inc. 47  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE MODULE TWO EDUCA TION LAWS AND SCHOOL PLANT UNIT 1 EDUCAT ION LAW AND CONTROL OF EDUCATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition of Law 3.2 Law in Nigeria Traditional Education 3.3 Evolution of Education Law in Nigeria 3.4 Education Ordinance of 1887 3.5 Education Ordinance of 1908 3.6 Education Ordinance of 1916 and 1926 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction 48  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE For any organisation or institution ( educational or otherwise) to be established, managed and perform effectively, there must be guiding principles in form of rules and regulations guiding the activities of such an organisation or institution.
These rules and regulations may be in form of taboos/customs/traditions, depending on the practices of the community where the institution is situated.
It may also be in form of constitutional laws made by relevant government agencies.
If there is no law, there will be no need to prosecute offender(s).
The essence of promulgating laws for educational institutions is to guide the activities of the operators in the system to ensure that, it all falls within the framework of the whole community.
Management of educational institution is a complex task for administrations because the industry (education) is the largest employer of labour in Nigeria as well as in other parts of the world and all other sectors depend on education industry for survival.
As a result of these, it is imperative to have some set rules and regulations guiding the operations of the industry and the operators.
2.0 Objectives.
At the end of the lesson, students should be able to: i.
Define law as a concept ii.
Distinguish between law and rule iii.
Distinguish between written and unwritten law iv.
Distinguish between statutory and customary laws v. Trace the history of education low from 1882-1926 3.0 Main Content Law can either be written or unwritten.
It is written when those rules and regulations guiding the conducts and operations of a society are written down and people recognise that, it is binding on them and sanctions could be imposed by appropriate authority if such rules and regulations are violated.
But when the rules and regulation guiding the operations of a society are not written down and the people also recognise that it is binding on them with appropriate sanding if violated, it is unwritten law.
Law could either be statutory or customary.
Statutory laws are the laws created by statute or acts of parliaments or the legislature arm of government.
Legislative arm of government is the one saddled with the responsibility of making laws.
Customary laws on the other hand are the laws, derivable from the customs and traditions of a society over a period of time but these customs and traditions must be known and recognized by the constitution of the land.
There is a difference between rules and laws.
Rules are regulations or ordinances which are statements of general norms.
Rules are made by the President, Governors, Ministers, Commissions, and Chief Executives of institutions/parastatals without passing through the legislative arm of government.
But in case of law, it must be passed through the legislature arm of the government before it can become operative and recognized as the 49  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE law of the land.
No single executive /chief executive can enact a law; it must pass through legislative process.
Decree is anot her type of law; it is a law made by the supreme military authority of a country during military administration.
Laws made by State Military Governors are referred to as edicts.
3.1 Definition of law The term law has been defined differently by different authors.
Some perceive it as a system of rules which all citizens of that country must obey.
This means that the law of a country is superior to the citizens of the country whether written or unwritten as long as it is the law of the country.
Elias (1962) defined law as a rule laid down for the guidance of an intelligent being by an intelligent being having power over him and Renter (1970) opines that law comprises all rules and arrangements recognized by the law courts From the above, law can be defined as a rules written or unwritten recognized by the courts.
However, law can also be a discipline or course of study in higher institutions of learning, just as we have courses like: education, medicine, engineering, pharmacy etc.
it may also be a profession.
But in this unit, the term law is the one used for the proper regulation of a society by appropriate authority.
Law has two main branches, civil and criminal.
Civil laws are those applied to settle civil cases such as: disputes between private individuals, between individual and businesses and between business, in this category we have law of torts, family law, land law, and law of contract.
Criminal laws on the other hand are those laws applied to settle criminal cases.
Criminal cases are wrongs committed against community, state or individual property.
3.2 Law in Nigerian Traditional Education Traditional education in Nigerian is the education which each community handed over to the succeeding generations; this is different from the western education or the formal education.
Nigeria comprises various communities with different cultures and ethnic groups.
Nigerian children who do not have the opportunity to have the western education or quranic education only enjoy the traditional education.
Traditional education is not obtained from the four- walls of a classroom; it is obtainable from the parents/communities.
The main objective of either formal/western or traditional education is to assist the child to grow into a functional member of the family and society.
A child has the right to be exposed to basic education; basic education is education for living in conformity with the norms and values of the society.
For traditional education; parents, various members of the family (nuclear and extended) located within the same compound, household and his neighbour-hood are the child’s teachers.
If a person is referred to as uneducated in a society, it is an insult on that person and the family became it is assumed that the parents did not fulfill their obligation by not providing the basic education for the child at the right time.
Every child in the traditional education is also exposed to some occupational 50  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE trading in form apprenticeship to en able him to acquire an occupation to maintain himself and his family at the appropriate tim e in the future.
In the traditional education, the environment/society reinforced the value of acceptance.
The principle of seniority within the traditional society strengthens the principle of authority and responsibility in the society.
People in a society are not only familiar to cooperative efforts, they also have divergent views.
To clarify issues on divergent views, elders in the society were looked on to with unquestioning obedience by the younger ones.
As soon as a child is born, the process of education started and continued into adulthood until death.
A child derives knowledge from observation, customs, traditional beliefs and religious tenets.
During the slave trade era, parents reserved the rights to sell into slavery, they can also administer corporal punishment without limit, and theft was seen as an offence that should be visited with capital punishment.
Every child in the traditional education must be corrected by the older children and members of the extended family and if the child refuses correction, corporal punishment can be applied At this time, disobedience and other forms of indiscipline acts were rare among children because of the method/sways of administering punishment.
The whole community as well as the parents is teacher who can also punish errand child.
3.3.
Evolution of Education Laws in Nigeria.
The history of education laws in Nigeria could be traced to 1882 when the first educational ordinance was enacted.
The 1882 education ordinance was the first education official law made by the colonial masters in Nigeria.
The ordinance makes the following provisions: 1. establishment of a general board of education for Lagos colony made up of the governor as the chairman and members of the state executive council as members and other four nominees by the government, 2. that the general education is empowered to hire and fire local education boards which were meant only to advise the general education board on the needs and areas where new schools are to be established, conditions for granting certificate to teachers and set condition for schools to be qualified for government grant-in aids, 3. that there shall be one inspector of schools for West African colonies and three assistant inspectors to be based in; Lagos, Sierra Leone and Gold Coast, 4. that there shall be both the government, missionary and community primary schools, and 5. that the school curriculum should include subjects like Reading, Writing, Arithmetic Domestic Science, English Language, History and Geography.
51  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.4 Educa tion Ordinance o f 1887 Up to 1886, Lagos colony was administered by the same colonial authority that governed the Gold Coast colony.
But from 1886, Lagos and Gold Coast colonies were separated; Lagos now became a separate colony and a protectorate.
This led to the attention given to the problems and prospects of educational development in Nigeria.
It was this event that led to enactment of the second education ordinance in 1887.
Fafunwa (1974) opined that, this was technically the first education ordinance to be enacted for Nigeria; the 1882 education ordinance was for the British West African colonies in which Lagos was one.
The 1887 ordinance provided that: 1. a board of education be established for Lagos colony comprising the Governor as the chairman, members of house of legislature and other four Governor nominee, 2. the board established shall assist school with grants and scholarship awards to pupils, and 3. the board shall establish conditions for granting scholarship to pupils.
Among the conditions set were that: a. schools must have a manager with power to hire and fire, teachers and also be accountable to schools on financial matters, b. teachers must be qualified and certified, c. schools academic performance in public examination must be good d. schools must be open for inspection, e. school must be for all children irrespective of their religion or ethnic background and no religious education must be given to students without the parent background, and f. school curriculum must include: Reading, Writing Arithmetic, English, Needlework, History and Geography.
3.5 Educa tion Ordinance o f 1908 In Nigeria, the Northern protectorate was established in 1899 and in 1906 the colonies of Lagos and Southern Nigeria were merged.
But prior to this merger, in 1908, the Department of Education was created for the new Southern protectorate of Nigeria.
This department was responsible for production of education codes to oversee the education need, expansion and management of education in the Southern protectorate.
The 1908 education ordnance focused on the Southern protectorate and also provided the following; i. that there shall be a department of education in the colony, ii.
that there shall be a director of education to head the department of 52  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE education who would be re sponsible to the governor on education matters only, and iii.
that there shall also be superintendents of schools.
The establishment of a separate department for education for Southern protectorate was major development in the history of Nigerian education because prior to this time, education had been administered from the Governor’s office when need be.
No specific department was designated to oversee the activities in the education department then.
The establishment of the department of education changed the scenario.
Training was organised for some officers who were given responsibility to plan, co-ordinate, and control and supervise the educational development in the merged Lagos colony and Southern protectorate and the head gave account of the stewardship in the ministry to the governor.
This resulted in greater efficiency and accountability in the management of education.
Self Assessment Exercise (i) Distinguish between written and unwritten laws.
(ii) There is no difference between civil law and criminal law.
Do you agree?
3.6 Educa tion Ordinance a nd Code of 1916 and 1926 The amalgamation of the Southern and Northern protectorates came up in 1914 by Sir Frederick Lugard who was also appointed the Government - General for Nigerian territory by the British Government.
Lugard was aware of the gap in educational development between the Southern and Northern Nigeria and the importance of education to development of the people and the nation at large.
He devoted special attention to the formulation of education policy and its implementation.
After a few months of assumption of office, Luggard proposed new guidelines for grant-in-aids to missionary schools, because the 1914 education ordinance was criticized by the colonial master’s office in London and leaders of the various missionary groups in Nigeria.
Other provisions of the 1916 education ordnance were: i. grants - in aid to the mission for running the missionary schools should be increased and inspection of schools should be more frequent, ii.
Christian Religion should not be taught in schools located in the muslims communities in the Northern Nigeria, iii.
schools located in the rural areas should teach Agriculture and Local Crafts, and iv.
no interference among the various agencies involved in education and there should be cooperation among these agencies.
53  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The 1916 education ordinance resulted in the improvement of efficiency and effectiveness of school manageme nt and leadership, better teaching staff quality, and higher pupils’ academic performance.
But the ordinance was not without critics.
It was said that the ordinance focused mainly on missionary schools which were located mostly in the Southern Nigeria.
It also contained nothing to bridge the education gap between the Southern and Northern Nigeria.
In 1922, the Phelps - Stokes Commission published a report on education in Africa, this report spurred the British government to produce a memorandum on education in its territories in 1925.
However, in 1926, there was an education ordinance to respond to the Phelps - Stokes Commission’s recommendations.
The ordinance addressed the issue of school management, staffing and supervision as observed by Phelps - Stokes commission.
It was spell-out in the ordinance that a person needed to be a registered teacher before he could be hired to teach in any school in the Southern Nigeria.
The ordinance also mandated voluntary agencies or communities to take approval from the director of education as well as the board of education before establishing new schools.
This measure was to check the establishment of sub-standard schools within the protectorate.
The ordinance also expantiated the functions and duties of supervisors and inspectors of education.
The work of the supervisors and inspectors assumed a different dimension because their reports not only improved the academic standard and performance; it also assisted the Board/Director of Education in arriving at vital decisions on education.
The ordinance also put in place stringent conditions for teachers to be employed; it also stipulated the minimum salaries that should be paid to any registered teachers in all the government or government assisted schools.
This 1926 ordinance therefore, became the first education ordinance that enhanced the status of teaching profession and made teaching attractive to the qualified teachers.
Self-Assessment Exercise Trace the history of Nigerian Education Law from 1882 to 1926.
4.0 Conclusion Law can be a discipline/or course of study in institutions of higher learning, and it can also be used for proper regulation of a society by appropriate authority.
Civil laws are applied to settle civil cases while criminal laws are applied to settle criminal cases in the society.
The history of education law could be traced back to 1882 when the first education ordinance was made for the entire British colonies to 1926 when education ordinance was made for the Southern and Northern protectorate after the amalgamation of Southern and Northern protectorate in Nigeria.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the historical development of education laws in Nigeria from 1882 when the first education official law was made by the colonial master (i.e.
54  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE British).
The 1882 ordinance was meant for the entire British West African colonies, while the 1887 ordinance was the fi rst one for Nigeria.
The education ordinance of 1908 was for the Lagos colonies and Southern protectorate after their merger in 1906.
This ordinance was focused on that new Southern protectorate which was a landmark in the history of education in Nigeria, because this ordinance stipulated and established a separate department (department of education) to oversee education ministry.
However, the 1916 and 1926 ordinances were made for the Southern and Northern protectorates after the amalgamation of the duo in 1914 by Sir Fredrick Lord Lugard who became the first Governor - General of the Southern and Northern Nigeria.
The education ordinances made various provisions for education at one time or the other.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Trace the historical development of education law in Nigeria from 1887-1926.
7.0 References/Further Readings Adesina.
S. (1993) ‘Education Law and Politics in E.A.
Yoloye, (ed) Education and the Law in Nigeria; the Nigeria Academy of Education.
1993 Year Book on Education.
Ibadan, Claverianum Press Elias T.O (1962).
The Nature of African Customary Law, Manchester; University Press.
Fafunwa, A.B (1973).
History of Education in Nigeria, London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd Federal Republic of Nigeria (1979).
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Lagos: Federal ministry of Information.
Nwagwu, N.A (1993).
“Historical Development of Education Laws in Nigeria” in E.A.Yoloye, (ed) Education and the Law in Nigeria; the Nigeria Academy of Education.
1993 Year Book on Education Ibadan, Claverianum Press Reuter, E.E (1970).
Schools and the Law.
Engle-wood Cliffs, New Jersey Oceana Publications Taiwo C.O (1993).
The Role of Law in Education in E.A.Yoloye, (ed) Education and the Law in Nigeria; the Nigeria Academy of Education.
1993 Year Book on Education.
Ibadan, Claverianum Press 55  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 2 ORGANISATION OF THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Structure of the federal ministry of education 3.1.1 Organogram of the federal ministry of education 3.2 Functions of the federal ministry of education 3.3 The state ministries of education 3.3.1 Organogram of the state ministry of education 3.4 Functions of the state ministry of education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor –marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to discuss the organisational structure of the ministries of education in Nigeria (federal and state).
We will also discuss the functions of federal and state ministries of education.
The various departments that make up the federal ministry of education and other agencies under it will also be looked into.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Distinguish deliver federal ministry and state ministry of education (ii) Draw organogram of federal ministry of education (iii) Explain the functions of the federal ministry of education (iv) Draw the organisational structure of state ministry of education (v) Explain the functions of the state ministry of education 3.0 Main Content Education in Nigeria is on the concurrent list of the Nigerian constitution.
Apart from the concurrent list, there are also the exclusive and residual lists.
All items on the exclusive list are exclusively under the total control of the federal government, for example: the Nigerian Police Force, the Nigerian Army: he Nigerian Custom Services etc the Nigerian Prison Service.
While residual list is made up of those items that are under the total control of the state government, the state governments are solely responsible for the provision, controlling and funding of items on the residual list at their various states, because the law has given the state government the statutory right to do so.
56  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE However, education is one of the items on the concurrent list.
This means it is to be jointly provided by both the federal and state governments.
In the process, if there is any clash, the position of the federal government takes precedent.
Federal government owns, controlled, financed and operates federal secondary schools and institutions of higher learning i.e.
Federal Secondary Schools, Federal Colleges of Education, Federal Colleges of Agriculture, Federal Polytechnics, and Federal Universities etc.
So also the state government owns, controlled, financed and operate the state owned secondary schools, state owned colleges of education, state owned polytechnics, state owned colleges of agriculture and state universities.
These institutions (secondary and institutions of higher learning at state levels) are owned, managed, financed and controlled by the state government.
However the Primary Basic Education is provided by the local government through the primary school.
3.1 The Structure of the Federal Ministry of Education: Federal ministry of education is the organ of federal government that is responsible for the administration, financing and controlling of the federal government-owned education institutions both at the secondary and higher institutional levels.
There are vertical and horizontal flows of authority and responsibility in them ministry of education.
This will be seen in the hierarchical structure.
The ministry is headed by a minister of education who is nominated for appointment by the president subject to the approval of the National Assembly in a civilian government or approval of the supreme military council in a military government.
At the ministry of education there are seasoned educational administrators and civil servants who work directly or indirectly with the minister in various capacities.
The ministry comprises eight different departments and several agencies.
The departments are: i.
Personnel ii.
Finance iii.
Planning Research and Statistics iv.
Primary and Secondary v. Post Secondary and Higher education vi Technology and Science vii.
Inspectorate viii.
Education Support Service Some of the agencies under the supervision of the ministry of education are: i.
The National Council of Education (NCE) ii.
The Join Consultative Committee on Education (JCCE) iii.
The Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) iv The National Teachers Institution (NTI) v Joins Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB) vi The National Universities Commission (NUC) vii.
The National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) viii The National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) 57  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.1.1 Organisational Structure/ Chart/Organogram of the Federal Ministry of Education.
Figure 1 below is the hierarchical structure/or organisation chart of the federal ministry of education in Nigeria Figure 1.
Minister of Education (ME) Permanent Secretary (PS) Director Director Director Director Administration Schools Higher Inspectorate & & (DI) Policy Education Education (DAP) Support (DHE) (DSES) It can be observed from figure 1 that authority flows downward from the ME = PS = DAP, DSESS, DHE & D1.
However, horizontal relationship exists between DAP = SESS = DHE = D1, because these personnel operate at the same level and are headed by officers of the same cadre i.e.
director.
3.2 Functions of the Federal Ministry of Education The functions of the federal ministry of education are discussed below: 1.
Formulation of National Policy on Education The federal government through the federal ministry of education lays down broad general education policies covering the various aspects of education in the country.
These policies are handed over to various states ministries of education through the state government to implement.
The federal ministry of education draws a bench mark for some educational programmes at certain levels e.g.
the minimum O’level qualification(s) 58  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE to be possessed by candidates be fore being admitted into the colleges of education, polytechnics and universities.
ii) Funding o f Educational Institutions/Agencies The federal ministry of education solely finances all the educational institutions owned by the federal government (i.e.
the federal unity schools popularly called federal government colleges, the federal colleges of education, federal polytechnics and federal universities).
The federal ministry of education finances federal colleges of education through the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE), also the ministry finances the federal polytechnics through the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) and finances the federal universities through the National Universities Commission (NUC).
The federal ministry of education also funds some special agencies and institutions under it such as Nigerian Education Research and Development Council (NERDC).
The National Teachers Institute (NTI) the National Council on Education (NCE) etc.
iii) Provision of Statistical Data Another major role of the federal ministry of education is the collection, collation and publication of students’ enrolment statistical data.
This assist the government to make necessary budgetary allocation to schools, have first hand information about the total number of students in the each school and all over the country.
Educational information is disseminated throughout the country through newsletter, statistical digest, pamphlets, journals and periodicals.
All educational plans are based on the statistics provided by the federal ministry of education.
iv) Quality Control The federal ministry of education formulates general guidelines and bench mark aimed at ensuring educational standards both at the state and federal levels.
The guideline and benchmark set are complied with by both the states and federal government-owned institutions throughout the country.
v) Development of Syllabuses/Curricula r The federal ministry of education in conjunction with other relevant agencies/bodies develops uniform curricula and syllabuses for use by all educational institutions in Nigerian.
The syllabuses/curricula developed are handed to state for implementation in the state owned schools.
vi) Provision of Consultancy Services In addition to all the above functions, the federal ministry of education also provides advisory sand consultancy services to schools at the state levels and other interested organisations requiring educational information or advice.
59  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Self- Assessment Exercise Apart from all the functions of feral ministry of education discussed above think of more functions of federal ministry of education 3.3 The State Ministries of Education As at now, Nigeria is made up of 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) Abuja.
All the states have their respective state ministries of education.
This means that there are 36 states ministry of education in Nigeria, apart from the federal ministry of education.
The state ministries of education are the organs of state government responsible for the administration, financing and controlling of the state government owned educational institutions both at the secondary school and higher institutional levels.
The state ministry of education is headed by a commissioner for education who is nominated by the Executive Governor subject to the ratification of the legislative arm of government at the state level ( in Nigeria, it is called the House of Assembly).
Apart from the commissioner for education, there are also seasoned educational administrations (Permanent Secretaries, Directors), and civil servants that work in his ministry of education who manage the affairs of various divisions, directorates, units and sections of the ministry.
There are some statutory management agencies under the state ministry of education e.g.
Secondary School’s Management Board (SSMB), the State Education Commission (SEC), and the Teaching Service Commission (TSC).
3.3.1 Structure/Orgnogram of State Ministry of Education Figure 2 below is the organogram of the state ministry of education in Nigeria.
There may be differences in the nomenclature depending on states, but a typical organogram of the state ministry of education looks like this 60  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Fig.
2 Commissioner for Education State Education Board Director Director (Policy and (Inspectorat Director Director (School (Higher Planning) e and Management Education) standards) ) From the above, as we have in the federal ministry of education, authority flows downward while responsibility flow upward.
There are also line authority relationships at the state ministry of education as we have at the federal level.
Self – Assessment exercise What are the differences between the organogram of the federal ministry of education and state ministry of Education?
3.4 Functions of the State Ministry of Education in Nigeria.
i.
Implementation of Educational Policies The state governments through the state ministries of education implement national educational policies formulated by the federal government through federal ministry of education.
State ministries formulate educational policies, based on the broad national policies on education set by the federal government through federal ministry of education.
(ii) Funding o f Educational Institutions/Agencies The state ministry of education is the sole financier of all the educational institutions owned by the state.
The ministry is responsible for recurrent and capital expenses on monthly, quarterly or yearly basis.
Capital expenses are money expended on site 61  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE acquisition, construction of school buildings, procurement of equipment and machinery.
The state ministry of education also finances the statutory education agencies under the ministry.
Some of the agencies are: Teaching Service Commission, State Education Commission, Secondary Management Board or Post Primary Schools Management Board.
iii) Coordination of Educational Activities The state ministries of education also coordinate educational activities within the states because of their leadership positions.
They also ensure that different parts of the school system and the people within it work harmoniously.
The state ministry of education streamlines the structure of the state educational system to avoid multiple control, direction and management.
In some states, we have post primary school management board or the secondary education management board at zonal levels to monitor educational activities within the zone and report bock to the parent body i.e.
the state ministry of education iv) Provision of Statistical Data This is another vital role of the state ministry of education.
The ministry collects, collates and make available data on admission, enrolment, drop-out and other relevant data that will assist the state government in making adequate preparation on planning for smooth operation of educational system at the state level.
Availability of correct data will enable the government to make adequate plan and vice versa v) Regulations of Admissio n into Schools The States ministries of education provide regulation that guide the admission of student’s into the state owned schools as well as student transfers and withdrawals vi) Quality Control It is reasonable to argue that one of the most important functions of the state ministry of education is the maintenance of educational standards.
The ministry inspects and supervise both the administrative and instruction components of the school and ensures that it meets the set standard vii) Formulation of Educational Policies Based on the broad educational provision and practices within the context of the policies from the federal ministry of education, the state ministry of education formulates state education policies which are included in the state education laws and cover every aspect of educational provisions and practices at the state level.
62  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE viii) Recruitment and Payment of Teachers/Other Staff The statutory agencies in the state ministry of education e.g.
Post-primary Education Board, Teaching Service Commission as the case may be, are responsible for the recruitment of teachers into the state owned educational institution.
The board also sees to the payment of teachers, and other staff salaries and allowances as at when due.
4.0 Conclusion From this unit, you have leant that education is a service provided by both federal and state governments in Nigeria.
Federal government provides education through the federal government owned educational institutions e.g.
federal government colleges, federal technical colleges, and federal colleges of education, federal polytechnics and federal universities.
These institutions are financed and controlled by the federal government through federal ministry of education which is headed by a minister appointed by the president based on the approval of the national Assembly in a democratic government.
State governments also provide education through the state owned educational institutions.
All the state owned educational institutions are controlled and financed by the state government through the state ministry of education which is headed by a commissioner for education who is appointed by the executive Governor of the state based on the approval of the State House of Assembly 5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the concurrent and residual list and that the concurrent list contains items to be jointly provided by both the federal and state governments’ e.g.
education, the residual list contain items solely reserved for the federal government to provide e.g.
Nigeria Police Force etc.
we also discussed the functions of federal and state ministries of education and structure of both the federal and state ministries of education.
It was pointed out that the federal ministry of education is headed by a minister of education while the state ministry of education is headed by a commissioner for education 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Draw the organogram of the ministry of education of your state 2.
Explain in full, the various functions performed the state ministry of education of your state 7.0 Reference Ajayi, T. & Oni J.O (1992).
A Functional Approach to School Organisation and Management, ljebu-ode: Triumph Books.
Bedeian, A.G. & Zamnuto, F. R. (1991).
Organization Theory and Design, New York: American Books.
63  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Ezeocha, P.A (1990).
Education al Administration and Planning, Nsukka: Optima Computer Solution.
64  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 3 FUNCTIONS OF STATE PRIMARY EDUCA TION BOARD AND EDUCAT ION COMMISSION S IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reasons for the establishment of state primary Education Board 3.2 National Universities Commission (NUC) 3.2.1 Function of the National Universities Commission (NUC) 3.3 National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) 3.3.1 Reasons for Establishment of NCCE 3.4 National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) 3.4.1 Reasons for the Establishment of NBTE 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, our discussion was on the federal and states ministries of education and we are able to see that education is provided by both the federal and state governments.
At the federal government level, education is under the federal ministry of education which is headed by a minister who is appointed by the president subject to the approval of the National Assembly.
So also at the state level, education is under the ministry of education, but this ministry at the state level is headed by a commissioner appointed by the executive governor subject to the approval of the state House of Assembly.
In the unit, we are going to discuss the establishment and the functions of state primary education board (SPEB) as well as the various commissions that we have in the ministry of education at federal level.
2.0.
Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) explain the reasons why SPEB is needed (ii) explain the important of NUC.
(iii) distinguish between NUC, NCCE and NBTE (iv) trace the historical development of NUC in Nigeria.
(v) mention the reasons for the establishment of NBTE.
65  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.0 Main Content The state primary education board (SPEB) was established for each state of the federal republic of Nigeria by the federal government by decree 96 of 1993.
It was established to oversee the activities and management of primary school education in their respective states.
There are thirty-seven (37) state Primary Education Board offices in Nigeria, it comprises one (1) in the thirty-six (36) states and one (1) at the FCT.
3.1 Functions of State Primary Educat ion Board (SPEB) The following are some of the functions for the establishment of SPEB in Nigeria (i) Management of Primary Schools Level The statutory role of SPEB is to manage the primary schools in the state.
This is done through co-ordination and supervision of the primary schools and its activities.
Needed assistance is rendered by SPEB to primary schools in needed areas discovered during the supervisory visit to assist the schools and teachers to achieve the school’s objectives.
(ii) Appo intment of Staff SPEB is responsible for the appointment, promotion and discipline of teaching and non- teaching staff on grade levels 07 and above.
The board is also responsible for transfer of teachers within the state and inter-state transfer.
(iii) Disbursement of Fund SPEB disburses fund provided to it from both the federal and state government to pay teachers and other supporting staff salaries and allowances.
SPEB also embarks on capital projects in the primary schools (building of classroom building, administrative blocks, library etc) (iv) Supervisio n of Institutions SPEB carries out supervisory duty either on routine basis, advisory basis, full-time basis special basis or follow-up basis, with the intention to improve the instruction, and maintain high standards of instruction in primary schools and to ensure that primar y schools are run in accordance with the laid down regulations.
Self Assessment Exercise What are the other functions performed by SPEB apart from the ones discussed above?
66  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.2 National Universities Commission (NUC) As fallout of Sir Eric Ashby Commission report on higher education in 1962, NUC was established in that same year.
However between 1962 and now the university system has undergone three developmental phases.
The first phase was between 1962 -1968 when NUC was a part of the Federal Cabinet.
It was an administrative department at this time and it was headed by Head of Department (HOD) to advice the prime minister on university matters.
At this time, the membership was comprised of twelve (12) non-academic members.
Around this time, there were three regional universities (Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, and University of Ife, now Obafemi Awolowo University), and two federal universities (University of Lagos and University of Ibadan) in Nigeria.
The second phase was between 1968 -1974.
During this period NUC still remained an advisory body, but the membership was expanded to seventeen (17) comprising twelve (12) non-academic and five (5) academic members.
During this time, University of Benin was established; this increased the total number of university in Nigeria to six.
The third phase was from 1974 to date.
This phase could be regarded as statutory phase because, it was during this period that NUC was given statutory powers, on the 25th April 1974.
Since then, NUC as been empowered to employ staff, discuss and reward staff, and was given definite roles to play.
NUC increased its staff strength and created professional departments and committees and since then NUC had been one of the statutory agencies of the Federal Ministry of Education.
3.2.1 Functions of National Universities Commission Below are some of the functions of the NUC: (i) Co-coordinating the entire activities in all Nigeria universities, (ii) harmonizing and co-ordinating the development of Nigeria universities to meet the national goals, (iii) advising the government on the financial needs of the universities, (iv) distribution of fund to then Universities when such is made available by the government, (v) setting the minimum, benchmark for Nigerian universities, (vi) ensuring compliance of the Universities to the minimum bench mark set, (vii) collecting, collating, analysing and storing data collected from Nigerian Universities for use in advising the government on the need to expand the existing universities or establish new ones, (viii) setting standards to be followed in establishing universities in Nigeria, (ix) issue operating license to Nigerian universities.
(x) accrediting courses in Nigerian universities, (xi) participating in universities annual estimate hearings to determine the financial need of the universities, and 67  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (xii) keeping of accurate and up-to-date financial records for all local and foreign transactions.
3.3 National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) Increase in school enrolment occasioned by the Federal Government Universal Primary Education Scheme introduced in 1974, brought about scarcity of qualified teachers.
This situation forced the federal government to be directly involved in teachers training programme for the first time by providing buildings (classroom and administrative), equipment, teachers salaries, bursary awards to students-teachers in the department of education in Nigerian Universities, Colleges of Education and Teacher Training Colleges.
The product of teacher training colleges needed higher education, for them to be qualified to teach in secondary schools, this led to increase in demand for higher education in education discipline.
As a result of this, between 1979 -1983, more Colleges of Education was established all around the country which created problems and necessitated a national body to serve as checkmate and to coordinate activities at the Colleges of Education in the country.
This led to the establishment of National Commission for Colleges of Education as one of the agencies under the Federal Ministry of Education in 1989 by Act No.3 of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
3.3.1.1 Functions of National Commission for Colleges of Education(NCCE) The following are among the functions of the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE): (i) to coordinate the activities of all Colleges of Education and other institution of higher learning offering teachers education other than universities, (ii) to advise the federal government through the Minister of Education on all the aspects of teacher education outside the Universities and Polytechnics, (iii) to make recommendations to the government on matters affecting teachers education, (iv) to manage the financial affairs of the colleges of education, (v) to develop scheme of National Certification for the various products of Colleges of Education, (vi) to collect, analyse and publish information relating to teacher’s education, (vii) to set bench mark for Colleges of Education, (viii) to accredit courses in Nigeria Colleges of Education, and (ix) receive grants from the federal government and allocate them to colleges of education according to the laid down formula.
Self-Assessment Exercise Distinguish between the National Universities Commission (NUC) and National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) and their functions.
68  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.4 National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) The National Board for Technical Education was firstly established by Decree No.7 of 1977 but it was later reconstituted by way of amendment Decree No.8 of 1993.
It was established to develop and manage technical and technological education in Nigeria.
This board was one of the agencies of the Federal Ministry of Education to oversee institutions offering technical and technology related courses in Nigeria.
National Universities Commission (NUC) was put in a place to monitor teaching and learning activities in Nigerian Universities, National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) monitors teaching and learning in the Colleges of Education.
National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) was however established to monitor teaching and learning in Polytechnics and Technical institutions in Nigeria.
3.4.1 Functions of National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) NBTE was established to perform some statutory roles, among which we are to: (i) coordinate all aspects of technical and vocational education outside the universities in Nigeria, (ii) make recommendations on the national policy necessary for the training of craftsman and skilled manpower in technical and vocational courses, (iii) advise the federal government on issues relating to all aspects of technical and vocational education outside the University, (iv) set minimum bench mark for Nigerian Polytechnics, (v) make recommendation based on the available data on the need to establish new polytechnics or expand facilities in the existing polytechnics, (vi) review the terms and conditions of service of personnel in polytechnics and make recommendation to the federal Government, (vii) assess the financial needs of polytechnics and technical institutions and advise the government appropriately, and (viii) act as channeling agents by channeling all external aids to polytechnics.
4.0 Conclusion The State Primary Education Board (SPEB) was established by decree 96 of 1993 of the Federal Republic of Nigeria to oversee the activities of primary schools in Nigeria.
SPEB has 37 offices in the country, one office each in a state and one at the federal Capital Territory (FCT) Abuja.
There are also other commissions established by the federal ministry of education to serve various functions, such commissions apart from SPEB are NUC, NCCE, and NBTE.
These commissions perform various regulatory functions in their various capacities.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the reasons behind the establishment of State Primar y Education Boards and the number of SPEB in Nigeria; we equally discussed other commissions/boards under the federal ministry of education.
Commissions discussed are 69  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE National Universities Commission (NUC), NCCE, and NBTE and we are able to see the various roles played by these com missions/boards to ensure that there is improvement in educational system at large.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (i) Justify the need for the establishment of the National Universities Commission (NUC) in Nigeria.
(ii) Primary School in Nigeria can survive without State Primary Education Board.
Do you agree?
7.0 References/Further Reading Ezeocha, P.A.
(1990): Educational Administration and Planning.
Nsukka: Optional Computer Solution.
Ogunu, M. (2000): Introduction to Educational Management.
Benin City: Mbogun Publishers Olagboye A.A (2004): Introduction to Education Management.
Ibadan: Daily Graphics 70  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 4 PLANNING OF SCHOOL PLANT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Objectives 3.1 Planning of school plant 3.2 Principles of school plant planning 3.3 Stages involved in the provision of school plant 3.4 Type of spaces on school site 3.5 Problems of school plant maintenance 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we have discussed the meaning of school plant.
We learnt that it is made up of all physical facilities which include buildings, equipments, furniture, and vehicles etc.
We also looked at the meaning of school mapping as a process of identifying and estimating educational institutions requirements and identify the communities and locations for new schools In this unit however, we shall be looking at the meaning of planning of school plant, the principles of planning school plant and the guidelines to be followed in arriving at logical effective school plant facilities.
We shall also be looking at the various types of spaces expected at the school site, the problems of school plants maintenance and the solutions to the various problems associated with school plants.
2.0 Objectives.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define school plant planning.
(ii) List the principles of school plant planning.
(iv) Mention the types of spaces expected to be provided for at the school site.
3.0 Main content 3.1 Planning o f School Plant School plant is the process of identifying, selecting and acquiring a suitable site for the school to be located, erecting appropriate physical structures that will assist in achieving the educational goals/objectives.
The planning process involves citing, construction, and 71  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE provision of recreation spaces for t he achievement of educational goals/objectives.
It is a comprehensive process in which a suitable site is chosen and adequate buildings are designed with the aim of satisfying the educational needs of the students.
Essentially, school buildings are designed to meet the educational programme requirements and satisfy the students and teachers physical and emotional needs.
The quality of instruction given to the students by the teacher depends on the type of school building and the learning environment.
This is the reason why it is emphasized that the school building should be adequately considered, planned effectively and executed thoroughly to allow for effective teaching and learning.
3.2 Stages Involved in the Provision of School Plant.
The provision of adequate and appropriate school plant is one of the most important responsibilities of school of school administrators.
To ensure that the school plant is relevant, adequate and efficient, the following six (6) stages should be observed: i Stage of adequate survey of needs ii Stage of wise educational planning.
iii Stage of choice of site.
iv Stage of architectural planning.
v Stage of prudent financial planning.
vi Stage of efficient plant construction.
The stages can be in form of a model (see fig.
1).
Each of these stages has its peculiar characteristics and requires specialists from the ministry of education, school architects, educational consultants, accountants, and the engineers.
The model shows the interrelationship of the stages involved in the procurement of school buildings and after the last stage i.e.
building construction, it goes back to the survey to find out if there is need for new project or expansion of the existing one.
Figure 1 Survey needs Educational Planning Choice of site Building Financial Planning Architectural Construction Planning Adapted from Adeboyeje (1994) 3.3 Type of Spaces on School Site There are five (5) major spaces necessary on the school site to enable it carry on the effective activities of teaching and learning.
72  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE i. Instructional Space s: These are spaces set aside for students to receive instruction; they include classrooms, auditorium, gymnasium, library, laboratory workshops, arts room, music room, multipurpose rooms and all other rooms set aside for students to receive learning instruction.
ii Administrative Spaces: These are spaces set aside for administrative offices of the school administrators, other staff members office (academic and non-academic), school counselor’s office, and health centres.
iii Circulation Spaces: These are spaces meant to occupy corridors, lobby, staircases, and other spaces where students can recreate.
iv Spaces for Convenience: These are spaces designed for toilets, bathrooms, cafeteria, kitchen, dormitories, custodian sheds and stores.
v Accessories: These are spaces meant for car parks, relaxation and football/tennis field, volleyball court and tennis lawn.
3.4 Challenges of School Plant Maintenance Several challenges are militating against proper maintenance of school plant.
These account for the reasons why the school facilities are not what it used to be.
Among the challenges, we have: i.
Financial Constraints This problem is very common is the primary and secondary schools.
The head at these levels of education are starved by the controlling and regulatory body with fund to maintain school plant.
Most of them are not even given imprests.
This makes it very cumbersome to procure or maintain the essential equipment and structure needed by the schools.
ii Misuse of School Physical Facilities Some members of the school make use of physical facilities in the school very carelessly, because of the impression they have that it is government property.
This is often common with the way both the students and staff make use of the toilets, lecture rooms, libraries, furniture, fittings, and other school facilities.
iii Mismanagement of Maintenance Funds and Materials School administrators in Nigeria mostly do not spend the allocation for maintenance appropriately.
Money allocated for maintenance is either used for personal purposes or on things other than maintenance.
Left over materials most times are not cared for; they are abandoned after use.
73  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iv Lack of Dedication on the Part of Custodians The custodians are those in charge of the maintenance of the physical facilities in the school.
The attitude of the custodians to work is very poor.
Some of them are absent from work without reasons.
They lack maintenance culture.
Incessant power failure and bureaucratic procedure involved in getting order are other excuses given by the custodians for failing to take proper care of the school plant.
3.6 Solutions to the Challenges of School Plant Maintenance With the present economic situation, the school administrators are not sure of the amount of money to be received from the government as imprest or for maintenance.
The following strategies could be adopted to deal with the challenges of school plant maintenance.
i Community Participation: The need to seek the support of the community where the school is located in solving school plant maintenance problem should not be overlooked.
This is because the community needs must have been considered and given priority at the initial plant planning for the school.
Members of the communit y especially members of Parents Teachers Association (PTA) of the school should be actively involved in solving the problems of school plant maintenance.
The professionals/artisans among them e.g.
carpenters, bricklayers, plumbers, etc should be co-opted as at when needed in the various committees for professional advice or repairs.
ii Creation of Awareness: The government at local, state and federal levels, educational administrators, curriculum planners should embark on enlightement campaign through the media on the need to properly use and maintain the school plants.
iii Setting up of Special Committees: These committees should be set up by the school administrators at the beginning of the term.
The committees will be in charge of maintaining and carrying out any form of repair on the existing physical structures in the school.
iv Regular School Inspection/Supervision: Regular school inspection by the school head or ministry of education will assist in detecting the problems on any of the school plant which if necessary action are taken to remedy them early will prevent total breakdown of the school plant.
v Provision of Adequate Funds: Government/Supervisory agencies should make available to the institutional administrators adequate funds to maintain school plant in schools.
If the government does not make available adequate fund the existing school plant can not be adequately maintained or utilized.
Most of the physical facilities in our schools are 74  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE lying idle and have b roken down because of inadequate funds to maintain them.
4.0 Conclusion The provision of adequate and appropriate school plant is one of the most important responsibilities of the school head.
School buildings are designed to meet the educational programme requirements and to satisfy both the physical and emotional needs of both the teachers and learners.
For this reason, and many more, school building should be adequately considered and planned effectively to allow for effective teaching and learning.
There are five major spaces (instructional, administrative, circulation, convenience and accessories spaces) that must be provided on the school site to enable it carry on effective teaching and learning.
However, there are also some challenges militating against school plant maintenance.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have considered what the school planning is all about.
It is a comprehensive process in which a suitable location in chosen and adequate buildings is designed with the intension of satisfying the educational needs of a community.
So also we examined the basic principles to be followed before a good school plant planning can be done as highlighted by UNESCO (1982).
The basic guidelines in the process of arriving at logical school plant facilities were also mentioned.
We also discussed the various stages involved in the provision of school plants as well as the various spaces that needed to be provided for on the school site.
Various problems facing school plant maintenance such as financial constraints, mismanagement, misuse of school plant facilities etc are discussed as well as the solutions to the identified problems.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What are the factors militating against proper maintenance of school plant in Nigeria?
7.0 References/Further Readings Adeboyeje, R.A (1994).
Management of School Physical Facilities Ibadan: Fountain publishers.
Adeboyeje R.A (1999).
‘A practical approach to effective utilization and maintenance of physical facilities in secondary schools in educational planning & administration in Nigeria in the 21st Century.
Ibadan.
Daily graphics Nig.
Ltd. Adeniyi, I.A and Oguntimehin Y.A (2005).
School plant and mapping in issues in school organization.
Lagos; African cultural institute.
UNESCO (1982).
Accommodating and space for secondary General Schools: Modules I, III & IV Paris;S UNESCO 75  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 5 SCHOOL PLANT AND MAINTENANCE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of school plant 3.2 Management/Maintenance of school plant 3.3 Types of school plant maintenance.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0.
Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to look at the concept of school plant, and how to maintain the school facilities.
Adequate and appropriate school plants are indispensable in educational process.
Proper maintenance of school plant in the schools will not only boost the morale of teachers and students.
It will also ensure that the objectives of the school system are achieved.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) Define school plant.
(ii) Explain/state the meaning of school plant management.
(iii) Give reasons why school plant must be maintained.
(iv) Briefly describe the various types of school plant maintenance 3.0 Main Contents Education is an industry that also makes use of human, material and financial resources like the production industry.
The school plant is the physical facilities available in the school; this can be likened to the capital in production industry.
There is no gainsaying that school plants are necessary ingredients towards achievement of effective teaching- learning activities.
As a result of this, there is need to ensure availability of school plant and it should be maximally utilized and maintained by school administrators and their staff.
Adaralegbe (1983) observed that, inspectors’ reports over the years have indicated that there is abundant evidence of a catalogue of inadequacies in the provision and judicious use of school buildings and instructional materials.
The proportion of increase in students population in Nigeria schools at all levels year-in year-out is much higher than the proportion of increase in the provision of school plant.
76  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Government has not considered the need to expand or put in place new school plant in the some proportion to student popula tion growth.
This has led to over-utilization of the existing school plant because of the pressure on them.
3.1 Meaning of School Plant The term ‘school plant’ embraces all physical structures and infrastructural facilities in the school premises such as the classroom buildings, hostels, halls, offices, libraries, laboratories, instructional materials room, workshops, and equipment used for educational use towards achievement of educational goals.
Olagboye (1998) refers to school plant as school physical facilities which include buildings, equipment, machinery, vehicles, books, electrical infrastructure and water supply.
Durosaro (1998) opines that school plant embraces both permanent and semi-permanent structures on the school premises as well as means of transport, teaching equipment and even the cleaner’s tools.
To Fadipe (1998), school plants are the non-consumable materials in the school for the promotion of teaching of teaching-learning activities.
Adeboyeje (2000) defines school plant as the physical facilities within the school which are basic materials that must be available and considered to be able to achieve the objectives of the school.
The availability of these facilities (in quantity and quality) determines the quality of instruction and students performance in the school’s internally and externally conducted examinations.
To Olutola (2000), school plant embraces both permanent and semi- permanent structures as well as items such as machines, laboratory equipment, the chalkboard and the teachers’ tools.
Self Assessment Exercise From all the definitions provided above, think of an appropriate definition of your own for the term ‘school plant’.
From all the definitions above, school plant covers all facilities required to facilitate teaching and learning.
School plant can also be said to include; buildings (classrooms, hostels, libraries, laboratories, assembly halls, administrative blocks, staff quarters where available), equipment (laboratory and workshop equipment , sporting equipment, instructional teaching materials, typewriters or and computers, printers), machiner y (duplicating and secretarial machines, workshops machines and tools), furniture (classroom and office furniture, hostels and staff quarters furniture), vehicles (official vehicles for school head and principal officers of the school, school bus, water tankers), books (text-books, stationeries, library books), electrical infrastructure (overhead electrical conductor lines, meters generating sets, air conditioners, fans and other electrical fittings) and water supply infrastructure (public water extension to the school, bore holes, deep well, water tanks, either used for teaching and learning or to support those activities.
77  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 3.2 Management/Maintenance of School Plant School plants or school physical facilities are essential aspect of educational administration.
Effective and efficient teaching and learning may not be achieved if schools are wrongly located, or if the classrooms are not well constructed or if the equipment available are over-utilized, under-utilized or are not well maintained.
Management of school plant is a process of planning to meet the need of the school in terms of physical facilities, maintaining and keeping such facilities in good condition at all times so that the facilities can be used as at when needed for teaching and learning.
Adeboyeje (1994) posited that efficient management of school plant is a must to make the school a pleasant, safe and comfortable place for the activities of the community.
One of the important duties of institutional administrator is the maintenance of the school plant.
Maintenance of school plant is an important aspect of school administration.
It is the activities embarked upon by the school administrators to ensure that school plant remain in the same state, the activities include repairs, servicing, painting, greasing etc.
Maintenance can also be those activities put in place to keep and restore the original condition of an item.
When activities such as repairs, servicing, painting, etc., are put in place to keep or restore the original condition of an item, the item is being maintained.
Maintenance of school plant therefore implies the process of or any other activities that involve repairs, servicing, painting, etc and which is been carried out on any of the components of school plant in an attempt to keep or restore it back to the original condition and more importantly to ensure that the school plants are in good shape.
The aim of maintenance of school plant is to ensure that it remains in the best condition for educational instruction at all times.
Miller (1965) observed that construction of new block of classroom and other buildings and alteration to the existing buildings are not the whole housing effort; it also involves the continuing operation and maintenance of the school plant.
It is therefore necessary for school administrators to have the knowledge of operating and maintaining school plants.
School plant maintenance requires maximum cooperation and hard work from the officials of ministry of education, the school administrator, the school staff (academic and non-academic), the students and the community where the school is located.
3.3 Types of School Plant Maintenance Maintenance services of school plant may take any of the following forms: (i) Preventive and Predictive Maintenance: this form of maintenance is aimed at preventing the occurrence of total breakdowns of school plants available for use.
It is also aimed at preventing situations which can put parts of the school plant out of use.
Examples of services under preventive maintenance are timely and regular servicing of vehicles, generating sets, duplicating machines, cutting of trees, periodic repair and painting of classroom building and other school buildings.
78  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) Corrective and E mergency Maintenance: this type of repair is a spontaneous repair c arried out at the appropriate time.
For example, the timely rectification of electrical faults in the school buildings will prevent the possibility of any fire outbreak.
Other activities that could be grouped under this are: replacing leaking pipes, replacing bad plugs, or cleaning of the plugs on time.
(iii) Breakdown Maintenance: this type of maintenance is otherwise known as emergency maintenance; it is that maintenance that aimed at rectifies breakdowns in any component of the school plant.
It involves preparation for a possible but unpredictable breakdown of school plant by procuring in advance spare parts that will be needed in case of breakdown.
Breakdown maintenance is the maintenance carried out after the breakdowns of the school plant which will require heavy monetary outlay.
Ineffective/inefficient preventive maintenance leads to total breakdown and invariably breakdown maintenance.
(iv) Running Maintenance: this type of maintenance is otherwise known as regular maintenance which is carried out when the school plant is still in use.
For example the repair carried out on the school generating set in the day while the lesson is going on and before it will be needed at night, the repair is completed, and the repair/servicing done on the school van during the school lesson period and before the students are ready to be taken back to their various homes/bus stop, the repair is over.
This type of maintenance is referred to as running maintenance.
(v) Shutdown Maintenance: This type of maintenance is carried out only when the operations of the school have been closed or postponed or suspended for a given period of time to carry out the maintenance work.
This type of maintenance is carried out when a major work/repair is to be done in a classroom.
For example, if a windstorm damages a classroom block or if a building collapse in the school, the school may be shut for a specific period of time to carry out major repair on the dilapidated building occasioned by storm.
4.0 Conclusion The achievement of the overall goals and objectives of education revolves around the ability of the learners to utilize the various opportunities offered by the school and its environment.
It is not just imperative that the school should have a functional school plant, it is equally very important that each school plant be well maintained to improve students’ academic performance.
79  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 5.0 Summary In this unit, we are able to see that school plant embraces all infrastructural facilities in the school premises.
It could also be send to mean both permanent and semi-permanent structures on the school premises which also include machines, vehicles, and instructional materials.
Various ways of maintaining school plant was discussed as well as the various types of school plant maintenance 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (i) Give a brief definition of school plant.
(ii) Briefly discuss fire (5) types of school plant maintenance.
7.0 References Adeboyeje R.A. (2000).
‘A practical approach to effective utilization and maintenance of physical facilities in secondary schools by J.O Fadipe & E.E Oluchukwu (eds) educational planning & administration in Nigeria in the 21st century.
Ondo.
National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Durosaro, D.O.
(1998).
School plant management practice in Nigeria.
Trends, Issues and problems.
In A.A Olagboye and J.O Fadipe (eds) management of Nigerian educational project monitoring and school plant maintenance.
Ondo National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Fadipe J.O.
(1998) .“Modern strategies of school plant maintenance” in A.A. Olagboye & J.O.
Fadipe, J.O (eds).
management of Nigerian educational project monitoring and school plant maintenance.
Ondo: National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Olagboye, A.A (1998).
‘Promoting school plant management culture in the Nigerian school system.
In A.A. Otagboye & J.O.
Fadipe (ads) management of Nigerian education project monitoring and school plant maintenance.
Ondo.
(NIEPA) Publications.
Oluchukwu, E.E (2000).
School mapping and planning for efficiency in the school system.
In J.O Fadipe and P.K Ojedele, eds.
management of Nigerian education, personnel administration and quality in education.
Ondo: National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Publications.
Olutola, A.D. (2000).
“Education facilities and students performance in West African School Certificate Examination.
International Journal of Educational Management.
Vol 11:1 80  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Owolabi J.
(1990) Introduction to sc hool mapping.
Mimeograph, Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan 81  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE MODULE THREE SCHOOL RECORDS AND ADMINISSTR ATION UNIT 1 SCHOOL RECORDS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning of School Records 3.2 Meaning of Record Keeping 3.3 Reasons for Keeping School Records 3.4 Classification of School Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 Introduction Record keeping is vital for the proper functioning of any system, be it private or public.
The school system is not an exemption.
Effective teaching and learning can be achieved if proper school records are kept and these records are effectively utilized.
Information is a perishable commodity; hence human beings have to rely on written document to store ideas and impressions.
One of the major challenges in our school system today is record keeping.
Information has to be documented for future use and reference purpose, hence the need to keep school records.
Records are indispensable to a progressive society, whether for government, in schools or any other activities.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) explain the meaning of a school record (ii) explain reasons why records are kept by school administrators (iii) distinguish between statutory and non-statutory records in a school (iv) mention the various school’s records.
3.0 Main Content 82  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The complexity of administration of educational institutions brought about by the explosion in students population at all levels of our education (i.e.
primary school, secondary school and institutions of higher learning) and the need to keep accurate and up-to-date information about the school and the students makes it unavoidable for school administrators to be exposed to ways and means of making their job less stressful.
One way to do this is to know what a school record is, how it can be kept safely and how it can be retrieved easily.
3.1 Meaning of School Records School records could be explained to be a document through which information is transmitted within the school system and between the school and other stake holders in the education sector.
Such document may be in form of letters, reports, pictures, minutes, maps, forms, films, microfiche and soft copy.
School records could be many and varied.
They are to be kept by the generality of schools staff members, head teachers (headmasters/headmistress at the primary school level and principals at the secondary school levels) bursars, heads of departments, coordinators etc.
Mbiti (1974) defined school records as the records that comprises all books, files and other documents containing information relating to what goes on in the school, who is in the school as well as what types of property the school owns.
Eleanor (1984) describes school records as a document through which information is transmitted.
However in the opinion of Akinyemi & Sanni (1999), school records document accurate information about the history, activities, students list, staff list, past and present events or happenings, among others of a school.
Self Assessment Exercise From the knowledge you have just acquired on what a school record is.
Give a precise definition of your own of what a school record is.
3.2 Meaning of Record Keeping A record is the detailed and meticulous account of any phenomenon.
It can be set down permanently in writing on a flat plate, film strip, computer flash/hard disk or any other form that is permanent.
A record serves as a memorial or authentic evidence of a fact or event.
A record if well preserved lasts from one generation to another.
Records are collected and stored by different people for different reasons.
Record keeping is the art, habit or practice of keeping information or fact in such a way or manner that it can be retrieved when needed.
The gate man in some schools have visitor’s book, which could include time-in and time-out book.
The store keeper has an inventory of items in and out of store i.e.
records showing who collects what?
What is left and what need to be replaced?
83  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Keeping of school records should b e seen as an indispensable aspect of effective school management and a way to preserve the tradition of the school, culture and image.
This is because; school records are where all the necessary information about the teachers, pupils and all activities being done in the school are kept.
Therefore, record keeping should not be seen as an undue imposition by the Ministry of Education or any other external agencies.
If we believe in the frailty of man, we must also acknowledge the fact that human memory needs to be supplemented with accurate records.
The school like any other organisation has its own records, which are kept for its efficient management.
The class teacher has his own records, the subject teacher has his/hers, the heads of departments have theirs, the vice principal academic and administration have theirs etc.
The practice nowadays is to store school records in soft copy or computer memory for easy retrieval and accuracy.
This method of keeping records in soft copy or in computer memory is not common in our secondary schools because most of the schools are located in the rural areas where they are yet to adopt the computer culture due to lack of funds and facilities.
As a result of these, our emphasis will be more on the manual storage of school records.
The use of documents in school management has increased as a result of increasing in students’ enrolment.
Parents are all concerned with education industry nowadays and tend to be more serious with a school whether public or private, that has its business properly documented.
Akinwumi & Jaiyeoba (2004) define record keeping as the processes and systems which an institution or individual staff member puts in place for compiling information.
3.3 Reasons for Keeping School Records (1) Record keeping in a school helps the head teacher to give all necessary information about the school, staff and pupils to any inspector from the Ministry of Education or any other regulatory body, (2) Record keeping plays a very crucial role in the life of the students because after leaving the school to further his or her studies, the institution of higher learning may request for any information about his/her previous school.
(3) It enables the parents to know the performance of their children.
The parents may ask the school administrator about the record which shows the performance of their children, (4) Apart from students’ academic performance, it also helps the parents to get adequate information about the children, how regular and punctual they are in the school and the general behaviours, (5) Record keeping helps the government through ministry of education to get adequate information about the school, and 84  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (6) Without relevant re cords, the development of scheme of work, lesson notes, and curriculum cannot be easy as records of past years will be helpful in these processes.
There may also be problems and confusion when compiling students’ results.
Self Assessment Exercise Apart from the above reasons for keeping school records, pause and think of more reasons for keeping school records.
Other reasons why school records are kept are; (7) to ensure strict compliance with the requirement of education law, (8) for planning and budgetary purposes, (9) to save school from unnecessary embarrassment (and legal tussle,) (10) to provide useful information not only for members of the school community but also for members of the public, employers of labour, researchers and government, (11) to aid administrative decision making and efficiency in the school, and (12) to enable the teacher know something about his pupil and through this, be in a better position to assist him/her academically, morally, socially and in addition to be able to predict his behaviour and provide needed information to whoever may need it.
From all the above, it could be concluded that “no comprehensive record, no efficient management” as records are life wires of any school management.
Every teacher or head teacher should therefore cultivate a good record keeping culture, because if the records are kept for a long time, it makes the school head/new school heads to have knowledge about what has happened in the school in the past/before his arrival as the school head, and also enables him/her to make prediction.
3.5 Classification of School Records There are countless numbers of records a school must keep subject to the level of affluence, tradition and status of the school.
School records are conventionally classified into two broad categories.
A. Statutory Records B. Non-Statutory Records A. Statutory Records 85  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE These are documents stipulated by the Education Law of the state.
They are mandatory records which must be kept by each school.
The following statutory records must be kept and maintained by each school and made available for inspection whenever they are demanded.
i.
A certificate of registration, letter of approval or other such document such as law, decree, edict, and gazette published giving legal authority for the establishment of the school, ii.
The log book, iii.
Admission progress and withdrawal register iv.
Class attendance register v. Class dairies vi.
Corporal punishment book vii.
School time-table viii.
National curriculum ix.
Examination syllabus and individual subject teaching syllabus x.
Scheme of work xi.
The education law xii.
The National Policy on Education xiii.
Staff time book xiv.
Students testimonial and transfer certificate book xv.
Stores and Inventory records including all school plant and equipment xvi.
School prospectus xvii.
Site plan, showing evidence of survey, registration and extent of the school card xviii.
School budget xix.
School audit file/book xx.
Staff records xxi.
Continuous assessment book/file xxii.
Individual students file xxiii.
Visitors book xxiv.
Board of governor’s records xxv.
P.T.A.
records xxvi.
School annual report file xxvii.
List of approved textbooks xxviii.
Teachers’ class/attendance registers xxix.
Teachers’ lesson notes xxx.
Staff minute book xxxi.
Staff movement book xxxii.
Students’ honour roll including school projects xxxiii.
School inspection file B. Non-Statutory Records 86  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE They are equally important records but not mandatory.
They are kept to assist the school head and or officers delegated by him in the day-to-day management of the school’s affairs.
The list of such supportive records are in-exhaustive but salient ones include: i.
Records of physical development ii.
Schools’ management board/committee records iii.
Staff registers showing the current staff list including personal details of each staff especially the registration number, qualification with dates, subject specialization, and date of employment, deployment and current salary.
iv.
Staff and students’ clubs and societies v. School sports vi.
Mark book for each class vii.
Record of work book viii.
Staff instruction book/internal circular file ix.
Inventory of school library books x.
Daily roster xi.
Fees register xii.
Account records including the cash book, bank reconciliation/statement, staff advances, auditor’s reports, impress book and record of vouchers.
Self Assessment Exercise Distinguish between Statutory Records and non-statutory Records.
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion, school administrations are to understand reasons why the need for safe record keeping is a must.
They also need to understand the differences between statutory and non-statutory records and what they are meant for.
Good understanding of statutory and non-statutory records by the school head will enable the school head to know the implication of keeping record safely 5.0 Summary In this unit, we have been able to see that record keeping is an essential instrument for effective school management, and that school records are documents through which information is transmitted.
We also looked at the reasons for keeping school records and types of records.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (i) Do you agree that record keeping is a must in educational institution?
Support your position.
(ii) Distinguish between statutory and non-statutory records.
Give at least 10 examples of each.
87  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 7.0 References Akinwumi, F. & Jaiyeoba, A.O.
(2004).
Principles and Practice of Educational Management.
Ibadan; Bash-Moses Printing & Publishing Co. Akinyemi, S.T.
& Sanni, R.I. (1999).
Confidentiality and school records.
In Bolarin T.A.
and Akinpelu B.
(eds).
Effective teaching practice (A slide for students teachers).
Lagos: Ziklay Educational Publishers.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981).
Educational Administration; Theory and Method.Lagos: Izharsons Printers Lahove Karachi.
Eleanor, A.T. (1984).
Administrative Office Management.
The Electronic Office.
New York; John Wileay and Sons.
Mbiti, D.M.
(1974).
Foundations of School Administration.
Nairobi; Oxford University Press.
88  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 2 SCHOOL RECORDS CONTINUED 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Types of Records Kept in School 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/further Readings.
1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we started discussion on school records.
We defined a record as a detailed account of any phenomenon and stated/learnt that record keeping is an art and a habit that a good school head should cultivate.
We also discussed the importance of keeping school records.
Effective and efficient record keeping is important for successful school management.
School records were also categorized into statutory and non- statutory records.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: i. list some vital records in the school ii.
explain the use of the vital records listed iii.
highlight the usefulness of admission register only .
3.0 Main content.
3.1 Types of Records Kept in School 89  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE The area of school record keeping i s one in which bureaucracy is exemplified.
Education laws specify that schools school keep some documents.
Apart from the requirement, school records are a source of information on a variety of sources and interests.
It is not possible to discuss in details the procedure and value of all he statutory and non- statutory records in schools, efforts would be focused on the vital records kept in the school.
i.
The Log Book:-The book is a document containing the comprehensive information about an institution, its establishment and equipment.
It is a historical record of events that have significant effect on schools’ activities.
It is similar to ‘Black Box’ in an aircraft which records all activities, discussions, and problems in the aircraft during a flight.
In case of an accident/air crash, the black-box is the main source of tapping information.
It is also similar to personal diaries, motor vehicle log books where details of movements and repairs are written.
Events happening within the immediate environment of the school, capable of influencing the school life, should be adequately recorded in the school log book.
The type of events that are recorded in the log book include: change of staff, date of vacation and resumption, mid- term date examination dates, visits by important people, special occasions and functions, workshops, sandwich, seminar course attended by teachers, reports of inspectors when they visited the school and so on.
ii.
The Admission Register: - this is a book that shows thre particulars of the registration of pupils enrolled in a particular school.
The book indicates a complete list of all pupils admitted each year with the following details: age, date of enrolment, class into which admitted, previous school, progression in the school, year of withdrawal/leaving indicating reason (s) and the certificate number.
Other information in the admission register are: registration numbers, names in full with surname written first, sex, date of birth, address of the parents or guardians.
Since we have to respect the cultural and religious sensitivities of the students in our schools, their state of origin and religion affiliation should also be entered in the admission register.
The admission register serves as the historical document or reference with detailed records of every child who was admitted into the school right form the year it was founded.
It is also a reference book for tracing the entry, progress and exit of any student admitted into the school.
From the admission register, reliable data which may be needed for the planning and management of the educational system at the local, state and federal levels.
iii Attendance Register: – this is a book in which the presence or absence of pupils in a school is recorded on a daily basis.
It is marked twice a day (morning and afternoon) to show pupils attendance in school.
There is a column in the register which shows whether the child comes to the school 90  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE or absent from the sc hool.
Attendance register enables the school authority to keep track of the p upils more so, that whatever happens to pupils during school hours is the major responsibility of the school.
The register enables the teacher to observe the behavioural traits of the pupils e.g.
punctuality, lateness, absence/truancy.
Data needed by researchers, educational planners and officials of the ministry of education can be obtained from the register and it serves as a valid evidence to save the school from a lot of embarrassment in case of a legal tussle.
iv.. Staff Record: – this is a record that shows the current staff list as well as their personal details, the teacher’s registration number, qualifications, subject specialization, date of employment/deployment and the current salary scale.
v. Record of Work (Diary):- this is a record that shows the teacher’s plan of work in each subject area and the actual work covered weekly, and this is recorded at the end of each week.
The school head is expected to check and be certain that all entries are correctly made.
It helps the new teacher(s) to know the topics taught and from where to take over.
vi.
Staff Meeting Minute Book: - this is a record of every formal meeting of the staff under the chairmanship of the school head.
In this book, the discussion and decisions of the staff are always written and it is kept with the secretary appointed by the members of staff.
vii.
Education Law: - it is a document which contains the education law obtained from the ministry of education.
It contains the objectives and policies of government on education and educational procedures.
This document spells out regulations guiding the management of the schools and education in general.
viii.
School time-table: - this is a comprehensive outline of the school schedules for the week.
Subjects for each day of the week are stipulated in the time-table and period for each subject also appears, so also the time for break.
This is usually in the school head teacher’s office so that the head teacher or any other supervisor can at a glance know what subject is being/to be taught in any class and which teacher is to teach/teaching it at that time.
Self Assessment Exercise Mention other records that school keeps.
Other books are as follows: 91  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE ix Continuous Assessment Cumulative Record:- this is a record of students performance in vario us continuous assessment tests carried out during the course, each year or session.
These scores are computed cumulatively.
x Terminal Record Card:- this is a record where all the assessments of the students are recorded either weekly or fortnightly, or quarterly according to (what the head of the school wants) the school’s policy.
xi Visitor’s Book: - this is a book that contains information about important visitors to the school.
An important visitor is presented with the book during his visit to the school to enter usually the date, and purpose of his visit, some comments on his visit or impression about the school and suggestion if any for improvement.
Apart from important visitor’s/personalities from the society, ministry of education officials who come to the school for important assignments like inspection of the school could also fill the visitor’s book.
xii.
Teachers Lesson Note: - this is the most important record kept by the teacher.
It is sometimes called ‘teachers companion’.
Every teacher is expected to prepare notes for the entire lesson he/she has to teach in all the classes.
This may be on a daily or weekly basis.
It is the duty of the head teacher or his delegates to ensure that such notes are well prepared and in line with the approved scheme of work.
If there is any record which must be properly prepared and kept very well, it is the lesson note because it is an indicator of a possible successful class lesson.
Familiarity with textbooks and many years of teaching experience cannot be a justifiable reason for not writing a lesson note.
A lesson note is the only convincing evidence that the teacher has given adequate thought and consideration to what he/she is teaching.
It is therefore; imperative that every teacher must have his/her lesson notes and make it available for inspection by the school head/delegates and other appropriate authorities as may be demanded.
xiii.
Stock Book: - this is a book containing a record of materials and other equipment supplied or bought by the school.
The school stock includes materials such as: duplicating paper, ink, pad, pencils, pens, typing sheets, which are constantly being used in the school.
xiv Time-Book:- this is a book where teachers attendance is shown, including the arrival and departure time.
It is kept to monitor the time of arrival and departure of each teacher.
The book should be filled by all members of staff twice daily.
The head teacher or appointees should rule-off at an agreed time so that anybody signing below the ruled-line is late for that day.
The name of teacher who is absent could also be written down when the school closes.
92  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE xv.
Teachers Movement Book: - this is a book where teachers’ movements every day are record ed to enable the school management to monitor the movement of teachers during each working day.
The book is usually placed in the principal’s office; it should be filled by any teacher who has obtained permission to go out.
4.0 Conclusion School record keeping is a compulsory process.
Schools are required to keep records on all children, staff to monitor their academic growth and development skills and abilities, progress made in the school, class management and performance amongst other things.
Good record keeping will lead to efficient and effective school management with effective teaching and learning process.
5.0 Summary.
In this unit, we have discussed record keeping in schools and we have identified the vital records in school and have also discussed them.
Among those records discussed are: the log-book, admission register, staff record, record of work, staff meeting minute book, etc.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Mention and discuss ten (10) vital records that must be kept in the school and why?
7.0 References/Further Readings Akinwumi, F. & Jaiyeoba, A.O.
(2004).
Principles and Practice of Educational Management.
Ibadan; Bash-Moses Printing & Publishing Co. Akinyemi, S.T.
& Sanni, R.I. (1999): Confidentiality and school records.
In T.A.
Bolarin and B. Akinpelu (eds).
Effective Teaching Practice (A slide for students teachers).
Lagos: Ziklay Educational Publishers.
Eleanor, A.T. (1984).
Administrative Office Management: The Electronic Office.
New York; John Wileay and Sons.
Mbiti, D.M.
(1974): Foundations of School Administration.
Nairobi: Oxford University Press.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981).
Educational Administration; Theory and Method.
Lagos: Izharsons Printers Lahove Karachi.
93  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 3 THE SCHOOL TIME - TABLE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Meaning of the school time-table 3.2 Types of school time-table 3.3.
Importance of school time-table 3.4 Guideline for constructing the school time-table 3.5 School time- table and school effectiveness 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusions 6.0 Tutor –marked assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 Introduction It is very necessary for a school to have a time-table; this will enable the school to plan in order to ensure orderliness and decorum among the teachers and students.
There must be time for every subject in the school.
Teachers lesson are guided by the school time- table.
In this unit, we are going to define the school time-table, the importance of school time- table, the guidelines to be followed in constructing school time-table and steps to be followed by the school head in order to ensure effective utilization of time through a well planned time-table.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) define school time- table (ii) mention the importance of school time –table 94  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) mention the types of time table (iv) highlight the guideli nes to be followed in constructing a school time-table 3.0 Main Content Time is a precious resource in the school; it must be managed well along with other resources to achieve the school goals.
A good school head must be able to plan the school time table and ensure compliance to it.
There are instances where some school head complain of non-working time-table: This is because the school head or those in charge are not well guided by basic principle of time-table.
3.1 Meaning of School Time- Table School time- table is one of the important records which a school is required to keep.
It regulates the teaching and learning activities in the school.
A school time- table can be defined as a schedule prepared by the school management indicating the subjects to be taught per day and per week, the time allocated for each subject as well as the number of periods per subject, per day and per week in a particular school.
Obi (2001) defines school time-table as a plan of action in which the subjects of the school curriculum are distributed over the teaching periods of the school day of the weeks that make up the terms and academic sessions.
A school time-table can also be defined as a schedule of classroom teaching by subjects per period, per day, designed by a committee or group of people usually time-table committee appointed by the school authority to guide and to regulate the teaching activities in the school.
A normal school time- table is usually divided into eight (8) periods per day and for five days (i.e.
Monday Friday) in a week with each period last for 40 minutes.
There is always an allowance for short and long breaks.
The short break lasts for about 10 minutes and usually it is between 10.00am -10.10am while the long break lasts for about 30 minutes and it is usually between 11.30am- 12.00pm.
The short break is meant for the pupils to stretch their muscle and urinate while the long break is for the pupils to take their refreshment that was brought from home or bought at the school canteen.
However, in some schools, there is only one break period and it is tagged long break but it will be for forty minutes between 11.20am-12noon.
3.2 Types of time-table There are three main types of time –table (i) General Time-Table: this comprises the whole school time-table, the various classes and various levels drawn for the school by a designated staff or committee under the supervision of the school head.
It is usually drawn and displayed in the office of the school head and/the assistant.
General time-table is a comprehensive time-table that consists of all the time-tables of the different classes of the school.
95  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) Class Time-Table: this typ e of time-table is meant for a particular class, it is extracted from the general time t able and it is usually drawn/displayed on the wall, besides the class chalkboard or in a conspicuous place in a particular class.
(iii) Individual Time-Table: this is a time-table prepared by individual student to guide his or her personal reading and learning per day, per week.
It is usually prepared by very few students.
3.4 Importance of School Time-Table The following are the reasons why timetable is a must in a school organization: i. it assists the teachers to know what subject, what time and which class to teach, ii.
it assists the students to know which books and other learning materials to take along to school daily, iii.
it assists the students to know when a particular lesson will be taught and who will teach it, iv.
it eliminates possible clashes in the teaching schedules, thereby preventing unhealthy rivalry among the teachers in the school, v. it ensures maximum utilization of time resources available for subject teaching and learning, vi it assists in the implementation of curriculum through well planned teaching and learning activities, vii it makers it possible to bring together the school subjects and other resources human (teachers), physical facilities (classrooms) and other supporting facilities to achieve the goals of the school, and viii.
it reminds the students of the assignment which could have been ordinarily be forgotten and when to submit the assignment.
3.4 Guidelines for Construction of a School Time-Table The school head must be guided by some guidelines in constructing a school time-table, so also the officer/group of people/committee who is/are in charge of the school time.
If the time-table is to serve the intended purposes, the following guidelines must be followed: i. Allocation of Periods: periods should be allocated to subjects based on their importance.
For example English Language and Mathematics are allocated the highest numeric periods in the week when compared with other subjects because 96  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE these are the basic necessa ry subjects and pre-requisites for any institution of higher learning admission re quirement.
The two subjects feature on the time-table almost everyday.
In addition subject(s) that needed practical sessions are allocated double periods on the time table (i.e.
80 minutes) to allow for effective practical exercise with the lesson.
For example subjects like Fine-Art, Agricultural Science.
Home Economics, Technical Drawing ii.
Scheduling of the Subjects: the nature of the subject will determine when it will feature on the time-table.
Subjects that need full concentration and that involve calculation such as Mathematic and Principles of Accounts should feature in the mornings on the time-table, so also subjects with practical that must be done on the field/in the farm such as Physical & Health Education and Agricultural Science are better in the mornings than afternoon when the weather becomes hot.
However, subjects that require less calculation and mental concentration such as some humanities subjects (Economics, Commerce Social Studies, Literature in English, Christian/Islamic Religion Studies, etc.
can be taught in the afternoons.
iii.
Lengths of the Period: the age of the students and the nature of the subject should be considered to in determining whether a subject will be for a period or double period per day and the number of times such a subject will appear in a week.
However the standard time for a period at the primary school level is 35minutes while it is 40 minutes at the secondary school level.
Double period at the primary school is 70 minutes while it is 80 minutes at the secondary school level.
Self Assessment Exercise i.
What is a school time-table?
ii.
Identify the three types of time-table you know iii.
Apart from the above- listed guidelines in the construction of a school time- table which other guidelines do we have to follow?
Other guidelines are: iv.
Arrangement of the Subjects: the nature of the subjects should be taken into consideration when drawing the time-table.
Subjects that require practical sessions such as Woodwork, Typewriting, Home Economics, and Fine Art should not be fixed close to some subjects that require physical activities such as Physical & Health Education and Agriculture practical.
v. Break Period: there is government regulation guiding the break period.
This is the standard practice and should not be deviated from by any school or the time- table committee.
It is mandatory to observe a break session of about 20-30 minutes before the commencement of afternoon session.
This should be noted when drawing the school time-table.
97  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE vi.
Available Space: the availa ble space in form of classroom, laboratories, library etc.
should be considered b y the time-table committee at the construction stage.
The space determines the number of students that a class can contain.
When there are enough and adequate spaces in the classroom, laboratory, library, etc the task of the time-table committee becomes easier and effective/working time-table could be constructed in such a situation than in a school that is having the challenge of space.
In such a school there will be over crowded classrooms which will have negative effect on teaching and learning of the subject.
vii.
Availability of Teaching Staff: the number of the teaching staff in a school must be considered when constructing a school time-table.
This will be used to determine the school student-teacher ratio (STR) as well as the teachers’ workload.
If the number of teachers required to teach a subject is adequate, this could facilitate efficiency because the teachers will not be overloaded with extra class without any form of incentive as we have in a school where the number of teachers needed to teach a subject is insufficient.
To ensure effective time-table, there must be adequate number of teaching staff for each subject on the time- table.
viii Availability of Supporting Facilities: availability of supporting facilities should be taken into consideration when preparing the school time table.
Supporting facilities such as non-teaching personnel, electricity, water, generator, etc.
These supporting facilities are very important in assisting in the maintenance and security of the school and especially in the teaching and learning of subjects that requires laboratory practical.
In a situation where these supporting facilities are not available or inadequate, it may be difficult if not impossible to teach these practical subjects effectively as it may appear on the time table.
ix.
Number of Available Subjects in the School: the total numbers of subjects on offer by the school will determine how they are allocated in the time-table and their frequencies.
A compulsory subject for example at the school and class levels must be identified and be given priority if the teachers that are to teach them are available.
This will also determine their frequency and time.
3.5 Time-Table and Schoo l Effectiveness The aims and objectives of preparing a time-table for school is to ensure that all the activities scheduled on the time table are carried out as expected and effective teaching and learning take place.
When this is achieved in a school, every staff both teaching and non-teaching are said to be effective.
For a school head to achieve this, he/she must take the following steps: He/She must: i. ensure compliance with government directives and polices in regard to the school time-table ii.
ensure that every teacher conducts his lesion as scheduled on the time-table, 98  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iii.
supervise instructional activities of the teachers to ensure that they adopt the right teaching method, iv.
ensure that every teacher makes the optimum use of the school resources, v. ensure amicable resolution of clashes in the time-table between teachers, vi put in place time-table monitoring committee that will ensure strict adherence to the school time-table, vii.
make the school environment conducive for teaching and learning, and viii.
maintain discipline among staff and students.
4.0 Conclusion An effective school head must be able to plan a working and acceptable time-table for the school.
For subjects to be taught at the right time there must be a time-table which is prepared by the school head/appointed committee/group.
Time table is a schedule of classroom teaching by subjects, per period, per day, designed by the time-table committee to guide teaching activities in the school.
To ensure that all teaching activities come up as at when scheduled, there is need to have a time-table and when the aims and objectives of preparing the school time table are achieved, the school is said to be effective and if otherwise.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of time-table and have highlighted and discussed the various types of time-table: general time-table, classroom time-table and individual time-table.
We also discussed the importance of school time-table in a school organisation, and the guidelines that must be followed to come up with acceptable and effective school time–table.
Finally, in this unit, we discussed time –table and school effectiveness as well as the various steps that could be taken to by the school head to ensure that the objectives of preparing the school time-table is achieved.
6.0 Tutor –marked assignment i.
Explain the concept of school time-table and state the reasons for preparing a time-table for school ii.
Mention and explain the various guidelines for construction of an effective school time-table.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ajayi I.A (2007).
Issues in School Management.
Lagos: Bolabay publishers.
99  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE Idoghor, I.S (2001).
Lecture and C ounsels to Students and Practitioner.
Effurum: Freebo Printing co. Obi, E (2001): Practicum in School Organization.
Enugu: Computer-edge Publishers UNIT 4 SCHOOL BUDGET 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Meaning of a Budget 3.2 Meaning of School Budget 3.3 Purpose of a School Budget 3.4 Methods of Preparing a School Budget 3.5 Importance of School Budget 3.6 Challenges of School Budget in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor –Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In this unit, we are going to look at the meaning of a budget as well as the meaning of a school budget; we will also explain the purpose of school budget.
The various methods of preparing school budget will also be examined in this unit.
We will equally examine the importance of preparing a school budget and look at the various challenges facing the proper preparation and implementation of a school budget in Nigeria 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Distinguish between budget and school budget (ii) List the purpose of a school budget (iii) Explain the various methods that could be adopted in the preparation of a school budget 100  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iv) Highlight the challen ges facing the school heads in the preparing a workable school bud get.
3.0 Main Content The three major financial functions in education – budgeting, accounting and auditing are separate, discrete operations, but they are nonetheless closely interrelated.
They are required activities in providing reliable fiscal information, guidance and accountability in the use of allocated fund.
Budgeting is a process and plan for determining how money is to be raised and spent, as well as document – the budget – developed and approved during the budgeting process.
Money is organised and spent according to an accounting system, using a general ledger that standardizes each spending category and accounts for its use.
Auditing however, is a formal or official inspection of organisations books of account.
3.1 Meaning of a Budget Every reasonable individual and organisation all over the world plans for the present and future.
Part of the plan is to forecast how much an individual/organisation would realize over a period of time as well as how much to be expended.
Forecast of income to be realised and expended is known as budget.
Budget is an itemized summary of estimated or intended expenditure for a given period along with proposals for financing them.
A budget is a two-way proposal i.e.
proposal on income and proposal on expenditure.
This is why budgeting is given special attention in everyday life, because no organisation can perform without income generation and expenditure.
At least, every organisation must source/generate the salaries of its work force.
Budget can also be said to be an analytical financial statement of income and expenditure for a specific period of time.
It can also be said that it is a systematic plan for the expenditure of a usually fixed resource, such as money or time during a given period.
From this point of view time can also be regarded as one of the resources that must be budgeted for just like we budgeted for money.
Budget could be deficit, surplus or balanced.
It could be deficit when the proposed expenditure is more than the proposed income, but when the proposed income is more than the proposed expenditure, the budget is surplus.
However, when the proposed income equals the proposed expenditure, it is referred to as balanced budget Self Assessment Exercise Now that we have knowledge of what a budget is, can you think of what a school budget is?
3.2 Meaning of School Budget Hartman (1999), defined school budget as a “working tool’’ for the successful operation of state and local schools and a significant opportunity to plan the mission, improve their 101  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE operations, and achieve their educat ional objectives.
To Clabaugh (1988), school budget is a financial blueprint for the opera tion of the school for the fiscal year.
Musaazi (1982), in his own view perceived school budget as a financial plan through which educational objectives are being implemented and translated into reality.
Edem (1987) posited that school budget is a statement which describes how various educational objectives outlined for the year or another stated period are to be achieved.
To Adesina (1981), school budget is an outline of the plan for financing the school programme for a given period In a more technical term, school budget is a statement of the total educational programmes for a given unit, as well as an estimate of resources to carry out the programme and the revenues needed to cover those expenditures.
The various definitions show that school budget is concerned with procedures of funding a school system to accomplish its pre-determined objectives over a period of time.
It is an estimated financial standard meant to guide the activities of a school administrator toward the attainment of the aims and objectives of the school system in the financial year.
School budget like budgets of the local governments, state governments and the federal government usually cover a period of one year.
The budget reveals the expected income and intended expenditure for a school.
School budget is usually prepared by the school head though the duty may be delegated to the bursar of the school.
Preparation of a school budget is neither a one-man affair nor one-department affair.
All the departments of the school must be involved in the preparation of the school budget.
The school head has to collect information on various activities and the financial needs of each unit from the units head and heads of departments so as to incorporate it into the draft of the school budget.
In a large school, a budget committee may be appointed by the head of the school to review the various departmental demands and make sure that they are in line with the school objectives.
Involvement of a committee/staff in budget preparation ensures better budgeting and will also serve as encouragement to the staff as well as cooperation of the staff when the budget is to b implemented.
A school head should not monopolize the preparation of a school budget in order for the budget to incorporate the needs of the various departments of the school.
Budget could be vertical or horizontal.
A budget that includes the various income and expenditure estimates by line item, function, and object in a given fiscal year is known as a vertical budget, but when the budget includes current estimates for a given fiscal year compared to prior audited income and expenditures, and a projection of costs, it is horizontal budget.
3.3.
Purpose of a School Budget The following are some of the reasons why there is the need to prepare a school budget: (i) to forecast the activities, services and programmes, which the appropriate school governing body/council has approved for a given period, (ii) to reveal the anticipated revenue for a given period and the source’ 102  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (iii) to show the details o f the intended expenditures for the school for a given period, (iv) to control the official financial activities of the school head be it at the primary, secondary and tertiary institution levels.
(v) to reduce to the bearest minimum the level of wastages or reckless spending of approved funds for various educational facilities in the school, and (vi) to reveal other contributions and pressures on the budget that are expected during the given period.
3.4 Methods of Preparing a School Budget There are various methods of preparing school budget, some of which are discussed below: (i) Line–Item Budgeting/Traditional Method This is a method whereby specific items of revenue and expenditure are listed on line-by-line basis.
In this type of budgeting, proposed revenue and expenditure are done in tabular forms showing the detailed items for the budgeted year and one or two previous years.
This method allows each unit to continue with the implementation of existing projects because it is backward-looking in preparation and it is based on certain increase or decrease in the amounts granted for the preceding year (s).
This method makes the preparation and auditing of budgeting easy and guards against misappropriation of funds.
However, it is lengthy to prepare, it is not good for planning or management, and does not relate to specific projects, because the functions of the expenditures are not explained.
For example, teachers’ salaries are a budget line-item, but it will not explain which teachers, at which schools, teaching which type of students.
(ii) Zero-Based Budgeting (ZBB) Method This method of budgeting was popular in the 1950s and 1960s.
However, unlike the line-item budgeting, it does not take cognisance of the previous year(s) budget.
It began with the assumption that the school system starts out every year on a “clean slate”.
It puts each programme under review every year and its cost is computed from the scratch as if the programme never existed.
With this assumption, every unit has to justify its expenditures annually by relating all costs to system goals and objectives to prevent arbitrary spending.
This method enables school head to allocate resources to programmes based on importance.
Nevertheless, the method is very expensive to implement and could make some 103  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE school administrators exagg erate the benefits of pet projects in order to have them funded.
(iii) Performance Budgeting Method This method of budgeting emphasises the performance of the work to be done.
There are ways of measuring the achievement of each programme.
It is possible to ascertain performance based on each unit of work.
For example, when budget is to be for the construction of a block of classroom, performance budgeting method would not only show the total amount of money to be spent on the whole block, but it would also show the amount to be spent on foundation, setting of blocks, roofing, plastering, wiring, plumbing, painting etc.
This budgeting method is very informative and makes it easy to control school spending, but it requires elaborate accounting, data processing and a lot of paper work.
Inflationary rate could also be a treat to this method.
(iv) Programme Budgeting Method When this method is used to prepare school budget, all the programmes to be executed are provided for, but it will be prepared according to the functions, programmes and activities of each unit/department in the school.
This means that the school budget will be classified according to the various unit/department in the school.
For example, in school, we have units/departments like Business and Vocational, Science and Technology, Language Arts, Humanities, Bursary, Expenditure and Control, General Administration etc.
Programme budgeting method will reveal how funds are distributed for various programmes in the units/departments in the school.
This method reduces the goals and objectives of the school system into specific operations and the method to accomplish them is determined.
However, the type of management information system required may take several years to be developed, thereby, delaying the take-off.
(v) Programme-Planning-Budgeting Systems (PPBS) This is a new method of preparing school budget; it requires the school head to spell out or identify the goals and objectives of a school in measurable terms, lay out alternatives to achieve the stated goals, attribute cost to each alternative, analyse the costs implication, then select and the best method for achieving the goals, and then build the budget around the selected option, and finally feed data back to adjust the cost to results.
This method was first used by the U.S Defense Department during the Vietnam War; it seeks greater efficiency by attaching spending to particular programmes.
The method enables schools to eliminate costly programmes that can waste resources, it also helps the school administrator to identify and define the goals and objectives of the school, on the basis of which appropriate programmes are designed to achieve such goals and objectives.
However, while this method sounds ideal, it is too complex for developing 104  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE countries such as Nigeria w here there is inadequate data to plan with and shortage of skilled manpower Self Assessment Exercise Mention and explain the various methods of preparing a school budget.
Which one would you as a school head prefer?
3.5 Importance of School Budget The role of school budget in administration of a school cannot be overestimated.
Some of the importances of the school budget are listed below: (i) School budget is an instrument of planning and control in the school system because it specifies the financial procedures through which the goals and objectives of the school system can be achieved.
(ii) School budget also serves as an instrument of control because it is an established standard against which performance of the school system is evaluated.
(iii) School budget makes it easier to ascertain the extent to which the school has achieved its aims and objectives through implementation of various programmes budgeted for in a year.
(iv) School budget also reveals possible inability of the school to implement/achieve some of the programmes budgeted for as this will enable appropriate action to be taken to ensure its implementation/achievement in the future.
(v) School budget encourages teamwork among the staff as they work together to achieve common goals and objectives.
(vi) School budget also enhances the coordination of the activities of the school by giving financial direction to the various activities being carried out by the school for the purpose of achieving the aims and objectives of the school system.
3.6 Challenges of School Budget in Nigeria There are various challenges facing the preparation and implementation of school budget.
Some of them are identified and explained below: (i) Lack of Accurate Statistical Data.
In order to make a working budget by the school, there must be available accurate data of past projects and budgets.
In some schools, these records are not properly kept while they are not even available in some schools.
This makes it difficult for school heads to make accurate financial projection for the school programmes, and with this problem preparation and implementation of budget in a school is difficult.
105  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE (ii) Political Instability.
Th e unstable political environment and policies, as well as lack of continuity in all government policies in Nigeria give room to poor economy.
This lead to reduction in allocation of funds to the public schools which have adverse effect on the preparation and implementation of the school budget (iii) Inflation.
This is a situation whereby too much money buys fewer goods; inflation is a persistent fall in the purchasing power of citizens of a country.
This situation makes the preparation and implementation of school budget so difficult in Nigeria where the accurate rate of inflation cannot be ascertained.
As a result of this, some budgeted projects may not be implemented due to rising cost of materials.
This makes the preparation of school budget fault y and makes the implementation very difficult.
(iv) Dependence on Government Grants.
The largest part of revenue for public school’s in Nigeria comes from the government, while very insignificant financial resources come from other sources and internally generated revenue.
Government gives both recurrent and capital expenditures to public schools.
Whenever, there is a delay in the allocation, the implementation of the budget becomes so difficult to the extent that schools at times are grounded, and in Nigeria nowadays, government allocation is unpredictable, especially with the trend of economic situation in the world, where prices of oil which is the major source of revenue for Nigeria is fluctuating.
This and other problems had reduced school budget to a mere paper work and no more a working budget.
(v) Insincere School Heads.
Most of the school heads in Nigeria are not sincere, and are greedy, most of the times; they misappropriate the allocated funds and also commit other forms of indiscipline such as embezzlement in their schools.
This will jeopardize the attainment of objectives of the school system as contained in the school budget.
(vi) Lack of Orientation for School Heads.
Most of the school heads are not given induction training on assumption of headship position.
They only use their residual knowledge gained when assisting their school head to prepare their budget when they eventually become the school head.
To those who do not assist before assuming headship position, this is a serious threat.
Most school heads give this function to their bursars or other delegated staffs; this practice does not give room for realistic budgeting.
4.0 Conclusion Budget has been defined as an analytical financial statement of income and expenditure for a specific period of time.
It can also be said that it is a systematic plan for the expenditure of a usually fixed resource, such as money or time during a given period.
However, a school budget is a statement of the total educational programmes for a given 106  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE unit, as well as an estimate of res ources to carry out the programme and the revenues needed to cover those expenditur es.
Budgets are used to forecast and reveal the anticipated revenue for a given period and the source, to control the official financial activities of the school head among others.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of budget as well as the meaning of school budget, and we can see that budget may be for either the whole country, or an organisation, but the school budget is a budget meant for a school.
However, whether a budget or a school budget, it is specifically for a period of one year.
We also looked at the purpose for preparing a school budget as well as the various methods that could be adopted for preparing a budget.
We also examined the various challenges facing the preparation and implementation of budget.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (i) Define a school budget.
(ii) Explain the various challenges facing school administrators in the preparation of a school budget and suggest possible solutions.
7.0 References/Further Readings Adesina, S. (1981).
Some Aspects of School Management, Ibadan and Abeokuta: Educational Industries Ltd. Clabaugh, R. E. (1988).
The preparation and administration of the budget, in S. Adesina, and E.O.
Fagbamiye, (eds) Educational Administration.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Edem, D. A.
(1987): Introduction to educational administration.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books ltd. Hartman, W. T. (1999).
School district budgeting.
Reston; V. A.
Association of School Business Officials International Musaazi, J. C. (1982): The theory and practice of educational administration.
London: Macmillan Publishers’ ltd. 107  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE UNIT 5 DISCIPLINE AND SCHOOL ADMIISTRAT ION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning of discipline 3.2 Meaning of indiscipline 3.3 Purpose of school discipline 3.4 Causes of indiscipline in school 3.5 How to control indiscipline in schools 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Discipline in Nigerian schools has long been an issue that is of main concern not only to the government at all levels but also to educational practitioners (private and public).
The parents are also not left out when the issue of discipline in school is brought up for discussion.
To a very large extent, good schools are usually known for their high level of discipline among their students.
The frequent occurrence of students’ unrest in Nigerian Universities, Polytechnics and Colleges of Education is a reflection of the level to which discipline has degenerated.
It should be noted that year-in year-out, people change with time.
Students are influenced by their peers and immediate environment.
The type of influence in students life is manifested in their relationship with schools and environment.
Discipline during the pre-colonial era, is not the same with the same during the colonial era and even not the same at the immediate post-colonial era and now.
2.0 Objectives 108  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE At the end of this unit, stude nts should be able to: (i) define discipline.
(ii) mention some acts of indiscipline among the secondary school students.
(iii) discuss the various causes of indiscipline in Nigerian schools.
(iv) suggest what school head can do to ensure discipline in schools.
3.0 Main Contents Oniyama and Oniyama (2002), posited that a problematic child is the one who cannot adjust to the socially acceptable norms of behaviour and consequently disrupts his/her own personal academic progress, the learning efforts of his/her classmates and interpersonal relations.
Thus problematic children denote children with unacceptable behaviour.
They are found in many schools at various levels influencing other students negatively and constituting a major source of worry to all educators.
The citizens of the country are governed by the laws of the land.
These laws also affect all agencies, whether government, inter-ministerial, parastatals or education for the purpose of promoting peace, justice and equity.
It is evident that the purpose of law is to ensure orderliness in the society.
So also the school system needs a conducive teaching and learning environment that is peaceful at all times for a functional and productive school work.
3.1 Meaning of Discipline The word ‘discipline’ is derived from the Latin word ‘discipulus’ which means to learn.
It means group of people are bound by rules and regulations towards attainment of a common goals.
The term discipline is construed in different forms such as; discipline as punishment, discipline as control, as training, and as learning.
Umukoro (1997) posited that discipline is training or learning by an individual to attain self-control, self-will, self- direction to act in a proper or right manner at the right time and place without being deceived or forced to do so.
Idoghor (2001) opines that discipline implies procedure and rules, which lead a child to manage his/her behavioural patterns by self in order to be able to act in a socially acceptable manner.
Olagboye (2004) has also posited that discipline may be considered as the readiness and ability of students and teachers to respect the constituted authority, observe and obey school rules and regulations, and to maintain a high standard of behaviour necessary for the smooth running of the teaching - learning process.
Discipline as conceived by various authors suggests, it is an internal state of the mind where in an individual thinks and acts in the proper manner anytime, anywhere, without anybody urging him/her to do so.
This is against the discipline that comes forcefully by an external factor so that the individual carries out the intended behaviour.
The first form of discipline is the positive type of discipline, while the second form of discipline resulted from external control or force is the negative type of discipline.
The willingness of the students to obey school laws and regulations is absent in the second form.
Therefore that type of discipline is not desirable.
The best form of discipline advocated 109  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE for the school is self control that lea ds to good behaviour without any external force.
It is this type of discipline that can fost er stability in the schools thereby paving the way for qualitative education.
3.2 Meaning of Indiscipline Indiscipline is the direct opposite of discipline i.e.
lack of discipline.
Dittimiya (1995) defines indiscipline as any act that does not confirm to the societal value and norms.
Otu (1995) also defines it as unruly acts and behaviours, acts of lawlessness and disobedience to school rules and regulations.
From the above, it can be inferred that indiscipline refers to behaviours which are capable of impeding the achievement of the goals set for institutions.
In other words, indiscipline is a violation of school rules and regulations.
Indiscipline is capable of obstructing the smooth and orderly functioning of the school system.
It can be summarized that indiscipline is any form of mis-behaviour which the student can display in the following ways; general disobedient to constituted authority, destruction of school property, poor attitude to learning, abuse of seniority, immoral behaviour, drug abuse, stealing, lateness, truancy, dirtiness, quarrelsome, use of abusive language, rudeness etc as the forms of indiscipline are inexhaustible.
Indiscipline can also be said to be the unwillingness of students and or teaches to respect the constituted authority, observe, and obey school rules and regulations, and to maintain high standard of behaviour conducive to teaching learning process and essential to the smooth ruling of the school to achieve the educational objective with ease.
It can also be said that an act of indiscipline is when the students and or teachers refused to obey the rules or a code of behaviour set aside by a constituted authority within the educational system/school.
Self-Assessment Test (i) Distinguish between discipline and indiscipline (ii) Highlight 15 types of indiscipline common to secondary school students 3.3 The Purpose of School Discipline 1.
To facilitate and enhance the attainment of the goals of the school, 2. to create a conducive teaching and learning environment, 3. to produce cultured citizens who will have respect for themselves and others in the society, 4. to help individuals to do the right thing all the time without any compulsion, 5. to produce loyal and respectful citizens, 6. to help student to develop and have respect for the constituted authority, and 110  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE 7. to facilitate the creation of a disciplined society where people of various interests learn free and apply the nor ms and values of that society.
3.4 Causes of Indiscipline in Schools There are many factors responsible for indiscipline acts among the students in the schools.
The behaviour of the students usually reflects the society in which they are brought up.
Since they are products of the society, they mostly exhibit and share in its values and belief.
The causes of indiscipline in the schools are therefore traceable to the parents at home, the headmaster/headmistress or principal, the teachers in the school the peer group, the government and the general public.
1.
The Parents Many parents have abandoned the responsibility of taking care of their children.
Some parents have little or no time for the children who are left in the care of house helps; hence many of these children pick up the behaviour of the house helps which they exhibit in schools.
Many parents are not disciplined too in terms of moral behaviour.
Some of them embezzle money in their various places of work; tell various lies in their places of work.
Everybody knows it is easier to copy bad behaviours than good ones.
As the children watch their parents’ bad behaviour, they practise them and with time they become perfect at putting up such bad behaviours.
(ii) The School Staff The attitude of teachers to work, teachers’ appearance (i.e.
dressing) and illicit relationship with students, failure to prepare for class work/lesson, teachers involvement in examination malpractices, cultism, illegal school fees collection/other fees, poor learning environment and the like breed indiscipline among the students.
(iii) The School Head The inability of the school head master/mistress or principal to provide or influence or have a say in the provision of adequate facilities, employment of qualified staff, encouragement to teachers, and admission of students with poor academic standard into schools may degenerate into various acts of indiscipline on the part of the students whenever there is need to show their disagreement with some of the policies of the school head.
(iv) The Peer Group Once a child is of school-going age, he/she spends more time with peers outside the family where the child is exposed to various pressures from the peers and with this, there is the possibility that the child may be more influenced by the peer’s character where he/she spends most of the time than home where less of the child’s active time is spent, because the peers are in the same age bracket with him.
The pressure from the peers as 111  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE well as students characteristics play s a strong role in shaping children’s behaviour.
Some peers have formed gangs who recruit members from among children who have experienced adjustment problems at school and at home.
Gangs/peers often create problems for schools by using drugs, encouraging violence among their members and b y participating in illegal acts.
(v) The Government Frequent change of government’s educational policies, poor funding, lack of sustainable plans, distorted value system, corruption, embezzlement, favoritism, nepotism, records alteration and all negative actions by government agencies, office holders, and mass media, breed indiscipline among the students and in the society as a whole.
The policy that affects the principle and practice of education in Nigeria seem to lack consistency.
Different administrations always come out with different policies instead of consolidating the existing ones.
This inconsistency does not only affect teachers’ morale and it also affects students’ interest and wastes their time.
Frequent strikes as a result of inconsistent police waste human and material resources which can also lead to students’ protests and demonstration.
Self Assessment Exercise Why is it that indiscipline is on the increase among Nigerian adolescents?
3.5 How to Control Indiscipline in the Schools Indiscipline is an act that can better be prevented than corrected.
The following pre- cautions are necessary to prevent occurrence or re-occurrence of indiscipline acts among the students in schools.
i.
Basic Managerial Skill – The school head should acquire basic managerial skill through training, and seminars to improve the technical skills of the school head as well as to improve the knowledge of school head administrative techniques, and procedures in order to foster and enhance discipline in school.
ii.
Appointment of Dedicated Trained Teachers – Dedicated professional trained teachers are those with professional competence who can bring the desired level of professionalism into teaching by ensuring that students comply with the laid down rules and regulations and ensure that culprits are brought to book.
iii.
School Head Should Leading by Example - Indiscipline can be reduced in schools when the school heads and other staff members are disciplined and those who are not disciplined among them should be ready to lose the right of forcing others to be disciplined.
112  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE iv.
Prioritize Student W elfare – The school management must give high priority to the welfa re of the students by providing health centres, sports facilities, conducive learning environment, water, regular electricity and meet with the students on regular basis to know their needs, and let them know why some of their demands may not be met if any.
v. Establishment of Guidance and Counseling Service – This service will promote discipline in schools because the service will assist the maladjusted students in the areas in emotional, social and personal adjustments.
This will reduce frequent indiscipline acts among the students.
vi Teaching of Moral and Religious Studies – In schools where we have moral and religion education, more emphasis should be laid on it and where there is none, it should be introduced.
This will instill the fear of God in the students, draw them more closer to God, and make them more obedient than before vii.
Establishment of Parent – Teachers Association – This is a forum where the school head can brief the parents and guardians of students on various acts of indiscipline found among the student and issues related to disciplinary matters could also be discussed.
This forum will allow parents and the school staff to join teach together to enforce discipline on the students.
4.0 Conclusion To achieve self control, there is need to behave according to the laid down rules and regulations in school setting.
Everyone in a given society needs to take part in the act of discipline and discipline should not be seen as a negative force and fire fighting activities.
It should be a habit in the home, classroom and even in the society.
Parents should be disciplined and be good models to their children, the society should equally be disciplined; bribery and corruption at various levels should be checked so that children will not imitate this bad habit from our generation, since the students are the product of the society and leaders of tomorrow.
If Nigeria is to progress and advance into a developed nation, then our present youths must be disciplined.
The home should lay the foundation, the school builds on it and this is transferred into the society where they will eventually function as disciplined adults.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed the act of discipline and indiscipline.
Discipline has been viewed as training by an individual to attain self-will and to act in the right manner at the right time and place, without being forced to do so, while indiscipline is the opposite of discipline.
Examples of acts of indiscipline found among the children in schools are 113  EDU412 COURSE GUIDE mentioned; the causes and what ca n be done to prevent indiscipline among the students have also mentioned and discussed.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Identify various reasons why the act of indiscipline is more pronounced in Nigerian educational institution than the act of discipline.
7.0 References/Further Readings Dittimaya, I.A (1995).
Discipline in schools in V.F.
Peretomode eds.
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research Publishers Ltd. Idoghor, I.S (2001).
Lecture and Counsels to Students and Practitioner.
Effurum: Freebo Printing co. Oniyame, H.O and Oniyama, E.A (2002).
Introduction to Sociology of Education.
A Social Psychology Analysis.
Warn: COEWA Publishers.
Otu, D.O (1998).
Handbook for Headmasters of Primary Schools.
Samaru, Zaria; S. Asoukome and Co. Umukoro, J.O (1997): Parents’ Supreme Duty and the Society: A Book of Inspiration and Guidance of developing children.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers.
114
