 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 760 COURSE TITLE: HISTORY METHODS 1 EDU 760: History Methods Course Developer: Dr. (Mrs.) Agnes.
U. Okai Niger State College of Education, Minna.
Course Writer: Dr. (Mrs.) Agnes.
U. Okai Niger State College of Education, Minna.
Course Editor: Prof. Mezieobi, Ken A.
National Open University of Nigeria, Owerri Study Centre Programme Leader: Dr. Ibrahim O. Salawu School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Dr. Ibrahim O. Salawu School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
2  TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE I: MEANING, SCOPE, NATURE AND CONTENT OF HISTORY Unit 1: The Meaning and Scope of History Unit 2: Nature and Content of History Unit 3: The Importance of Teaching and Learning History MODULE II: DIMENSIONS OF PLANNING IN TEACHING Unit 1: Differentiation between Aims and Objectives in Planning Teaching Unit 2: Formulating Behavioural Objectives Unit 3: Syllabus versus Scheme of Work Unit 4: Writing Lesson Plans MODULE III: METHODS/STRATEGIES OF TEACHING AND THE PLACE OF RESOURCE MATERIALS IN TEACHING HISTORY Unit 1: Methods and Strategies Differentiated Unit 2: Methods of Teaching History I (Lecture and Demonstration Methods) Unit 3: Methods of Teaching History II (The Discussion, Project and Dramatic Methods) Unit 4: Method of Teaching History III (The Questioning Technique and Simulation) Unit 5: The Place of Audio-Visual Materials in Teaching History MODULE IV: EVALUATION IN HISTORY Unit 1: Meaning and Importance/Purpose of Evaluation in History Unit 2: Techniques of Evaluation in History I (Essay, Objective Questions) Unit 3: Techniques of Evaluation in History II (Teacher- Made Test and Observation) 3  Module One: Meaning, Scope, Nature and Content of History Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of History 3.2 The Scope of History 3.3 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings Unit I: The Meaning and Scope of History 1.0 Introduction Man and time have not been static.
Often, there have been changes in man’s activities as a result of challenges posed by his environment and his fellow man.
These challenges are either between man and his environment or between man and man.
The challenges are also enormous.
Although, the activities might have happened in the past, they usually left behind relics, traces and marks that become subjects of collection and interpretation.
Bards, witch doctors, folk singers, poets, etc., who were responsible for preserving and recounting stories of the past activities of any particular person, tribe or society can be regarded as historians as they have been dated back to the earliest human societies.
History has been developed as a discipline.
In this unit you are going to examine the meaning and scope of history.
An overview of history as a subject is paramount in understanding the methods of teaching it.
A good grasp of the basic elements of history will give one a better footing in teaching it.
Hence, there is the need to have an overview of the meaning and scope of history.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define history and identify the key elements embedded in the definition.
(ii) Identify the scope of history.
4 (iii) List the sources of historical knowledge.
3.0 Meaning and Scope of History 3.1 Meaning of History Various authorities have given different definitions of history.
We shall examine few of these definitions.
Barnes (1962), defined history as ‘the sum total of human activities of the past’.
In the same light, Marwick (1981) defined history as ‘an interpretation of past human activities’.
According to Collins Essential English Dictionary (2006), history is ‘a record or account of past events and developments.’ Similarly, Crabtree (1993) quoting his graduate advisor said that ‘history is the story about the past that is significant and true.’ Two words of importance in the last definition of history are ‘significant’ and ‘true’.
By significance, history is to tell a story about the past which captures the essence of an event while omitting superfluous details.
The historian analyzes evidences and presents only that which is significant as perceived by his particular world view.
At the same time, the historian in narrating his story is influenced by the community of historians who must have approved his narration.
Therefore, historians tend to tell stories which reflect the values of the society in which they live.
The other aspect of the above definition is truth in any historical narration.
Truth depicts any evidence that is supported by facts.
Wikipedia organization (2009) defined history as ‘the study of the past, focused on human activity and leading up to the present day.’ One key factor in these different definitions is that history deals with man’s past activities which includes his political, economic and social activities that have subsequent impact on the present.
A working definition of History can therefore be given as the study of man and his environment in relation to past activities.
3.2 The Scope of History The scope of history has naturally led scholars to divide the past into manageable pieces for study.
There are a variety of ways in which the past can be divided, including chronologically, culturally, and topically.
These three divisions are mutually exclusive, and significant overlap is often present, as in ‘the Aba Women Riot of 1929’.
It is possible for historians to concern themselves with specific and very general locations, times and topics although the trend has been toward specification.
Traditionally, the study of history was limited to the written and spoken word.
However, the rise of academic professionalism and the creation of new scientific fields in the 19th and 20th 5 centuries brought a flood of new information that challenged this notion.
Archaeology and other social sciences now provide new information including theories about the past activities of man.
Hence, history is often classified under either the humanities or the social sciences and can be seen to be a bridge between them, incorporating methodologies from both fields of study.
Some traditional historians questioned whether these new studies were really history, since they were not limited to the written word.
A new term, prehistory, was coined, to encompass the results of these new fields where they yielded information about times before the existence of written records.
In general, the sources of historical knowledge could be primary, secondary or tertiary and has been divided into three categories: written, oral and what is physically preserved (archeology).
Historians often consult these three categories.
Primary sources are also referred to as original sources and are created at the time under study.
These sources include: documents, recordings /eye-witness accounts, diaries, etc; secondary sources are writings and interpretations resulting from primary sources while tertiary sources are compilations of both primary and secondary sources such as library catalogs, bibliographies and directories.
As a discipline, history encompasses many subfields and ancillary fields, which include chronology, genealogy, historiography, paleography and cliometrics, among many others.
3.3 Self-Assessment Exercise (i) Define history in your own words.
(ii) List and explain the sources of history.
4.0 Conclusion Despite the various definitions of history, two key words are very important: ‘past’ and ‘man’.
These words are crucial in the study of history.
This means that history deals with the study of man’s past activities.
Anything that man did in the past becomes history; it has to be so because it is those past activities that culminate into the present condition or situation of man.
Man, therefore needs to study those past events in order to understand his present circumstances.
6  5.0 Summary In this unit, we are able to identify the various meanings of history, and we are able to conclude that history deals with the study of man’s past activities which has influence on the present circumstances of man.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment History has been defined from various angles.
How far is this statement true?
7.0 References/Further Readings Barnes, H. E. (1962).
A History of historical writing (2nd ed.).
New York: Dover Publications.
Carr, E. H. (1990).
What is history?
(New Ed ed.).
London: Penguin.
Crabtree, D. (1993).
The importance of history.
http://www.mckenziestudycenter.org/society/articles/history.html Gooch, G. P. (1913).
History and historians in the nineteenth century.
London: Longman, Green & Co. Marwick, A.
(1989).
The nature of history (3rd ed.).
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Answers.com (2009) Meaning nature & scope of history.
http://in.answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20070221021307AA3In7I Osokoya, I. O.
(1996).
Writing and teaching history: A guide to advanced study.
Ibadan: Oluseyi Press Ltd. Vansina, J.
(1965).
Oral traditional: A study of historical methodology.
London: Aldine Publishing.
Wikipedia Organization.
(2009).
Historiography.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historiography Wikipedia Organization.
(2009).
History.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History 7 Module 1 Unit 2: Nature and Content of History Content 4.0 Introduction 5.0 Objectives 6.0 Main Content 3.1 The Nature of History 3.2 The Content of History 3.3 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In our last unit, we were able to give various definitions of history and we noted that history deals with past events of man that have impact on his present situation.
In this unit, we shall examine the nature and content of history.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Explain the nature of history.
(ii) Identify the content of history.
(iii) Differentiate between history and other social science disciplines.
3.0 The Nature and Content of History 3.1 The Nature of History The nature of history has to do with the entire process of historical studies.
This includes a clear definition of history, its laudable objectives, its presented facts and evidences and its sources to prove its authenticity.
History, by its very nature, tells us more than just about the past; it argues for an ideology or a world view.
History involves explanation and the study of the inter-connection between events.
Some other social sciences or humanities subjects are differentiated from history by the way it is studied and written.
The study and writing of history involve evidences from available data which can be gathered orally, written or archaeologically.
8  3.2 The Content of History Like any other course in the curriculum of a programme, history has its content areas.
These areas include historiography, world history for a defined period of time, regional and local history of a selected group of people (e.g.
African and / or Nigerian history or even the history of any of the ethnic groups in Nigeria) as well as history methodology.
For this course, the two content areas are historiography and history methods.
The former deals with the meaning, nature, scope, content and sources of history; dating in history and perceptions in historical writings while the latter, on the other hand, deals with methods and strategies of teaching / learning history, instructional materials / resources for teaching history including evaluation in history.
The two basic issues involved in historiography are the study of the:  Development of history as an academic discipline over time among various groups of people.
 Academic tools, methods and strategies in the teaching and learning of history.
3.3 Self-Assessment Exercise (i) Discuss the nature of history.
(ii) Identify the content areas of history.
4.0 Conclusion The historian is not concerned with flimsy or general statements about man in a given society.
He is concerned with the actual, particular, unique and different experiences which have befallen man in a given society in the past.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have examined the nature of history which deals with the entire process of historical study by way of explaining historical events through presentations of facts and evidences to proof its authenticity.
This can be done through oral, written and archeological studies.
9 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify the significant difference between history and other social science disciplines.
7.0 References/Further Readings Barnes, H. E. (1962).
A History of historical writing.
2nd ed.
New York: Dover Publications.
Carr, E. H. (1990).
What is history?
New Ed edition.
London: Penguin.
Crabtree, D. (1993).
The importance of history.
http://www.mckenziestudycenter.org/society/articles/history.html Gooch, G. P. (1913).
History and historians in the nineteenth century.
London: Longman, Green & Co. Marwick, A.
(1989).
The nature of history.
3rd ed.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Osokoya, I. O.
(1996).
Writing and teaching history: A guide to advanced study.
Ibadan: Oluseyi Press Ltd. Vansina, J.
(1965).
Oral traditional: A study of historical methodology.
London: Aldine Publishing.
10 Module 1 Unit 3: The Importance of Teaching and Learning History Content 7.0 Introduction 8.0 Objectives 9.0 Main Content 3.1 The Importance of Teaching and Learning of History 3.2 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last two units of module I, we were able to define history, examine the nature and content of history.
In this unit, we shall be looking at the rationale for the teaching and learning of history.
In other words, can anything worthwhile be gained from continued research into historical events?
History, seen as the study of the past, is an integral part of many education systems across the world.
Many countries spend huge amounts of money and resources to uncover their past.
Every year new and new historical sites are uncovered, excavations on those sites are conducted and the results are studied by archeologists throughout the world.
But have we gained anything worthwhile from research into the past?
As a result of this question, we shall be dealing with the reasons for studying history.
This will clarify doubts as to the significance of teaching and learning history to you as an individual and to the society at large.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) List the importance of teaching and learning history.
(ii) Explain the importance of teaching and learning history.
3.0 The Importance of Teaching and Learning History The importance of teaching and learning of history cannot be over-emphasized.
History as a discipline offers the avenue for understanding the very nature of the society, its values and problems.
This is as a result of the fact that societies are not static, but dynamic.
Man is 11 concerned with the nature of his society in terms of his past activities that serve as an indicator of the present and future.
One’s history is always his beginning.
In other words, man’s genesis is always traced through history as it explains to him how he came to be, who he is and why he is where he is today.
Hence, no society can get along without the knowledge of its history.
History is to the community, what memory is to the individual.
A man suffering from loss of memory could be said to have lost his sense of identity.
Similarly, a society without history is doomed as such society will lose its sense of identity and bearing.
In other words, there will be no development since there is no knowledge of the past, no understanding of the present and no projection into the future.
History offers students the skills of critical thinking, reasoning and analysis of issues and development in all ramifications.
It is only through historical reflections that one develops a particular view of the world and it allows one to appreciate his / her own views and the views of others that may seem different.
The study of history does not only broaden students’ knowledge and appreciations of the world, but offers the basis of constructive interaction and objectivity in analyzing issues.
Knowing your history alongside developing your character brings your personality into alignment with yourself.
This way, you become more confident in expressing your own views and ideas and you become more receptive to learning from others.
By cultivating the healthy habit of constant reflection, one is less likely to repeat past errors.
3.1 Self-Assessment Exercise Suggest more importance of teaching and learning history.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of teaching and learning history cannot be overemphasized because history enables the society and the individuals within that society to take their bearings, to place themselves in relation to their own past and in relation to other societies, and thus, establishing sense of identity.
A society always finds its ‘soul’ (that is what binds that society together) in the study of history.
12  5.0 Summary In this unit, attempt has been made to explain the importance attached to the teaching and learning of history as a discipline.
We have been able to establish the fact that without history an individual and the society will loose its focus and bearing, thus, putting the society in a state of confusion.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Enumerate and explain the importance of teaching and learning history in the school curriculum.
7.0 References/Further Readings Barnes, H. E. (1962).
A History of historical writing.
2nd ed.
New York: Dover Publications.
Carr, E. H. (1990).
What is history?
New Ed edition.
London: Penguin.
Crabtree, D. (1993).
The importance of history.
http://www.mckenziestudycenter.org/society/articles/history.html Gooch, G. P. (1913).
History and historians in the nineteenth century.
London: Longman, Green & Co. Marwick, A.
(1989).
The nature of history.
3rd ed.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Osokoya, I. O.
(1996).
Writing and teaching history: A guide to advanced study.
Ibadan: Oluseyi Press Ltd. 123 Help (2009) The importance of history http://www.123HelpMe.com/view.asp?id=23553 Vansina, J.
(1965).
Oral traditional: A study of historical methodology.
London: Aldine Publishing.
13  Module Two: Dimensions of Planning in Teaching Unit 1: Differentiation between Aims and Objectives in Planning Teaching Content 10.0 Introduction 11.0 Objectives 12.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Aims 3.2 Meaning of Objectives 3.3 Types of Objectives 3.3.1 Instructional objectives 3.3.2 Content objectives 3.3.3 Process objectives 3.3.4 Behavioural objectives 3.3.5 Performance objectives 3.3.6 Expressive objectives 3.3.7 Domain-referenced objectives 3.4 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In our previous module we discussed the meaning, nature and importance of history.
In this module we shall examine all facets of planning in teaching history.
Planning entails detailed study of the syllabus now referred to as curriculum, drawn by specialists, to meet the demands of the society.
Attempt will be made to look at the basic elements of planning in teaching from the breakdown of the curriculum to smaller units until one gets to the level of classroom teaching.
To start teaching without definite objectives in mind is like traveling to an unknown place without direction.
The aims and objectives of a lesson give an indication of what is expected 14 of the pupils to learn by the end of the lesson.
This also guides the teacher on the right path.
The meaning of ‘aims’ and ‘objectives’ is one common area of misunderstanding among teachers and students.
Some teachers use aims and objectives interchangeably to mean the same thing.
Often, learners ask whether ‘aims’ mean exactly the same thing as ‘objectives’.
The fact is that they are basically two different things.
Educationists have tried to differentiate between the concepts of aims and objectives.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Identify the differences between aims and objectives in teaching and learning.
(ii) Explain why aims and objectives are necessary in planning for teaching of history.
(iii) State objectives from a given aim in history.
3.0 Aims and Objectives 3.1 Meaning of Aims Aims and goals are synonymously used.
Aim is seen as a broad statement of intent and the first step about planning a programme.
It is a general statement representing an idea or aspiration.
In other words, an aim is a non-specific guideline and relates to overall policy or strategy rather than detailed specification.
Ndubisi (1981) defined aims as “overall, foreseen ends of schooling that give direction to activities and motivate behaviour”.
In curriculum and instructional studies, aims are usually seen as very general statement of goals and purposes.
Aims are therefore, general targets of education, which are derived from the needs, problems and philosophy of society.
For instance aims of education may include the development of National consciousness, social and moral abilities of the child, etc.
From our example, it could be seen that aims and goals are ‘global’; they are ‘overall’; they are ‘vague’ but they give indication of what the schools should be doing.
3.2 Meaning of Objectives Objectives are statements often of quantifiable operational nature, indicating events from which mastery of desired activities may be correctly inferred.
It is a statement describing a proposed change in a learner.
i.e.
what the learner is to be like when he has successfully 15 completed a learning experience.
It is in fact a description of a pattern of behaviour expected from the learner after being exposed to a learning process (instruction, educational treatment or stimulation).
Objectives should be expressed in terms of conduct or behaviour expected in relation to skills, ideas or values involved.
Objectives are derived from the aims of education.
While aims are general, objectives are more specific and definite.
Objectives of education are therefore, subsets of aims of education as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: An Aim and its Related Objectives Aim Objectives To develop national consciousness.
(a) To recite the national pledge.
(b) To sing the national anthem.
(c) To defend the course of this nation.
The first column shows one of the general aims of education while the second column illustrates the objectives that are derived from the aim.
Table 1 shows that objectives are specific, definite and clear while an aim is broad and general.
3.3 Types of Objectives There are different kinds of objectives, namely.
(a) Instructional Objectives (b) Content Objectives (c) Process Objectives (d) Behavioural Objectives (e) Performance Objectives (f) Expressive Objectives (g) Domain-Referenced Objectives 16 3.3.1 Instructional Objectives These define the specific and immediate outcomes of particular teaching-learning situations.
They ordinarily take the form of a list of statements describing the intended learning for students.
For example: By the end of the NOUN history programme, the students should be able to: (i) Identify major problems of teaching history in Nigeria.
(ii) Discuss intelligently major issues affecting the teaching of history in Nigeria.
3.3.2 Content Objectives Content objectives focus on the acquisition of facts, principles or concepts associated with the topic under study.
Examples: (i) To identify the major causes of military intervention in Nigerian political history.
(ii) To explain why casual sex is a threat to human health.
3.3.3 Process Objectives These are objectives that centre on treatment of content or an action suggested by the topic at hand.
Examples: (i) To evaluate the potential impact of computer on society.
(ii) To propose ways of improving community services to handicapped persons.
3.3.4 Behavioural Objectives According to Ndubisi (1981), behavioural objectives “are statements of educational outcomes which can be measured or observed in the learner”.
Examples: (i) To define history.
(ii) To identify the nature, scope, and content of history.
(iii) To discuss the rationale for teaching and learning history.
3.3.5 Performance Objectives These are variations of behavioural objectives.
In this case, a performance objective is supposed to include four components: what is to be done (actively/behaviour), who is to do it 17 (learner), when is it to be done (time), and what level of proficiency is to be accepted (criteria for acceptable performance).
Examples: (i) After listening to the guest speaker from the academia, the students will be able to identify through discussion four out of the five advantages of archaeological studies.
(ii) After the debate on “Is oral source of history reliable?’’ the students should be able to decide which side presented the best argument.
3.3.6 Expressive Objectives Here the learning activity is specified, but the actual outcome is open-ended.
This is because behaviour does not necessarily reveal all the feelings or attitudes that grow out of teaching- learning situations.
In addition, learning is highly personal.
Due to individual differences among learners, what is actually learned is both diverse and varied.
Examples: (i) To visit the super market and discuss what was of interest there.
(ii) To watch a football match and discuss on the best player.
3.3.7 Domain-Referenced Objectives One way of thinking about learning is to imagine that it occurs in three areas of domains: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor.
The cognitive domain refers to the acquisition and use of knowledge.
The affective domain is concerned with feelings and attitudes while psychomotor domain focuses on the development of physical skills.
Examples: By the end of lesson students should be able to: (i) List the causes of the rise and fall of Mali Empire (cognitive).
(ii) Discuss the popular leader in the rise of Mali Empire (affective).
(iii) Draw the map of West Africa showing the areas covered by Mali Empire (psychomotor).
Self Assessment Exercise (i) Give two different definitions of ‘aims’ by different authors.
(ii) Identify one broad aim of education in history and generate 3 objectives from it.
18  4.0 Conclusion Aims and objectives are major ingredients needed for setting a work plan in the teaching- learning process.
Aims and objectives give the teacher the right frame of mind in any teaching activity in the classroom.
Consequently, a teacher needs to get the clear meaning of aims and objectives in the process of teaching.
5.0 Summary Aims and objectives are related, but differ in terms of the period set for achieving either of them.
While aims have long term effect, objectives have a short term or immediate effect.
It is also discussed in this unit that objectives are derived from aims of education which in turn are derived from the needs, problems and philosophy of the society.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Differentiate between aims and objectives in the teaching-learning process.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau.
Garvey, B., & King, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ndubisi, F. A.
(1981).
Curriculum objectives for effective teaching.
Onitsha, Nigeria: Africana Educational Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Osokoya, I. O.
(1996).
Writing and teaching history: A guide to advanced study.
Ibadan: Oluseyi Press Ltd. Mager, R. F. (1997).
Preparing instructional objectives.
Atlanta, GA: The Center for Effective Performance.
19 Module II UNIT 2: Formulating Behavioural Objectives Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Behavioural Objective?
3.1.1 Behaviour 3.1.2 Conditions 3.1.3 Criteria for acceptable performance 3.2 Advantages of Stating Behavioural Objectives 3.3 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit we were able to explain the meaning of aims and objectives, and we differentiated between the two concepts.
We also identified different types of objectives in relation to teaching and learning.
In this unit we shall dwell on formulating behavioural objectives in the teaching-learning process.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, the you should be able to:- (i) Define behavioural objectives (ii) List some reasons for stating objectives behaviourally (iii) Formulate at least five behavioural objectives (iv) Identify the right verbs to use in stating behavioural objectives.
3.0 Formulating Behavioural Objectives 3.1 What Is Behavioural Objective?
20 Most of the time, some objectives are stated in a vague manner.
Such objectives are neither observable nor measurable.
For effective teaching and learning, objectives should be behaviourally expressed.
Ndubisi (1981) defines behavioural objectives as statements of educational outcomes which can be measured or observed in the learner.
When statements of outcomes are observable, they are said to be behavioural.
Behaviours, according to Mager (1997), are overt actions.
He argues that one cannot see learning or thinking but can see its manifestation.
He further argued that the learning that cannot be measured is not learning.
Therefore, for any behavioral objective to be complete, it must possess three characteristics.
These include.
 Behaviour  Condition  Criteria for acceptable performance.
3.1.1 Behaviour Behavior is that part of instructional objective that shows what the learner should do.
It is always accompanied by an action verb.
The objective needs to be written in terms of the student and in terms of some performance that can be seen, changed, modified and measured.
Important point to note here is that the behaviour must be observable.
Let us look at some examples below: ‘The student will be able to identify through discussion’.
‘The student will be able to evaluate……………..’ Words that can be used in writing behaviour objectives include to write, recite, list, identify, differentiate, solve, construct, compare, etc.
3.1.2.
Conditions It is that part which describes the condition under which the behaviour should be performed.
In other words, what is it that you will do, or the student is expected to do or learn in order to change or modify his behaviour?
For instance, is he to listen to a guest speaker, or observe a drama or listen to a debate, etc?
What are the conditions for example:  After listening to the Guest Speaker from the Hospital, the students will be able to identify through discussion….. 21   After the debate on ‘should education be free at all..…’ the student will be able to decide..… 3.1.3.
Criteria for Acceptable Performance This refers to the minimum acceptable level of proficiency that students should show that they have attained that level.
In other words, how will you know if students are achieving up to an appropriate standard?
How much of the learning activity should be learned by each individual in the class?
When no criteria are set, it is assumed that each student is expected to perform at the 100% level at all time.
Let us look at the examples below:  After listening to a Guest Speaker from the academia, the students will be able to identify through discussion four out of the five advantages of oral source of history.
 After the debate on “Should history be on Nigeria school curriculum at all levels?” the students will be able to decide which side presented the best argument.
Although each of these items might help an objective to be more specific, it will not be necessary to include all the three in each objective.
3.2 Advantages of Stating Behavioural Objectives There are some advantages that can be derived both by the teacher and students from writing objectives in behavioural terms.
Some of these advantages include:  When behavioural objectives are written in clear, definite, measurable or observable manner, it gives the teacher a clear sense of direction.
Thus, it prevents the teacher from wasting time on irrelevant ideas and statements that often emanates from their lack of clear sense of direction.
 The choice of appropriate teaching materials can be most validly made when objectives are written in behavioural terms.
Therefore, it guides the teacher on the type of teaching materials to use in the course of teaching.
 Also, behavioural objectives have added advantage of directing the teacher as to what type of method or instructional strategy to be used in that lesson.
 For the teacher to be able to know whether his lesson objectives have been achieved or not, it is necessary for the objectives are clear and specific.
Thus, evaluation becomes easy where objectives are written in behavioural terms.
22  Well-stated Behavioural objectives set the scope and limitation of what is to be taught.
It therefore, prevents teachers from teaching too many facts in a short time thereby making the lesson over loaded with facts.
 Also when teachers for genuine reasons absent themselves from classes, other teachers are at great loss on how to handle their classes appropriately.
However, if the objectives of the lesson to be delivered by such teachers are clearly and specifically written, substitute teachers can conveniently and effectively handle such class.
 When objectives are clear and definite, the learner who knows the objectives of the lesson can study by himself to achieve such objectives.
When objectives are clear, specific and meaningful, it challenge the students to go ahead on their own to try to achieve them.
3.3 Self Assessment Exercise Select a topic of your choice and formulate 2 behavioural objectives.
4.0 Conclusion Putting a target by the teacher to the learner on behavioural objective is necessary in planning a teaching.
The teacher is encouraged to think and plan in advance to see to the achievements of the set out objectives.
For instance, the objective which says ‘student should be able to explain the role of Bashorun Gaha in the collapse of Oyo Empire”, indicates the subject matter involved (i.e.
Bashorun Gaha) and the behaviour desired (i.e.
explaining).
Stating instructional objectives in this way ensures that the instructional plan not only covers all the essential materials (i.e.
information, concepts, ideas, skills, and values) to be learned but also specifies the level of understanding (i.e.
recall, interpretation, analysis, application and evaluation at which the material must be learned.
5.0 Summary This unit has dealt extensively on the need to always state objectives behaviourally.
Effort should always be made by teachers to state their objectives behaviourally for the benefits attached to such objectives are numerous to a teacher.
It is believed that at the end of this unit you must have learned a new dimension involved in the teaching and learning processes.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Itemize the characteristics of behavioural objectives.
23 7.0 References/Further Readings Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi:Kenya Literature Bureau.
Garvey, B., & King, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ndubisi, F. A.
(1981).
Curriculum Objectives for Effective Teaching.
Onitsha, Nigeria: Africana Educational Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Osokoya, I. O.
(1996).
Writing and teaching history: A guide to advanced study.
Ibadan: Oluseyi Press Ltd. Mager, R. F. (1997).
Preparing instructional objectives.
Atlanta, GA: The Center for Effective Performance 24 Module II Unit 3: Syllabus versus Scheme of Work Content 1.1 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Syllabus 3.2 Factors to be Considered when Planning Syllabus 3.3 Scheme of Work 3.4 Unit Plan 3.5 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we dwelt on the ways through which we can draw out behavioural objective.
In this unit, the syllabus and scheme of work in relation to teaching and learning process shall be discussed.
A clarification of these two concepts will go a long way in enhancing your effectiveness in teaching.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to:- (i) Define syllabus and scheme of work.
(ii) Differentiate syllabus from scheme of work.
(iii) List the advantages of developing a scheme of work.
3.0 Syllabus and Scheme of Work Conceptualized 3.1 Syllabus The term syllabus is fast loosing its place as an educational term.
In a modern educational thinking, people no longer really worry about the term.
Its use has been engulfed in the umbrella term: curriculum.
This notwithstanding, we need to know what syllabus means.
The term syllabus generally refers to a list of topics or a collection or outline of what pupils or students should study in a given year or specified period of teaching.
It is a brief outline of 25 the ground to be covered in a course of lessons or lectures.
Strictly speaking, it is that aspect of the curriculum that lists topics to be taught in a given course or programme.
The outline of the syllabus tends to guide the teachers on the extent of work involved in a particular class.
It must be pointed out, however, that the term syllabus can only be discussed meaningfully in terms of content consideration in the curriculum.
It is part of the curriculum and not the curriculum itself.
There are two types of syllabus: (i) School syllabus, which refers to specific programme of study in the school.
The topics to be covered are listed in the subjects.
(2) Examination syllabus, which refers to a number of topics outlined specifically for examination purpose, it is usually given by examination bodies such as WAEC, NECO, etc.
3.2 Factors to be Considered When Planning Syllabus In planning syllabus either for schools or examination, the planners have to consider a number of factors: Among these are:  The philosophy of the nations.
 The age ability of the learner.
 Learning materials.
 Resource persons (teachers).
 Sequential arrangement.
After these considerations, the topics should proceed from known to unknown.
For instance in history, begin with local history before embarking on topics that are external to the pupils’ immediate environment.
3.3 Scheme of Work Looking at the meaning of syllabus, the class teacher does not contribute very much in its preparation.
The teacher is only involved at the level of the scheme of work, unit and lesson planning.
When the syllabus is sent to Schools by the authorities concern, there is the need to divide the yearly content of the syllabus into definite amount of work that may be covered per term.
If, for instance, there were thirty topics to be covered for the Senior Secondary School history for the three years, there would be about ten topics per year.
When the history teacher splits the year’s work into portion that may be studied every term, we have what is called 26 ‘scheme of work’.
The Scheme of work therefore, describes the content and learning experiences that should be treated every term of the academic year.
The scheme of work is very important to the teacher.
It guides him in planning the unit of instruction and consequently the daily lessons in line with the time available for each topic in the term.
It also guides supervisors of schools in determining the efforts of the schools and teachers towards meeting the societal demands on them.
The scheme of work is aimed at serving the following purposes:- - As a guide to the teacher - For organizational convenience - For keeping records of what is taught and what ought to be taught.
3.4 Unit plan When the scheme of work for each term has been outlined, it becomes necessary to breakdown further the term’s work into smaller potions that can be treated within a period of a few weeks.
The unit plan can therefore, be described as the organized sequence of content and learning experience derived for an analysis of the term’s scheme of work designed to be covered by the class within a period of about two to six weeks.
It is worth noting that the topics selected for the unit plan must be homogenous.
That is, they must be inter-related.
The idea of unit suggests some kind of unity or relationships of the concepts being taught or learned.
3.5 Self Assessment Exercise (i) List and explain some factors to be considered when drawing up a syllabus.
(ii) As a teacher-to-be, what do you stand to gain in preparing your scheme of work?
4.0 Conclusion From the foregoing, we can see that syllabus refers to a list of topics to be taught and learned for a specific period or programme, while scheme of work is drawn from the syllabus and broken into pieces to be taken on a termly basis.
The unit plan is a further breaking down of work to be done.
5.0 Summary Syllabus and scheme of work are documents necessary for any meaningful teaching to take place at any level of our educational system.
While the syllabus is usually prepared by the 27 examining body, the scheme of work is prepared by the teacher.
The benefit of preparing a scheme of work to teacher is highlighted in this unit.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Breakdown into scheme of work the topic: ‘The history of Nigeria from independence’ in your syllabus.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau Garvey, B., & King, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ndubisi, F. A.
(1981).
Curriculum objectives for effective teaching.
Onitsha, Nigeria: Africana Educational Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Osokoya, I. O.
(1996).
Writing and teaching history: A guide to advanced study.
Ibadan: Oluseyi Press Ltd. Mager, R. F. (1997).
Preparing instructional objectives.
Atlanta, GA: The Center for Effective Performance, Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well.
28 Module II Unit 4: Writing Lesson Plans Content 1.2 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Lesson Plan?
3.2 Importance of Lesson Plan 3.3 Components of a Lesson Plan 3.3.1 General information 3.3.2 Objectives 3.3.3 Instructional materials 3.3.4 Entry behaviour 3.3.5 Set induction 3.3.6 Instructional procedure 3.3.7 Evaluation 3.3.8 Students’ activities and assignment 3.4 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we have seen the meaning of syllabus and scheme of work whereby topics drawn are expected to be covered by the teacher.
The yearly plan (syllabus) is divided into termly plan, weekly plan and daily plan or lesson plan.
Our main focus in this unit is the lesson plan.
2.0.
Objectives By the end of this unit students should be able to: (i) Describe what a lesson plan is.
(ii) List and explain the components of a lesson plan.
(iii) Prepare a lesson plan on a given topic in history.
29 3.0 Lesson Plan 3.1 What is a Lesson Plan?
The lesson is the lowest or most specific level of instructional plans.
It is derived from the analysis of the unit plan.
Thus, when the unit plan is broken down into smaller topics and sub-topics, we have the lesson topics, which can be used to plan a lesson.
A lesson plan could therefore, be described as a planned organized amount of subject – matter and learning experiences that the teacher will communicate to the learners with details of how instruction will take place within a lesson period.
Lesson planning is an important activity for a teacher.
It supplies guidance and feelings of confidence to the teacher in the art of teaching.
If lessons are planned, both learning and teaching becomes simplified.
Some benefits the teacher derives from planning his lesson could be seen below.
3.2 Importance of Lesson Plan A lesson plan is useful for the following reasons:  The teacher follows correct steps and procedures in teaching.
 Time is not wasted in the class since the period of one lesson must be used to cover the day’s lesson topic.
 Meaningful objectives are pursued in the lesson.
 Activities are related to the content and objective.
 Instructional materials are adequately selected and utilized.
 Proper evaluation procedures and tools are used.
 A substitute teacher can use the lesson plan to hold on the class.
 The most important content is identified for learners.
3.3 Components of a Lesson Plan 3.3.1.
General Information This includes the subject, date, time of the day, length of the lesson.
It equally includes the title of the lesson to be taught the class and in some cases the average age of pupils in the class.
3.3.2 Objectives This is called performance, terminal or behavioural objectives.
It is a statement describing what the learner will be able to do to show that learning has taken place.
A clear statement of 30 objective will enable both the teacher and the learner to evaluate or assess the learning experiences.
3.3.3 Instructional Materials (Teaching Aids) These are the resources or materials used to facilitate teaching and learning inside and /or outside the classroom.
Things like maps, charts, pictures, artifacts, etc.
3.3.4.
Entry Behaviour Entry behaviour was formerly referred to as previous knowledge.
It is the information or ideas pupils possess about the topic they are about to discuss.
Entry behaviour as it affects lesson preparation is only that knowledge that will help students to learn more successfully if they are reminded of it.
3.3.5.
Set Induction It is referred to as introduction or initial activities.
These are evaluative or learning activities provided at the beginning of the lesson either to motivate or to lay good foundation for the new lesson.
Good and well planned set induction encourages pupils to participate in the lesson since children will be anxious to see what will follow next.
Short stories, drilling questions, etc could introduce a lesson.
3.3.6.
Instructional Procedure It is referred to as presentation or development of the lesson.
This is a clear statement of what is to be taught in the lesson and how it is to be taught.
This serves as the main- body of the lesson, where the subject matter or main points of the lesson are presented to the pupils.
Instructional procedure comes in stages varying from one to five stages or steps depending on the area of coverage.
Various activities could also form part of the instructional procedure where pupils or students are involved in different activities to confirm the achievement of lesson objectives.
3.3.7.
Evaluation Though Evaluation is something that is continually going on during the lesson, it is also good to have some exercises in evaluation towards the end of the lesson.
At this stage, the teacher can briefly list the things he plans to do, the questions he is going to ask or the problems he is going to pose to test the students’ knowledge.
31  3.3.8.
Student’s Activities and assignment It is good to give assignments regularly.
It should not only be restricted to English and Mathematics teachers.
In the lesson plan you should briefly describe the assignments by indicating what exactly you want them to do.
3.4 Self Assessment Exercise As a teacher, why is the writing of a lesson plan important?
4.0 Conclusion The lesson plan is the most important tool for a teacher at the point of teaching in the class.
This can be likened to a hoe for a farmer to be on the farm.
Without a lesson plan, a teacher is already planning to fail.
The success of a teacher in the classroom begins with a good lesson plan.
5.0 Summary In this unit, attempts have been made to examine the concept of a lesson plan, identify the importance of a lesson plan to a teacher.
We have also listed and explained the components of a lesson plan.
A good lesson plan is surely the first step in the right direction as far as teaching and learning is concerned.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Draw a lesson plan on a topic taken from the History Curriculum for a class to be at the a Senior Secondary Class One.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau.
Garvey, B., & King, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ndubisi, F. A.
(1981).
Curriculum objectives for effective teaching.
Onitsha, Nigeria: Africana Educational Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Osokoya, I. O.
(1996).
Writing and teaching history: A guide to advanced study.
Ibadan: Oluseyi Press Ltd. 32 Mager, R. F. (1997).
Preparing instructional objectives.
Atlanta, GA: The Center for Effective Performance.
Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well.
33 Module Three: Methods/Strategies of Teaching and the Place of Resource Materials in Teaching History Unit 1: Methods and Strategies Differentiated Content 1.3 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Differentiation between Methods and Strategies 3.1 What is Method?
3.2 What is Strategy?
3.3 Principles of Selecting Methods and Strategies 3.3 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the first two modules, we have been able to define history, examine the scope, nature and content of history, and itemize some dimensions of planning to teaching, which are aims, objectives, syllabus, scheme of work and lesson plan at the classroom level.
In this module attempts will be made to examine some methods of teaching history and the place of resource materials in the teaching of history beginning with this unit.
As there are many teachers, so there are many methods and strategies for teaching history.
No matter a teacher’s level of qualification, he/she must master the use of certain methods and strategies for effective teaching and learning to take place in his or her class.
This unit will avail you an opportunity to differentiate the two concepts.
34  2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to (i) Identify methods and strategies.
(ii) Differentiate between a method and a strategy.
(iii) Enumerate some principles of selecting methods and strategies in teaching history.
3.0 Differentiation between Methods and Strategies 3.1 What is a method?
A method is a way of doing something.
It is an approach which a teacher adopts to impart a subject matter to a group of learners.
This definition can be represented by a simple triangle thus; Teacher Method Learners Subject Matter Figure 1: Interrelationship among the Teacher, Learner, Subject Matter and Choice of Method.
The above figure shows the interrelationship among the teacher, learners, the subject matter and choice of method.
At the top of the triangle is the teacher, and the two other angles at the base are the learners and the subject matter.
Each of the angles of the triangle is very important to the selection and development of a method.
For a method to be successful, it must bring about positive relationship between the teacher, learners and the subject matter.
Hence, the three variables cannot be separated.
3.2 What is Strategy?
Whatever method a professional teacher decides to adopt in classroom teaching, there are many techniques which a teacher can use to effectively improve on the methods.
The sequential order through which these techniques are utilized can be described as strategy.
In other words, strategies are special techniques organized and employed in a systematic way by the teacher to make any method unique in his/her way.
That is to say that two or more teachers may be using the same method but different strategies.
A strategy, therefore, is a 35 teaching device or technique adopted by a teacher to teach a lesson.
Strategies include the use of films, games textbooks, library study, project, field trips, and simulation.
Strategies act as a stimulus to learning.
In any teaching activity, a teacher has to use several strategies within a teaching period to make his classroom lively.
3.3 Principles of Selecting Methods and Strategies.
It is important for any teacher to consider certain factors or principles before selecting any teaching method or strategy.
This is usually done for a teacher to achieve ultimate success.
The following must be considered when selecting a method/strategy.
 Suitability of method to the learner and the topic.
 The interest of the learners must be considered.
 Teacher’s mastery or technical-know-how of the method/strategy to be adopted.
 Both the chronological and mental age of the learners must be considered.
 The period of the lesson must be taken into consideration in selecting any method/strategy.
 Give room for individual differences in the class.
3.4 Self Assessment Exercise Differentiate between method and strategy.
4.0 Conclusion Methods and strategies are important tools in the hand of the teacher.
It is noted that no matter the level of a teacher, he/she needs to identify certain methods and strategies of impacting his/her subject matter to the learners.
In any teaching activity, three variables are of great importance, namely: the teacher, the learner, the subject matter.
All three are connected by a method and strategy.
5.0 Summary In this unit attempt has been made to define methods, strategy and to examine some of the principles to be considered in selecting whatever method/strategy to be employed by the teacher.
36  6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Methods and strategies are important tools in any teaching activity.
Discuss.
2.
As a teacher, what factors guide you in selecting any method/strategy of teaching?
7.0 References/Further Readings Alaezi, P. (1990).
Groundwork of teaching strategies.
Nigeria: Fab Anieh (Nigeria) Limited.
Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau.
Banks, J.
A., & Clegg, A.
A.
(1977).
Teaching strategies social studies: Inquiry, valuing and decision making (2nd ed.).
Massachusetts: Addison – Wesley.
Callahan, J. F., Clark, L. H, & Kellough, R. D. (1997).
Teaching in the middle secondary school (6th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Clark, L. H., & Starr, I. S. (1995).
Secondary and middle school teaching methods (7th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Fadeiye, J. O.
(1995).
A textbook of social studies for NCE and undergraduates.
Garvey, B., & Krug, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in the secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Nacino-Brown, R., Oke, F. E., & Brown, D. P. (1982).
Curriculum and Instruction: An introduction to methods of teaching.
Hong Kong: Macmillan.
Robinson, A.
(1980).
Principles and practice of teaching.
London: George Allen and Unwin.
37  Unit 2: Methods of Teaching History I (Lecture and Demonstration Methods) Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Lecture and Demonstration Methods 3.1 Lecture Method 3.2 Principle to follow in the use of Lecture Method 3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Lecture Method 3.3.1 Advantages of Lecture Method 3.3.2 Disadvantages of Lecture Method 3.4 The Demonstration Method 3.5 Principles of Demonstration Method 3.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of Demonstration Method 3.6.1 Advantages of Demonstration Method 3.6.2 Disadvantages of Demonstration Method 3.7 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Some educationists tend to classify methods of teaching in many ways e.g.
traditional versus modern methods, teacher-centered versus learner-centered method.
However, it is important to note that the skilful teacher uses as many methods as possible because of the fact that there is no single method, which will be regarded as best for every teaching situation.
The success in using these methods depends on the purposes, the ability and nature of the students in the class and the subject matter that will be treated.
Thus, it is better to have a knowledge and mastery of some of the formal methods of teaching irrespective of their classification.
In this unit, we shall be looking at Lecture and Demonstration methods of teaching History.
38  2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit students should be able to (i) Define lecture method.
(ii) Define demonstration method.
(iii) Identify how to use both methods in teaching history.
(iv) Enumerate the advantages and disadvantages of lecture and demonstration methods.
3.0 The Lecture and Demonstration Methods 3.1 Lecture Method This method is also called one-way-oral communication method.
About, 90% or more of the time is spent by the teacher talking.
The teacher presents information, ideas, facts and knowledge probably collected from books and expantiates on the topic while students listen and take notes simultaneously.
It is a kind of verbal presentation of subject-matter with the students at the receiving end.
Sometimes, the teacher dictates salient points, or repeats the points for emphasis.
The teacher, at times, uses charts, filmstrips, projectors, and other visual aids to illustrate points.
The method is commonly used in higher institutions, but could be modified for use in the secondary schools.
3.2 Principles to follow in the use of Lecture Method When lecture method is inevitably used, you should follow the following principles:  Use illustrative materials.
 Reduce the speed at which you deliver your lesson.
 Important points and ideas must be repeated severally  Allow more students questions and answers.
 Be less formal; i.e.
taking away all the seriousness of facial expression, tone, voice, and other distracting characteristics of learning.
 Always, notice restlessness, boredom, confusion and provide changes as necessary.
 Follow the lecture with an assignment and marking them immediately.
39  3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Lecture Method 3.3.1 Advantages of Lecture Method There are some benefits to be derived when lecture method is used in teaching history.
These advantages are:  The use of lecture method will enable the teacher to cover a lot of grounds within a short time.
 Lecture method saves time and energy in that a single teacher can lecture as many as 1,000 students assembled in a large hall.
 The teacher spends little or nothing on teaching materials and other equipment.
3.3.2 Disadvantages of Lecture Method  Lecture method does not cater for individual differences among students.
 Lecture method allows little or no room for learners’ active participation.
 In lecture method learner-teacher interaction in the lesson, a process that is fundamental to a meaningful teaching and learning is absent.
 In lecture method only one of the senses of the learner can be utilized.
i.e.
listening.
This makes it difficult for the average pupil to remember what was learned.
3.4 The Demonstration Method This method is a demonstration of doing and showing.
The method applies sight and touch rather than hearing as the major means of communication.
This method combines telling, showing and doing for the benefit of the students.
This method is essential in arriving at fundamental skills and practice in a very short time.
It is the basic method for introducing new skills to students and for developing understanding.
It is also basic in getting students accept new and better ways of doing something.
The demonstration is always done by the teacher while the students watch.
At the same time the teacher does the explanation.
In many subjects, the demonstration method appears to be the only possible means of achieving the objectives of learning by doing.
40  3.5 Principles of Demonstration Method When the need to use demonstration method arises, you should pay attention to the following;  Stimulate the learners to enable them see the need for demonstration.
This will arouse their interest and enable them participate actively.
 Have your working materials ready and in good condition.
This will ensure a smooth and uninterrupted demonstration.
 Arrange the learners properly.
The physical environment must be comfortable.
The teacher should stand in a position where every member of the class can see and hear every explanation.
 Provide every necessary information and theory before beginning the demonstration.
You should explain exactly what you are about to demonstrate and relate same to the students’ previous knowledge.
 Follow the procedures sequentially and slowly to ensure understanding.
 Follow up with an application activity.
3.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of Demonstration Method 3.6.1 Advantages of Demonstration Method The following merits can be derived in a demonstration method:  Active participation of the learners in the learning process is ensured.
 There is not monopoly on the part of the teacher.
 Learners are fast to grasp the meaning of the concept taught since most of their senses are appealed to i.e.
they can hear, see, touch, and even smell.
3.6.2 Disadvantages of Demonstration Method  It is not suitable where the class size is too large.
 It is very expensive as it involves a lot of teaching materials.
3.7 Self-Assessment Exercise (i) Lecture method is only meant for higher institution.
Do you agree?
(ii) How would you improve on lecture method if you must use it in the classroom for teaching History?
41 4.0 Conclusion Lecture and demonstration methods are just two out of the numerous methods of teaching that a teacher can employ in teaching history.
There are lots more to be discussed in the next two units.
5.0 Summary In this unit, the lecture and demonstration methods are treated.
Attempt is made to look at the meaning of the two methods.
We have also identified ways to improve on their usage by a teacher.
We also took time to examine their advantages of disadvantages.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1(a).
Briefly define lecture method.
(b).
Identify the advantages and disadvantages of lecture method.
2(a).
What is demonstration method?
(b).
In using demonstration method, what are your guiding principles?
7.0 References/Further Readings Alaezi, P. (1990).
Groundwork of teaching strategies.
Nigeria: Fab Anieh (Nigeria) Limited.
Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau.
Banks, J.
A., & Clegg, A.
A.
(1977).
Teaching strategies social studies: Inquiry, valuing and decision making (2nd ed.)
Massachusetts: Addison – Wesley.
Callahan, J. F., Clark, L. H, & Kellough, R. D. (1997).
Teaching in the middle secondary school (6th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Clark, L. H., & Starr, I. S. (1995).
Secondary and middle school teaching methods (7th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Fadeiye, J. O.
(1995).
A textbook of social studies for NCE and undergraduates.
Garvey, B., & Krug, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in the secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
42 Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Nacino-Brown, R., Oke, F. E., & Brown, D. P. (1982).
Curriculum and instruction: An introduction to methods of teaching.
Hong Kong: Macmillan.
Robinson, A.
(1980).
Principles and practice of teaching.
London: George Allen and Unwin.
43 Module III Unit 3: Methods of Teaching History II (Discussion, Project and Dramatic Methods) Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Discussion, Project, and Dramatic Methods 3.1 Discussion Method 3.2 Types of Discussion 3.3 Improving Discussion Method in History Teaching 3.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Discussion Method 3.4.1 Advantages of Discussion Method 3.4.2 Disadvantages of Discussion Method 3.5 The Project Method 3.5.1 Improving Project method for teaching History 3.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of Project Method 3.6.1 Advantages of Project Method 3.6.2 Disadvantages of Project Method 3.7 The Dramatic Method 3.7.1 Advantages of Dramatic Method 3.6.1 Disadvantages of Dramatic Method 3.8 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In our last unit we were able to examine the lecture and demonstration methods.
In this unit we are going to look at discussion, dramatic and project methods of teaching history.
To do justice to this we shall be looking at the meaning, types, advantages and disadvantages of the three methods.
Efforts will also be made to identify ways through which to improve on the use of these methods so as to enhance effective teaching and learning of history.
44  2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: (i) Define discussion, project and dramatic methods of teaching history.
(ii) Explain how to make optimum use of these methods to enhance history learning.
(iii) Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each method in teaching history.
3.0 The Discussion, Project, and Dramatic Methods 3.1 The Discussion Method Discussion takes place when two or more persons verbally interact with each other.
In a classroom situation, it could be planned and deliberate or spontaneous.
In this method both the teacher and learners are engaged in thinking together to consider various aspects/facets of a problem.
This method justifies the adage which says that ‘two heads are better than one’.
The teacher or any leader chosen by the teacher regulates the activities of the discussion group.
The teacher or any leader of the group should not monopolize the discussion but he/she must ensure that every body is carried along in the discussion.
The teacher poses the problem, initiates interaction and allows the learners to pursue the discussion towards the realization of the stated objectives.
The problem chosen must have meaning, interest and appeal to the learners.
3.2 Types of Discussion Discussion is divided into the following (a) Whole class discussion: Here the whole members of the class are involved in the discussion.
(b) Small group: In this type of discussion the class in divided into smaller groups and given either the same topic or different aspects of a topic to be discussed.
The small group may be in form of mixed abilities or same abilities.
(c) Debating discussion: This is a situation where the class is divided into two groups to discuss on two sides of a topic.
e.g.
‘There is no need to study history in the secondary schools’.
The two groups will take: ‘There is no need’ and ‘There is need’ respectively and argue out their points to justify the topic.
(d) Panel discussion: In this type of discussion, a team of people are chosen to take part in the discussion.
Any of a panel member is usually an expert on that topic to be discussed.
45 Panel discussion is also accompanied by an audience who listens attentively to the discussion and later makes some inputs.
3.3 Improving the Discussion Method in History Teaching Whatever types of discussion you want to employ, observe the following for effective result.
 Adequate planning of the discussion.
 Identification of a problem must be relevant to the whole class so as to establish a focus.
 Direct the learners to read all the necessary sources of information about the problem to ensure full and active participation.
 Appoint group leaders.
 Provide rules for the discussion  Both teacher and pupils should contribute, but the teacher should only guide not dominates.
 Discussion must take place under a friendly atmosphere.
 Make a summary of the main ideas discussed.
This should be done by the teacher and the learners cooperatively.
3.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Discussion Method 3.4.1 Advantages of Discussion Method Some of the advantages of discussion method are listed below  Builds confidence on the learners as points raised are their views only guided by the teacher.
 Learning becomes more permanent and lasting  Leadership qualities are identified in some learners.
 The slow learners are always carried along by the fast learners.
 A lot is discussed within a teaching period.
3.4.2 Disadvantages of Discussion Method  Where it is not properly organized, it could lead to noisy environment.
 It may lead to domineering attitude by the most intelligent learners if not properly controlled.
 Some lazy learners may hide under the umbrella of discussion to play away their time.
46  3.5 The Project Method Any undertaking by an individual or group, which results in a tangible product, is a project.
It is a natural life-like learning activity involving the investigation and solving of problems by an individual or small group.
This method is derived from the educational ideas of John Dewey, who argued that education should not prepare a child for the future that is not known but rather it should fit him rightly into the society.
On this premise, the child should be allowed to take full part in the life of the village and the wider neighbourhood.
Indeed, it is the cooperative study of a real life situation by either a class or the whole school usually under the guidance of a teacher.
Under this method, the teacher inspires, supervises and coordinates the activities of the various groups to be involved in the project work.
3.5.1 Improving Project Method for Teaching History  Projects should not be set too often for learners.
 Learners must clearly know the purpose, what they have to do, and that the project has a worthwhile educative enterprise.
 Consider the level of the learners  The project must contain problems that the learners are capable of solving through curiosity and the search for new information.
 Complete projects must be used to advantage and not a mere assembly of materials which may eventually gather dust.
3.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of Project Method 3.6.1 Advantages of Project Method  Learners will be gainfully employed in searching for information from various sources concerning the project.
 Learners’ sense of collective responsibility is ensured.
Children learn to plan and cooperate with one another when working together, better than when working individually.
 Learners come more in contact with real-life situations and problems through project work than they would work in classrooms alone.
 This method helps learners to use their experience, initiative, creativity especially in though-provoking activity.
47  3.6.2 Disadvantages of Project Method  Some topics on the planned scheme of work may become neglected as a result of over concentration on particular project topics.
 Where examination is the order of the day in the educational system, this method can lack objectivity.
 There is no assurance that all the learners in the group project work are equally interested in the topic.
As a result equal active participation is not guaranteed.
3.7 The Dramatic Method This method is derived from the words ‘to dramatize’ or ‘to act’.
It is a method used to convert facts or skills to be learnt into drama in order to make the learning of such facts and skills more interesting and more real.
In History, learners can act the role of many characters of honour in the past that assisted in one way or the other to bring about wars or development.
e.g.
the role of Mansa Musa in the development of an Empire in West Africa.
Another topic that can be dramatized in history is: ‘War between two villages’ so as to indicate how one village became superior to the other and became Lord over the weaker village.
3.7.1 Advantages of Dramatic Method  The method is practical and child-centred.
 It makes recall easy and learning more meaningful and permanent.
 Active participation of all members of the class is encouraged.
 Learners’ power of imagination is developed.
This may shape their character since some of the learners would want to imitate the lives of the role model they have represented.
3.7.2 Disadvantages of Dramatic Method  If the teacher is not careful, the drama may take much time at the expense of other lesson periods.
 If not properly organized, it may degenerate to rowdiness and noisy environment.
 Learners may be easily carried away by the enjoyment of dramatization and consequently, forget the purpose of the lesson.
48 3.8 Self-Assessment Exercise (i) How would you explain discussion method?
(ii) As a History teacher which of the types of discussion would you prefer to employ?
(iii) Think of a topic in history that can be treated conveniently using the project method.
Let us look at the following topic in SSII History: The rise and fall of Mali Empire.
In using a project method to teach the above topic, a teacher can divide the class into four smaller groups with specific tasks.
Group A: To be in charge of the causes of the rise of Mali Empire.
Group B: To identify the leader behind the rise of Mali Empire and his achievements.
Group C: To draw the map of West Africa showing Mali Empire.
Group D: To be in charge of the causes of the fall of Mali Empire.
4.0 Conclusion One can go on to discuss more methods but for time constraints.
It is important to emphasize that there is no one best method of teaching history.
As such, a good teacher can combine two or more methods depending on the nature of the topic and the objectives of the lesson.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have examined three methods of teaching history.
i.e.
discussion, project and dramatic methods.
We examined the advantages and disadvantages of each method and also looked at ways of improving on these methods to enhance their use in teaching history.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Select a topic in history and use the project method in teaching it.
7.0 References/Further Readings Alaezi, P. (1990).
Groundwork of teaching strategies.
Nigeria: Fab Anieh (Nigeria) Limited.
Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau.
Banks, J.
A., & Clegg, A.
A.
(1977).
Teaching strategies social studies: Inquiry, valuing and decision making (2nd ed.).
Massachusetts: Addison – Wesley.
49 Callahan, J. F., Clark, L. H, & Kellough, R. D. (1997).
Teaching in the middle secondary school (6th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Clark, L. H., & Starr, I. S. (1995).
Secondary and middle school teaching methods (7th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Fadeiye, J. O.
(1995).
A textbook of social studies for NCE and undergraduates.
Garvey, B., & Krug, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in the secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Nacino-Brown, R., Oke, F. E., & Brown, D. P. (1982).
Curriculum and instruction: An introduction to methods of teaching.
Hong Kong: Macmillan.
Robinson, A.
(1980).
Principles and practice of teaching.
London: George Allen and Unwin.
50 Module III Unit 4: Method of Teaching History III (The Questioning Technique and Simulation) Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Questioning Technique and Simulation 3.1 The Questioning Technique 3.2 Purpose of Questioning 3.3 When do we ask Questions?
3.4 Techniques of Questioning 3.5 Simulation Technique 3.6 When and how to use Simulation 3.6.1 When to use simulation 3.6.2 How to use simulation 3.7 Advantages of Simulation 3.8 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction We have all along in Units 2 and 3 of this Module examined some methods of teaching.
Some of these methods can be enhanced by using some strategies/techniques of teaching.
There is no one method that can succeed without employing a technique or strategy.
Consequently, this unit will be dedicated to treating two techniques/strategies namely: the questioning technique and simulation.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define the two techniques.
(ii) Identify when and how to use the above techniques.
(iii) Suggest ways of improving the two techniques of teaching history.
51  3.0 Questioning Technique and Simulation.
3.1 The Questioning Technique Questioning is the art of asking for information.
Put in another way, it can be referred to as a way and manner one clarifies certain issue at stake.
Questioning technique is very important in a teaching situation.
The importance of this technique cannot be over-emphasized.
Indeed, the success of teaching history depends to a great extent upon our skill in questioning.
Good questions direct students thinking and learning.
History teachers should use the questioning technique together with other methods of teaching discussed earlier.
Questions to be asked must interest the students; they must not be ambiguous, they should be logical; they should not be too easy or difficult and they should be treated from simple to complex.
3.2 Purpose of Questioning Every teacher asks questions at one stage or another in the course of his lesson.
Have you ever taken time to ask?
Why do teachers and students ask questions during any lesson?
Questions serve different purposes in teaching and we must be aware of these purposes so as to identify when to ask questions and what type of questions to ask.
The under listed are some of the purposes of questioning.
 Finding out the level of our learners on the topic to be taught.
This type of question is asked often at the beginning of the lesson to identify how much of the topic of the lesson the learners can conceptualized before going into the main teaching.
This in other words refers to the entry behaviour of the learners.
 Reminding the pupils what they have learned previously: this type of question is also asked at the beginning of the lesson to identify how much the learners can remember from the previous lesson.
This will surely awaken the students’ interest and command attention.
 Developing a line of thought.
These types of questions are always arranged in an array and are of real value in helping the learners to arrange, connect and relate facts, to form a flow of thought.
 Making learners to use their knowledge.
Having taught a lesson, a teacher may want to know whether or not the learners can make use of the new knowledge acquired and so may pose questions accordingly.
52  3.3 When Do We Ask Questions?
The following are the times you can ask questions during the period of teaching a lesson.
However, you do not have to be rigid about the stages.
They are just guiding principles.
The nature of the topic being taught will determine when you can ask questions and how many questions are required.
 At the beginning of a lesson: We may ask questions at the beginning of a lesson to find out the learners’ entry behaviour of the topic to be taught and to connect that knowledge to what is about to be taught.
Such questions enhance good introduction to your new lesson topic.
 Throughout the presentation stages.
Questions asked at these stages give room to active participation of the learners in the lesson.
It also prevents passive listening and day dreaming.
In moving from one point to another, we may pause to ask questions to clarify misconceptions of the points raised in the lesson.
The level of participation of the learners in answering the questions serves as directives to the teaching in which way forward (either to wind back or move ahead).
 At the end of the lesson: Questions are useful means of revising a lesson.
At this stage you are already evaluating the success of your lesson.
Questions asked and answered at this stage can help a teacher to build up his chalkboard summary for the learners to write down in their notebooks.
When necessary, such questions should aim at emphasizing the salient points raised during the lesson period.
3.4 Techniques of Questioning There are certain guidelines to follow when asking questions in a teaching situation.
These guidelines enhance maximum benefit in using the questioning technique in the classroom.
 Ask the question before you point to a learner to answer.
 Spread your questions evenly across the class.
 Give the learners time to answer.
 Avoid leading questions.
 Questions must not be ambiguous but clear and to the point.
 Avoid irrelevant questions.
53  3.5 Simulation Technique This is a way of presenting ideas, issues, and problems in life-like manner either in the past or in the present.
Simulation is from the latin word ‘similes’ which means ‘to act or to resemble’.
Simulation, therefore, presents real-life situation.
It is ‘pretence’ or an imitation device used to help learners discover how certain situations affect human behaviour.
It attempts to model some kind of reality in which the learners work through a problem or an activity rather than simply discussing it.
Note that simulation technique cannot be used on its own.
It can only be used along side with other methods of teaching like discussion and lecture methods earlier discussed.
Historical simulation can take the form of dramatization.
e.g.
learners can re-enact historical occurrences like the Igala-Benin wars and the Jukun-Wukari wars of the 18th century, the Benin Massacre; the military take over of power in the early 60s.
3.6 When and How to Use Simulation 3.6.1 When to Use Simulation  When the teacher desires to have the learners fully involved in the experience being taught.
 When the teacher wants to establish important aspects of a life situation.
 When the teacher wants to develop in the learners the ability to take important decision.
3.6.2 How to Use Simulation  State the objective clearly and discuss it with the learners.
 Make a simple model of the game/drama that shows the elements/characters to be simulated.
 Specify the role of each player.
 Set the rules, conditions and a time limit.
54  3.7 Advantages of Simulation  It gives room for active participation of the learners in the teaching and learning process.
 It adds variety to the daily teaching activity of the History lessons.
 It enhances problem solving.
In other words it helps learners understand more clearly the historical issues and problems in the art of living.
 It helps the learners to achieve attitudinal, behavioural and value-oriented objectives of education like self-development, self-awareness, personal independence and acquisition of skills.
 It enhances motivation and stimulates interests which are two most important traits to successful learning.
 It promotes cooperation among learners and develops their creative abilities.
3.8 Self Assessment Exercise (i) Find out two more purposes of questioning in any teaching situation.
(ii) Of what importance is questioning during the presentation of your lesson?
4.0 Conclusion Questioning and simulation are among some of the techniques that can be combined with any method of teaching history to enhance effective teaching and learning in the classroom as earlier discussed, no one method is the best.
Trying to combine two or three of them will produce a better and lasting result.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have attempted to examine two techniques of teaching history which are Questioning and simulation techniques.
We x-ray the meaning, purposes, when and how to use them in teaching history.
We also took a cursory look at the advantages of these techniques which when analyzed contribute immensely to the effectiveness of teaching and learning history.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Select a topic of your choice in history and describe how you will combine lecture and questioning technique in teaching it.
55  7.0 References/Further Readings Alaezi, P. (1990).
Groundwork of teaching strategies.
Nigeria: Fab Anieh (Nigeria) Limited.
Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau.
Banks, J.
A., & Clegg, A.
A.
(1977).
Teaching strategies social studies: Inquiry, valuing and decision making (2nd ed.).
Massachusetts: Addison – Wesley.
Callahan, J. F., Clark, L. H, & Kellough, R. D. (1997).
Teaching in the middle secondary school (6th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Clark, L. H., & Starr, I. S. (1995).
Secondary and middle school teaching methods (7th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Fadeiye, J. O.
(1995).
A textbook of social studies for NCE and undergraduates.
Garvey, B., & Krug, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in the secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Nacino-Brown, R., Oke, F. E., & Brown, D. P. (1982).
Curriculum and instruction: An introduction to methods of teaching.
Hong Kong: Macmillan.
Robinson, A.
(1980).
Principles and practice of teaching.
London: George Allen and Unwin.
56 Module III Unit 5: The Place of Instructional Materials in Teaching History Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Instructional Materials in History Teaching 3.1 What are Instructional Materials?
3.2 Importance of Instructional Materials in History 3.3 Types of Instructional Materials in History 3.4 Guiding Principles on the Selection and use of Instructional Materials 3.5 Improvisation of Instructional Materials 3.6 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Units 1-4 of this module are dedicated to various methods of teaching history.
This unit will be dedicated to resource materials in teaching history.
As a teacher of today, you do not need to do all the talking alone, while the students remain passive listeners.
You need some materials to simplify your teaching and make teaching process a lot easier.
Hence, there is need for this topic.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) Identify the various instructional materials in teaching history.
(ii) Discuss the importance of instructional materials in teaching history.
(iii) Improvise some instructional materials when necessary.
(iv) Identify some guiding principles in the selection of instructional materials.
3.0 Instructional Materials in History Teaching 3.1 What are Instructional Materials?
Instructional materials are those materials used by a teacher to simplify his/her teaching.
They include both visual and audio-visual aids/materials.
They could be concrete or non- 57 concrete.
The teacher uses these materials in his/her lessons to promote teaching and learning activities in history.
These instructional materials bring life to learning by stimulating students to learn.
However, they are not ends in themselves but they are means to an end.
Good teaching materials can never replace the teacher but the teacher uses them to achieve his teaching and learning objectives.
3.2 Importance of Instructional Materials in History.
 Instructional materials simplify teaching and learning process.
They help teachers to reduce the amount of talking and then, make their teaching to be more interesting and successful.
 Instructional materials assist the teacher to be more explanatory, thus, bridging the communication gab between the teacher and the learners.
 Instructional materials build more confidence in the teacher and consequently assist him to be more efficient in the handling of his topics.
Hence his teaching ability is enhanced.
 Instructional materials create high degree of interest.
When students’ interests are captured in any lesson, there will be high level of success in that lesson.
Moreover, students are interested in what they can see, hear, handle, smell and touch.
 High level of interest can lead to maximum attention of the learners being captured through the use of instructional materials.
 Instructional materials appeal to learners’ senses which include hearing, seeing, smelling, touching/feeling and handling.
These senses when combined in teaching and learning produce better result.
 Instructional materials encourage clear thinking and concentration as pupils/students like to listen to radio broadcast, television and watching the cinema with deep attention and concentration.
 When the right materials are used at the right time, it can multiply and widen the channels of communication between the teacher and the learners.
Instructional materials, therefore, make teaching and learning easier.
 Instructional materials save teaching time and fortify cooperation in class work.
58  3.3 Types of Instructional Materials in History.
Instructional materials can be conveniently divided into two namely: visual aids and audio- visual aids.
Visual materials are those materials that the learners can only see.
They are less expensive.
They include materials such as pictures, maps, chairs, textbooks, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, models, board displays, and costumes.
Audio-visual materials are those materials that learners can see and at the same time hear them talk and do some body movement.
They are very expensive and include materials such as tape recorders and players, film trips, projectors (film projector and over-head projector) slide, video tape recorder, television set, etc.
3.4 Guiding principles on the selection and use of Instructional Materials There are certain vital principles that guide a teacher in the selection and use of instructional materials.
Following the under listed guiding principles will avert one being a slave to his own servant.
 Suitability and appropriateness: History teachers must consider the suitability and appropriateness of the teaching materials before using them.
You should think of the age and ability of students to benefit from the instructional materials.
 Clarity of the instructional materials: The instructional materials must be clear and specific to the lesson taught.
They should not contain too many pieces of information which may confuse the learners.
Rather, they should be simple and clear.
 Attractiveness: The instructional materials should be attractive enough to capture the interest of the learners which will in turn stimulate the students to learn.
 Availability and Affordability: The teacher must consider the availability of materials and how affordable such materials can be.
There is no point indicating an instructional material which is neither available nor affordable.
 Relevance: The most relevant instructional materials which are capable of stimulating the interest of the learners should be used.
59  Time of the Lesson: The period allotted to the lesson determines the type and nature of instructional materials to be used by history teachers.
3.5 Improvisation of Instructional Materials Instructional materials, though highly important in any teaching activity, cannot be adequately sourced for by the school whether federal, state, local government councils or even private ventures.
Hence, there is the need to improvise these materials by teachers.
What then is improvisation?
Improvisation of instructional materials means creation of substitutes.
In other words, improvisation means an invention or an art of producing a similar or near similar teaching materials to facilitate the process of teaching and learning.
An instructional material is identified to simplify your teaching but unfortunately, it is not available in your school.
As a teacher you will go all out to produce something that is near to the needed material to aid your teaching.
The challenge of improvising some of the needed teaching materials has become more relevant now in Nigeria, bearing in mind that Nigeria is going through a terrible economic and financial crisis.
Teachers are known to be resourceful.
They should, therefore, use local materials to make some of the instructional materials.
Teachers cannot run away from this challenge and the earlier they woke up to this challenge the better for our country.
3.6 Self-Assessment Exercise (i) From the above explanation, can you think of any material one can use in teaching history?
(ii) Select a topic of your choice in history and identify an instructional material you will use to teach it.
4.0 Conclusion There is no doubt that instructional materials are important in the teaching of History.
They must, therefore, be provided and used wisely in the teaching and learning process.
There is no lesson in history that does not need instructional materials, no matter the level of teaching.
5.0 Summary In this Unit, efforts have been made to examine the place of instructional materials in the teaching of history.
Instructional material is defined as simple teaching materials to simplify 60 teaching and learning.
We also looked at the possibility of providing a substitute to an instructional material that is not readily available by improvising from the local materials available.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Instructional material is of no use in the teaching of any topic in History.
Discuss.
7.0 References/Further Readings Alaezi, O.
(1990).
Groundwork of teaching strategies.
Nigeria: Fab Anieh (Nigeria) Limited.
Ayot, H. O.
(1979).
New approach in history teaching in schools.
Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau.
Banks, J.
A., & Clegg, A.
A.
(1977).
Teaching strategies social studies: Inquiry, valuing and decision making (2nd ed.).
Massachusetts: Addison – Wesley.
Callahan, J. F., Clark, L. H, & Kellough, R. D. (1997).
Teaching in the middle secondary school (6th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Clark, L. H., & Starr, I. S. (1995).
Secondary and middle school teaching methods (7th ed.).
Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.
Fadeiye, J. O.
(1995).
A textbook of social studies for NCE and undergraduates.
Garvey, B., & Krug, M. (1977).
Models of history teaching in the secondary schools.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Nacino-Brown, R., Oke, F. E., & Brown, D. P. (1982).
Curriculum and instruction: An introduction to methods of teaching.
Hong Kong: Macmillan.
Robinson, A.
(1980).
Principles and practice of teaching.
London: George Allen and Unwin.
61 MODULE Four: Evaluation in History Unit I: Meaning and Importance/Purpose of Evaluation in History Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Meaning and Purpose of Evaluation 3.1 Meaning of Evaluation 3.2 Purpose of Evaluation 3.3 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The 1st three modules earlier discussed centered on the overview of history, dimensions of planning in teaching history, methods and instructional materials in teaching history.
In this module attempts will be made to examine evaluation in history.
What has a beginning must have an end.
The only way to end your teaching activity is to evaluate the entire exercise.
Hence, the need for this last module which commences with a unit that addresses the meaning, and importance/purpose of evaluation in History.
This is based on the principle that says the teaching process is never complete without the evaluation process.
It then means that evaluation in history is also an important ingredient for a teacher in any teaching activity.
It is for this reason that this unit will be dedicated to the meaning and purpose of evaluation in History.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define evaluation.
(ii) List and explain the purposes of evaluation in history.
62  3.0 Meaning and Purpose of Evaluation in History 3.1 Meaning of Evaluation Evaluation, assessment and testing are used to mean the same thing in this unit.
Evaluation in a school setting is the process of assessing achievement and to encourage and instill confidence in the right direction.
It is a way by which the teacher determines the extent to which learning had actually taken place.
In other words, evaluation is carried out to assess the extent to which set objectives have been achieved and to effect necessary changes for improvement.
Tests, examinations and assignments are usually conducted to find out to what extent students have been able to learn the factual knowledge or information being taught to them.
On the other hand, evaluation is carried out to determine the extent to which stated objectives have been accomplished.
3.2 Purpose of Evaluation Evaluation is very indispensable in History.
In fact every lesson in history course must be evaluated.
Why then do we evaluate?
 To asses the effectiveness of instruction.
i.e.
to check the effectiveness or quality of teaching.
 To asses the effectiveness of instructional materials such as textbooks, teaching aids and other resources for teaching and learning.
 To determine to what extent students have learned what they are expected to learn.
 Evaluation gives the students a clue as to how well he is doing in relation to his classmates.
 Parents gain first hand information on their children’s performance.
 Evaluation helps to give the designer of the course important feedback information necessary for the purpose of amending, modifying, changing, accepting or rejecting the entire curriculum package.
3.3 Self-Assessment Exercise In your own words, define evaluation.
63  4.0 Conclusion Evaluation is indispensable in History.
Any teaching activity is incomplete without evaluation.
It is therefore, pertinent for a teacher to be conversant with evaluation procedures in history.
5.0 Summary This unit has successfully examined the meaning of evaluation in history.
It has also looked at the purposes of evaluation in history.
We will go further to list and discuss some evaluation methods in History.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment.
Discuss the importance of evaluation in history.
7.0 References/Further Readings Adegoke & D. Ajeyalemi (Eds.).
Fundamentals of Curriculum Theory and Practice.
Nigeria: UNILAG Press.
Baiyelo, T. D. (1992).
Critical review of models in curriculum evaluation.
In K. A. Baiyelo, T. D. (1993).
Curriculum evaluation.
In U.M.O.
Ivowi (ed.).
Curriculum development in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Sam Bookman.
Gronlund, N. E. (1981).
Measurement and evaluation in teaching (4th ed.).
London: Collier Macmillan.
Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Vernon, P. E. (1962).
Personality tests and assessments.
London: Methuen.
64  Module IV Unit 2: Methods of Evaluation in History I (Essay and Objective Questions) Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Essay and Objective Techniques of Testing 3.1 Essay Techniques 3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of Essay Techniques 3.2.1 Advantages of Essay Techniques 3.2.2 Disadvantages of Essay Techniques 3.3 Objective Techniques of Testing-Types 3.3.1 True or False 3.3.2 Filling the Blanks or Completion of Item Type 3.3.3 Multiple Choices 3.3.4 Matching Pairs 3.3.5 One Word Answers 3.5 Advantages and Disadvantages of Objective Tests 3.2.1 Advantages of Objective Tests 3.2.2 Disadvantages of Objective Tests 3.6 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit we examined the meaning of evaluation.
We went further to discuss the purposes of evaluation.
In this unit we will examine some methods of evaluation in History.
Different evaluation techniques could be used in History.
In this unit, we shall look at the essay and objective techniques.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to: (i) Set questions signifying essay and objective methods of evaluation.
(ii) List and explain the advantages and disadvantages of each method.
65  3.0 Essay and Objective Techniques of Testing 3.1 Essay Techniques Essay method is a very popular method of evaluation in our educational system.
It is through the use of essay that the cognitive, affective and psycho-motor domains are tested.
The essay method gives the students the opportunity to react to the questions given to them in whatever form by using their own approach and language and they could write at length.
Responses in essay questions are usually in written form.
3.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of Essay Techniques 3.2.1 Advantages of Essay Techniques  It is easy to set essay questions within a short period of time and less expensive in terms of materials and production.
 It enhances good written expression and good organization and presentation of ideas.
 Essay test determines the degree, depth and quality of the knowledge students have acquired.
 It does not give room to guessing.
 Through essay test, attitudes, feelings, values and skills of the learners are assessed.
 There is freedom of expression unlike in an objective test where there is restriction in response to a question.
3.2.2 Disadvantages of Essay Techniques Critics have been very skeptical about essay method of evaluation on the basis of the following:  Only a few questions are set and answered making it impossible to adequately cover the total area taught or to be assessed in history.
 The awarding of marks in an essay test is influenced by the mood of the examiner.
In other words the marking and grading of students’ test are usually subjective.
 It is tedious to mark an essay test in terms of time and energy.
 It is disadvantageous to those who lack written communication skills.
 It attaches much importance to the ability of students to recall information and therefore places much premium to verbal ability.
66  3.3 Objective Tests Vernon (1956) defined an objective test as a test or examination in which every question is set in such a way as to have only one right answer.
Objective test cover a wider area than the essay type.
However, they require more time for planning and writing.
The question can be answered with either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, ‘True’ or ‘False’ or making a choice from a group of alternatives.
3.3.1 True or False Examples: History is the study of man and his environment in relation to his past.
(True or False) Umaru Musa Yar’adua became the President of Nigeria in 2008.
(True or False) Barrack Obama is the first black man in the United States of America’s White House.
(True or False) Here you are required to indicate the appropriate response.
3.3.2 Filling in Blanks or Completion of Item Type Examples: Supply the missing words in each of the following sentences: (a) Mansa Musa was a great ruler in __________________________ (b) The first military coup in Nigeria occurred in the year __________ (c) Nigeria gained her independence in the year__________________ Here you are to supply the right answer.
3.3.3 Multiple Choices Example: Underline the correct answer or put an (x) in the box that represents the correct answer.
(1) The first Nigerian president in 1960 was (a) Dr. Nnamdi Azikwe (b) Chief Obafemi Awolowo (c) Alhaji Sir Ahmadu Bello (d) Alhaji Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa 67  3.3.4 Matching Pairs Example: Match the following states in Nigeria with their correct capitals using arrows pointing from the states to their capitals.
State Capital 1.
Kwara Minna 2.
Benue Lokoja 3.
Plateau Ilorin 4.
Niger Makurdi 5.
Kogi Jos 3.3.5 One Word Answers Examples: (a) Who was the first President of Ghana?
(b) Who is the first lady of Nigeria?
(c) When did Nigeria get her independence?
3.5 Advantages and Disadvantages of Objective Tests 3.5.1 Advantages of Objective Tests  It is argued that objective test seems better than the essay type because of the objectivity which is built into it.
There is only one correct answer for every item, thus the examiner’s mood is not affected.
 It does not give room for beating about the bush, because there is restriction in expression.
 It is easier and faster to mark objective test.
 Writing skill, good expression and presentation of ideas is not a barrier to a student performing well.
 It can be used to test a wide range of information and skills in history.
 It test one item at a time and marking is standardized.
68  3.5.2 Disadvantages of Objective Test  Setting objective test is tedious and time consuming.
 There is a great deal of guessing and cheating.
 It does not assess actual mental knowledge.
 It makes it impossible to assess writing and language skills.
3.6 Self-Assessment Exercise Think of more advantages and disadvantages of essay method of evaluation in History.
4.0 Conclusion Essay and objective methods of evaluation are indispensable to a history teacher.
Both are very helpful in assessing the ability of students.
While essay helps the students to interpret correctly and make value judgments, reason intelligently and manipulate correctly the facts at their disposal, objective test only concentrate on restricted answers.
It is advisable, therefore for history teachers to combine one method with another.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have succeeded in examining two methods of evaluation in history.
i.e.
essay and objective tests.
We looked at what the methods involve and how to go about using them.
We also examine the advantages and disadvantages of both.
6.0 Tutor Mark Assignment Compare the essay and the objective methods of evaluation in History.
7.0 References/Further Readings Baiyelo, T. D. (1992).
Critical review of models in curriculum evaluations.
In K. A. Adegoke & D. Ajeyalemi (Eds.).
Fundamentals of Curriculum Theory and Practice.
Nigeria: UNILAG Press.
Baiyelo, T. D. (1993).
Curriculum evaluation.
In U.M.O.
Ivowi (ed.).
Curriculum development in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Sam Bookman.
Gronlund, N. E. (1981).
Measurement and evaluation in teaching (4th ed.).
London: Collier Macmillan.
69 Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Vernon, P. E. (1962).
Personality tests and assessments.
London: Methuen.
70  Module IV Unit III: Methods of Evaluation in History II (Teacher Made Tests and Observation) Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Teacher –made Tests and Observation Methods 3.1 Teacher-made Tests 3.2 Observation 3.2.1 Types of Observation 3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Observation 3.3.1 Advantages of Observation 3.3.2 Disadvantages of Observation 3.4 Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the last unit we looked at two methods of evaluation in history.
i. e essay and objective techniques.
In this Unit, efforts will be made to examine two more techniques of evaluation i.e.
teacher-made test and observation techniques.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: (i) Evaluate history lessons using teacher -made test (ii) Initiate some desirable changes in children using the observation method of evaluation in History.
71  3.0 Teacher- Made Tests and Observation Techniques 3.1 Teacher -Made Test This technique has its root in the belief that the teacher is all knowing.
The teacher at the end of his teaching periods constructs some questions to assess his learners.
He may decide to use any of the two methods discussed in Unit 2 or even the two in constructing his test.
Teacher- made test can be used to an advantage when such tests are constructed to test certain concepts, knowledge and understanding of work done in the course of any history class.
Teacher -made test can be used to evaluate the students, growth in certain skills in history e.g.
skills in locating historical places in their community.
All Tutor Mark Assignments in this study manual are examples of teacher- made test.
3.2 Observation The method involves the process of noting and recording specific categories of behaviour as they occur in the natural setting.
The result could be used to describe or explain a child’s affective behaivour.
The observation has a considerable potential to assist a teacher initiate desirable changes in the affective area of learners.
3.2.1 Types of Observation There are basically four types of observation techniques.
These include: (a) Systematic observation: It is the type which has the procedure, range of situation and recording system clearly specified in advance.
A greater degree of control and organization direct the observation from the beginning to the end.
That is it is planned from the beginning to the end.
(b) Unsystematic observation: It is the type which is not planned and does not impose any control or strict organization in the way it is conducted.
The observer is given absolute freedom and discretion to decide and direct his observation in a way he deems fit.
(c) Participant observation: It is that which has the observer as part and parcel of the observed so that the observer is placed in a better position to know and understand the nature and justification of the behaviour of the observed.
72 (d) Non-participant observation: This is where the observer is detached from the activities of the observed.
Here the observer is given ample opportunity to plan, record, and direct his/her observation while the observed may be so engrossed in their activities such that they may forget to record some significant behaviour.
3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Observation 3.3.1 Advantages of Observation The following are some of the advantages of observation method.
 Observation offers the best means of noting and recording behaviour as it occurs in natural setting devoid of any pretence.
 It provides the best supplementary information that will assist the history teacher in taking dependable decisions aimed at improving the teaching and learning process.
 It assist in assessing the all round behaviour of children that are incapable of verbalization.
 Observation provides relevant information that could be used for counseling and reporting on students’ behaviour.
3.3.2 Disadvantages of Observation Some critics have the following against observation method of evaluation in history.
 It is time consuming and energy sapping.
 In some cases it may involve financial cost.
 The person being observed may not give honest response especially if he/she gets to discover the same.
 There is the tendency for the observer to become bias in his reporting of observed behaviour.
3.4 Self-Assessment Exercise (i) As a history teacher, construct two questions in history with a marking guide.
(ii) On your own add two more advantages and disadvantages of observation method of evaluation in history.
73  4.0 Conclusion Teacher -made test is a very important tool in the hands of the History teacher.
The History teacher does the teaching and so he/she is in a better position to evaluate the learners via his test.
In doing this, the teacher has to consider the topics taught and the aspects of the topic emphasized in his teaching.
There is also the need to evaluate through observation to cater for the affective domain of educational objectives.
5.0 Summary In this Unit, we have been able to examine two more techniques of evaluation in History.
There are some techniques not discussed in this course material because of time and the degree of their importance to a History teacher.
This Unit brings us to the end of this course material.
Stay back, read well and enjoy your study period.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Select a topic in history taught and develop two questions.
7.0 References/Further Readings Baiyelo, T. D. (1992).
Critical review of models in curriculum evaluations.
In K. A. Adegoke & D. Ajeyalemi (Eds.).
Fundamentals of Curriculum Theory and Practice.
Nigeria: UNILAG Press.
Baiyelo, T. D. (1993).
Curriculum evaluation.
In U.M.O.
Ivowi (ed.).
Curriculum development in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Sam Bookman.
Gronlund, N. E. (1981).
Measurement and evaluation in teaching (4th ed.).
London: Collier Macmillan.
Kyriacou, C. (1986).
Effective teaching in schools.
Oxford: Basil Black Well Ltd. Vernon, P. E. (1962).
Personality tests and assessments.
London: Methuen.
74
