Course Code EDU 421 Course Title Fundamentals of Guidance and Counseling Course Developers/Writers Olugbenga David Ojo,(PhD) Examinations Unit, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island Lagos.
Dr. Ogidan Rotimi, Learners Support Services Department National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island Lagos Course Editor Professor V. O. Adedipe, Manager, Akure Study Centre, National Open University of Nigeria, Akure Programme Leader Dr.
I. O. Salawu, School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos Course Coordinator Dr. Osuji, U.S.A. School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-015-8 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………..… 1 Unit 1 Nature of Guidance and Counselling ……….
1 - 9 Unit 2 Principles of Guidance and Counselling …… 9 - 18 Unit 3 Historical Development of Guidance and ….. Counselling ………………………………… 19 - 25 Unit 4 Developmental Problems of Guidance and … Counselling ………………………………… 26 - 32 Unit 5 Functions of the School Counsellor ………... 33 - 38 Unit 6 Functions of the Major Stakeholders in …….
Guidance and Counselling ………………….
39 - 47 Unit 7 Organisation of Guidance Services ………… 48 -54 Module 2 ………………………………………………..… 55 Unit 1 Records and Record Keeping in School Guidance Programme ……………………….
55 - 60 Unit 2 Process and Techniques in Counselling …….
61 - 64 Unit 3 Techniques of Counselling………………….. 65 - 69 Unit 4 Group Dynamic Process in Counselling …….
70 - 74 Unit 5 Continuous Assessment in Schools ………….
75 - 79 Unit 6 Historical and Theoretical Development of Vocational Guidance ………………………… 80 - 84 Unit 7 Collection, Planning and Dissemination of ….. Career Information …………………………… 85 - 92 iii NoneEDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING MODULE 1 Unit 1 Nature of Guidance and Counselling Unit 2 Principles of Guidance and Counselling Unit 3 Historical Development of Guidance and Counselling Unit 4 Developmental Problems of Guidance and Counselling Unit 5 Functions of the School Counsellor Unit 6 Functions of the Major Stakeholders in Guidance and Counselling Unit 7 Organisation of Guidance Services UNIT 1 NATURE OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions 3.1.1 Meaning of Guidance 3.1.2 Meaning of Counselling 3.2 Types of Counselling 3.3 Classification of Counselling 3.4 Approaches to Counselling 3.5 Differences between Guidance and Counselling 3.6 Purposes of Guidance and Counselling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Any worthwhile book on Guidance and Counselling will always discuss what the nature of the course is all about.
These include its routine definitions, purposes, theories and principles.
This will allow project understanding of the course.
This unit will provide the definitions and meanings of the terms Guidance and Counselling, the purposes and principles of Guidance and Counselling, the need for it and its functions in the School system.
These will help lay the necessary foundation about the course.
1 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Define Guidance and Counselling.
(ii) List the differences between Guidance and Counselling.
(iii) Enumerate the objectives of Guidance and Counselling.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions 3.1.1 The Meaning of Guidance The word guidance is explained in different ways by various/many writers, but all, having the same meaning.
Shartzer and Stone (1976) defined guidance to mean “to direct, pilot or guide.
Bakare (1996) refers to guidance as a more directive or prescriptive form of assistance.
Idowu (1998) sees it as a family name for all the helping service within the general educational and community systems.
To make the meaning to be more explicit, Akinade (2002) remarked that some specialists assert that guidance is a broad term used to cover a number of specialist services available in schools.
Such services include the information service, testing service, placement service, follow-up service and counseling service.
But looking at the modern day global world, the provision of specialist services are no more limited to the school, it now includes the community in general.
From the above, guidance can be summarily defined as a cognitive educational services (within or outside the school system) that help people understand themselves, provided the client reveals accurate, reliable and valid information about himself and his environment.
3.1.2 The Meaning of Counselling Counselling is a process of helping individuals or group of people to gain self-understanding in order to be themselves.
Burker and Steffler (1979) see counseling as a professional relationship between a trained Counselor and a client.
Olayinka (1972) defined it to be a process whereby a person is helped in a face-to-face relationship while Makinde (1983) explained counseling as an enlightened process whereby people help others by encouraging their growth.
Counselling is a process designed to help clients understand and clarify personal views of their life space, and to learn to reach their self-determined goals through 2 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING meaningful, well-informed choices and a resolution of problems of an emotional or interpersonal nature.
It believes that every human individual has the potential for self-growth, self-development and self- actualization.
3.2 Types of Counselling There are two major types of Counselling, namely: individual counselling and group counselling.
(a) Individual Counselling: This is referred to as one-to-one counselling.
It occurs between the professionally trained Counsellor (Therapist) and his client (Counsellee).
The goal of this is to help the client to understand himself, clarify and direct his thought, in order to make a worthwhile decision.
Through this, clients’ problems are alleviated.
Frumboltz and Thoreson (1967) as cited in Ojo (2005) remarked that it is mainly to bring about change in the client either by altering maladaptive behaviour, learning the decision making process or preventing problems.
(b) Group Counselling: This is a counselling session that takes place between the professionally trained counsellor and a group of people.
Number of this group should not be more than seven, or at least ten, in order to have a cohesive group and an effective well controlled counselling session.
Members of the groups are clients/counselees whose tasks or problems that are meant for resolution are similar.
During group counselling, a free atmosphere is allowed and freedom of speech is encouraged.
The counselees are free to express themselves individually as counselling progresses so that encumbrances surrounding the tasks or problems to be resolved would be open for all to consider and benefit from.
All counselees are expected to participate and express their feelings.
The responsibility of the counsellor during group counselling is to help remove the marks covering the problem.
He helps open up the problem with the professional competence and knowledge he possesses.
The counsellor is not just a member of the group; he is to direct the affairs and situations.
3.3 Classification of Counselling Counselling can be classified according to different spheres of life in which human beings could encounter problems.
These are: 3 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (a) Educational Counselling: problems that could be of learning, teaching and that of education generally are handled here.
(b) Marital Counselling: problems that could emanate from married life beginning from spouse selection are resolved here.
(c) Personal Social Counselling: problems including personality and life in general are taken care of here.
(d) Rehabilitation Counselling: problems emanating from life disruptions such as accidents, retrenchment and natural mishaps are handled here.
(e) Vocational Counselling: problems from work and training, career choice making and adjustment are handled here.
Only three of the above types of counselling will be mainly practiced in the school setting.
These are Educational, Vocational and Personal- social counselling which will be the full responsibility of the school counsellor.
However, a counsellor in private practice might need to engage in the other types of counselling depending on the needs of his clients.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the classifications of counseling?
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Counseling can be classified into the following; Educational counseling, Marital counseling, personal-social counseling, Rehabilitation counseling and vocational counseling.
3.4 Approaches to Counselling There are many approaches to Counselling, but these approaches can be grouped under the following three headings: (a) Indirect Approach: The indirect approach to counselling is also regarded as the client-centred approach.
In this approach, the counselee is allowed to express self while the counsellor only listen with rapt attention and intermittently, when necessary, injects words that can elicit more responses on the case at hand from the counselee.
The professional counsellors that use this 4 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING approach rely on the tenets of the client-centred theory as their major counselling skill.
(b) Direct Approach: This is just the opposite of the indirect or client-centred approach.
In this counselling approach, the talking is done by the counsellor who uses questions and various counselling skills to elicit responses from the counselee about the problems at hand.
Here, the counsellor dictates the pace and directs the counselee based on what can be made out of the sparing responses gathered from the counselee.
(c) Eclectic Approach: This approach to counseling does not rely totally on either the indirect or direct approach.
Rather it finds the two approaches named above with any other suitable one handy during counseling sessions.
It thereby relies on chosen skills that suit the counseling session at hand, from all the available approaches, to resolve the counsellee’s problems.
3.5 Differences between Guidance and Counselling Writers in most cases find it difficult to distinguish between the two words.
According to Shertzer and stone(1976), the attempt to differentiate between guidance and counseling has not met with any measure of success because it is difficult to make distinctions between the two terms.
On the basis of similarities, the terms could be interpreted to mean the same thing because in terms of peoples’ welfare the two words are out to achieve the same goals.
Although they are both educational services but contextually, they can be differentiated.
The table below shows some differences between the two terms.
5 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Table 1: Comparison between Guidance and Counselling S/N COUNSELLING GUIDANCE 1.
Student (client) directed.
Counsellor directed.
Locus of Locus of control moves control remains with the Tutor toward student (client).
This (Counsellor).
means the client is more involved at every stage in counselling.
2.
The Tutor (Counsellor) is a The Tutor (Counsellor) is facilitator /enabler.
He is not information/advice giver.
the decision maker.
3.
Client and Counsellor jointly Counsellor determines negotiate a contract about objectives and methods.
agenda and methodology.
4.
Client participates in assessing Assessment/diagnosis and needs and evaluating progress.
evaluation is in the domain of the counsellor.
5.
Concern is with the process of Concern is with decision decision-making.
(decision seen as product).
Understanding how decision is The way it is reached is not reached is as important as the regarded as especially content of the decision.
significant.
6.
Learning is seen as Learning is seen as specific to transferable.
What is learnt in the problem in question.
one context is seen utilizable in another e.g.
the learning of a skill such as breaking down problem into its component parts.
7.
Learning is seen as an Feelings are not regarded as emotional as well as a important in learning.
cognitive process.
This means the behaviour and the thinking are important.
8.
Learning about a subject is Learning about a subject is not seen as involving a process of seen as involving self learning about self.
discovery.
Adapted from Kolo 1992:5 3.6 Purposes of Guidance and Counselling The guidance and counselling purposes include: assisting individual students, teachers, adults and the society in general to: 6 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 1. find out and make individuals aware of their basic personal prerequisites, abilities, assets, liabilities and potentialities, 2. provide usable information on vocation and to correct or clarify misinformation, 3. assess an individual’s chances to succeed in the labour market, 4. create awareness of clients in the availability of jobs and how to progress in it, 5. make available opportunities for further training and advancement in occupations, 6. suggest alternative careers and realisation of priorities summarized the objectives in Nigerian schools thus, 7. assist students in making appropriate and satisfying personal, vocational and educational choices; 8. assist student acquire a positive image of self through self- understanding the needs and problems of each person, 9. assist teachers and school personnel in understanding the needs and problems of each student, 10. assist school authorities / administrators in improving educational objectives and programmes of interpersonal relationships; 11. contribute to educational planning; 12. mobilize all the available resources of the school or home for satisfaction of the vocational, educational and socio-personal needs of the students; 13. supplement school instructional and administrative input into the learner; 14. help students develop proper attitude towards themselves, others, school, values, interests, morals, beliefs and discipline; 15. help students develop to optimize and utilize their skills and correct the sources of their weaknesses and to improve the standard of education; 16. help learners live within the framework of an institution; 7 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 17. help people achieve independence with a minimum of conflict with institutional values; 18. promote in pupils good sense of awareness, ability to acquire a good knowledge of the world of work, possibility of continuing education and ability to make realistic decisions; 19. guard individual’s mental health; and 20. promote human effectiveness.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit acquainted you with what Guidance and Counselling is all about.
This will, no doubt, help lay the necessary foundation as you work through the course for better understanding of the subject matter.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been introduced to the meaning of guidance and counselling, its purposes or objectives.
The differences between the two were also established 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the different types of Counselling?
Describe each of them briefly.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinade, E. A., Sokan, B. O., Oseremen N. (1986).
Introduction to Guidance and Counselling: A Basic Text for Colleges and Universities.
Ibadan: Caltep.
Idowu, A. I.
(Ed) (1998).
Guidance and Counselling in Education.
Ilorin: Indemac.
Kolo, F. D. (1992).
Guidance and Counselling in Perspective Zaria: Sleveno Printing.
Makinde, O.
(1983).
Fundamental of Guidance and Counselling.
London: Macmillan.
8 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Ojo, O.D.
(2005).
A Guide to Guidance and Counselling Practicum.
Concept Publications.
Shamble, Lagos.
Okon, S. E. (1984).
Guidance for the 6-3-3-4 System of Education.
Zaria; Institute of Education.
Olayinka, M. S. (1972).
The Role of Guidance and Vocational Counselling in Nigerian Education.
University of Lagos.
9 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 2 PRINCIPLES OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Principles of Guidance and Counseling 3.2 Need for Guidance and Counseling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about the principles that guide the practice of guidance and counseling in the school setting and also, the reasons why it is required in the school.
The knowledge from this unit will help justify the reasons for introducing this important service in Nigerian Schools.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the basic principles that guide the practice of guidance and Counseling.
2.
Enumerate the reasons for the need for guidance and counseling in the school setting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Principles of Guidance and Counseling The basic principles of guidance and counseling as accepted by most authorities in the field of guidance and counseling are described as follows: (1) Guidance and Counseling is for everyone.
The service is not only for those with special handicaps but it is also meant for all “normal”, developing children and adults; 10 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (2) Guidance and Counseling activities should therefore be based on the need and total development of every person.
It is the duty of all personnel in a setting to identify the needs of individuals so that programme activities can be designed to meet such needs; (3) Guidance and Counseling must be provided in a way that ensures human dignity and worth.
The full and adequate development of the individual must be given preference.
It should be seen as encouraging individuals to attain maximum satisfaction, to realize their potentials and to be aware to self.
No one who has gone through counseling should feel inadequate; (4) Guidance and Counseling is a sequential, continuous and developmental process, which starts from birth to death.
This means that guidance and counseling runs from the nursery school through primary, secondary to the tertiary institutions.
It is not a once-and-for-all event but a process which is an integral part of the total educational programme throughout the school life of an individual; (5) There is a close relationship between counseling activities and the instructional process, each contributing to the other.
Counseling can help make the instructional activities to be more relevant and meaningful to the needs of students, while the instructional activities can help to give necessary information and directives to a student in planning his/her life goals; (6) All guidance activities must emphasize the will for each student to learn more about himself in an accurate and systematic manner.
Through the use of well-planned instructional strategies and appraisal techniques, individuals can become more knowledgeable about themselves and about the world around them.
Without such knowledge, an individual cannot exercise intelligently the rights to free choice in educational, vocational and personal-social fields.
(7) Every member of staff in a school and non-school setting should assume responsibility for guidance activities.
The principal, teachers and counselors are all members of the guidance team and each member has prescribed functions and roles.
(8) Effective leadership is the watchword for any effective guidance and counseling programme.
Guidance counselors who are qualified, well - trained and competent are expected to function in schools and other settings.
Such professionals would be able 11 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING to enlist the support of staff members in effecting guidance activities.
(9) The practitioners should practice within ethical and moral limits.
The ethical and moral guidelines should be such that clients would feel secure and confident in using the services provided.
This also guarantees that counselors will not use techniques and/or approaches for which they do not have competence; and (10) The objectives of counseling should be based on clients’ needs and not on the needs of the counselors.
In pursuing such needs of the client, the counselors must present a positive image.
3.2 Need for Guidance and Counseling The reasons for the establishment of Guidance and Counseling in the educational system of many countries are different from one another.
In the United States of America, for instance, it was the issue of space science development.
The fear that Russia was ahead in Space technology led to the establishment of Guidance and Counseling.
In Nigeria, some factors that are responsible for the development of guidance and counseling for the educational system include: (a) Expansion in the Enrolment of Pupils/Students in Primary and Secondary Schools From time immemorial, enrolment in all stages of our educational system has been on the increase.
Due to this, Fafunwa (1990), a one time Minister of Education, after examining the enrolment trends, which of course did not include actual applications made for enrolment, stated that: mandatory student Guidance and Counseling services should be established in all Nigerian institutions of higher learning and through such services, the true conditions of the Nigerian economy and its ever changing labour market situation and requirements would be exposed to students’ choice of fields and skill of study and inculcating in them the acceptance of the dignity and more superior option of leaving institutions of higher learning well prepared both as possible paid employees of other and creators of jobs for self and others, in both the formal and the informal sectors of the economy.
(p. 16).
12 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (b) Skilled Work Force Among the services offered through Guidance and Counselling is to guide people into areas where jobs are available taken the cognizance of their capability and competencies in order to reduce the problem of unskilled and skilled work force.
In the Technical and sub-professional sectors, there is noticeable shortage in manpower.
We depended on foreign experts to run our railways; Iron and Steel while the aviation sector is not spared from this manpower shortage too.
In the education sector, the few experts who trained Nigerians to be technologically self- sufficient have packed their bags and baggage for greener pasture, and to the safety and academic freedom of western countries.
The Medical sector is not spared from this rot.
There is shortage among senior craftsmen and technical foremen as well as high level secretarial and clerical personnel in the country (Okon, 1984).
In the light of the fact that Nigeria has a lot of human and material resources, one would have thought that the country would get out of the underdevelopment.
Other countries such as India, China have done it.
Therefore, the availability of Guidance services within the education system can help in the development of skills, attitudes, and potentials of Nigerian youths so as to realize their fullest possible capabilities for national development.
(c) Automation in the World of Work In 1972, Gaymer observed that that availability of professional counselors in the school system would have rewarding and increasing impact on the lives that students will have after they leave school.
She believes that the after school working lives of student will differ radically from the present and the past.
She therefore remarked that automation and technological changes and breakthroughs would lead to change their jobs more often; relocate more often; change the type of jobs more often; and update and trade in education for models to remain employable, and they will have to diversify their practical skills to remain competitive.
The import of these changes will require lots of people to seek for guidance and counseling.
Visitation to many of modern day offices show that lots of changes have taken place comparing the old office equipment that were in use.
Offices now has an IBM electric typewriter, a Computer, internet facility, a Fax machine, a 13 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Photocopier, a Laser printer, an answering machine, and many of such things.
In industries, robots have come to be utilized in many operational sectors.
In the assembly line, it is the robot that receive the order, does the parceling, the compilation, and the hauling of equipment from one section of the assembly line to another all with unwavering precision.
Robots are now known to fly planes, launch missiles and probe into outer space.
The implication of this technological revolution for the practice of guidance and counseling can only be imagined than described.
Although it is difficult to predict what the technological future will be like, suffice it to say that the nation that desires development deep into the 21st century and beyond should not pay lip service to guidance and counseling but should ensure that all machinery is set in motion to maximize the potentiality of the youths for timely absorptions, and survival in an uncertain technological future.
(d) Growing Needs of Youths According to Okon (1984), a NEED is a condition within an individual that energizes and disposes an individual toward certain kinds of behaviour.
Durojaiye (1976) stated that the developmental needs of youths include: i) attaining individuality; ii) making progress towards an organized personality pattern; iii) developing philosophy of life; iv) developing concept of values and desirable behaviour; v) achieving a place in the society; vi) understanding of personal assets and liabilities; vii) maturing of plans for future living; viii) establishing deep personal relationships with individuals of both sexes; ix) learning to live independently from their parent; x) learning to adjust to changes resulting from physical and social relationships and citizenship plans; and xi) learning to attain adult status by vocational plans, family, and social relationships and citizenship plans.
All these needs of the youths call for a need of guidance and counseling.
14 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (e) Repeated Changes in the Education System Since after independence, Nigeria has witnessed a number of changes in the education sector.
In the past, a pupil needed to spend 8 years in the primary school, 5 years in the secondary school, 2 years in the higher school, and 3 years in the University (8-5-2-3).
Later, the 6 years of primary, 5 years of secondary, 2 years of higher school, and 3 years of University system was recommended and adopted.
Currently, that is in vogue.
Already, there are calls in various sectors to change the system to 6-3-3-3- 3 to include three years at any College of Education or Polytechnic.
The present 6-3-3-4 does not include training at College of Education or Polytechnics.
These changes can cause confusion for the individual, which again demands the guidance services.
(f) Students’ adjustment in Universities and other Tertiary Institutions The students’ body is made up of students with different personality make-up, traits and needs.
Some are in the school system to study and get the certificate which will enable them to secure their future, some are there to socialize without really knowing why they are in school; that is playing and wasting away their time while some are there not knowing what course and subject to choose or study nor even how to plan their time and also develop appropriate study skills.
This situation requires counseling services handled by an expert to help the students adjust adequately.
(g) Problem of National Integration Nigeria, as judged by the 1993 census, has almost 104 million inhabitants with population density of about 800 people per square kilometer.
Three major linguistic groups, the Hausas, Ibos and Yorubas are found in the three main regions – Northern, Eastern and Western parts of the country respectively.
Each group and section of the country is clamouring for a share in the national cake.
The consequence has been political instability, religious intolerance, tribal loyalties, and all forms of vices which have militated against the development of the country.
Okon (1984) has observed that the survival of Nigeria as a nation depends largely on our degree of tolerance not only in economic, social and political stability but to a large extent, on the ability of every citizen to possess some measure of common understanding, 15 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING attitudes, beliefs, skills and purposes.
These attributes can be inculcated in youths very early in their educational development.
Thus, the inevitability of guidance and counseling in this respect cannot be overemphasized.
(h) Realities in Home and Family Life Family climate has a high influence in the direction and development of interests, abilities, aptitudes, and values of children.
Lots of changes these days happen in homes in Nigeria.
Most parents, because of the demands of their jobs, pay very little attention to the development of their sons and daughters.
Some parents also show bad examples to their children.
There are parents who believe so much in ethnicity, alcoholism and idolatry.
Changes in home life which have brought about some good are those resulting from urbanization where different ethnic groups converge on a city to the point that the next door neighbour may be someone from a different cultural boundary altogether.
Superstition is also de-emphasized in the urban centres, inter-ethnic, inter-tribal and inter-state marriages are occurring at increasing rates in Nigerian cities than in the rural areas.
Polygamy, which in the not too distant past, used to be a measure of affluence and status is no longer in vogue.
One of the greatest changes in family life is in the area of extended family network where ties have become weakened partly because of economic realities, distance and different geographical mobility.
Changes in family and home life include rising trends in divorce rates, single parenting, children studying far away from homes, reduction in the number of children a family wants and the provision of insurance for other members of the family.
These changes create a need for counselors to help children cope with these changes.
(i) Problems of Cultism Cultism activities have been in Nigeria institutions since its inception.
The dimensions it’s taken these days are more pathetic and worrisome.
Many students are these days’ members of one secret cult or the other and the level of what they do is fearful.
They kill, maim and destroy.
These negative tendencies in the societies and cults activities need to be exposed to individual through guidance activities.
16 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Self-Assessment Exercise: What are the developmental needs of the youths according to Durojaiye (1976)?
For the answers see page 14.
4.0 CONCLUSION Guidance and Counseling activities should therefore be based on the need and total development of every person.
It is the duty of all personnel in a setting to identify the needs of individual so that programme activities can be designed to meet such needs.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed the basic principles guiding the practice of guidance and counseling and also reasons for the need for guidance and counseling in the school system.
This background has prepared you for the next unit where you will read about its historical development both in America and in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss why Nigeria needs Guidance and Counseling in the educational system.
2.
What are the basic principles of guidance?
Using your own words, describe the key aspects of guidance services.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinade, E. A., Sokan, B. O., Oseremen N. (1986).
Introduction to Guidance and Counseling: A Basic Text for Colleges and Universities.
Ibadan: Caltep.
Idowu, A. I.
(Ed) (1998).
Guidance and Counseling in Education.
Ilorin: Indemac.
Kolo, F. D. (1992).
Guidance and Counseling in Perspective Zaria: Sleveno Printing.
Makinde, O.
(1983).
Fundamental of Guidance and Counseling.
London: Macmillan.
Okon, S. E. (1984).
Guidance for the 6-3-3-4 System of Education.
Zaria; Institute of Education.
17 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Olayinka, M. S. (1972).
The Role of Guidance and Vocational Counseling in Nigerian Education.
University of Lagos.
18 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 3 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History and origin of Guidance and Counseling 3.2 History and development of Guidance and Counseling in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Guidance and Counseling began to emerge as an identifiable aspect of the Nigerian educational enterprise in the mid ‘50s.It is a discipline whose history emanated from the experience of happenings in the United States of America and it is these happenings that influence the establishment of the Guidance and Counseling as a discipline in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (1) Explain the factors that led to the establishment of Guidance and Counselling in America.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History and Origin of Guidance and Counselling History is a continuum and any kind of division imposed on it is more or less arbitrary.
Guidance and Counselling as a discipline has an abundant evidence to show that it originated from America at the beginning of the 20th Century because of the society’s emphasis on individual development.
This could be seen from several historical events that took place in the United States.
These historical events are: (1) Vocational Guidance Movement (2) Standardized Testing Movement 19 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (3) Mental Health Movement (4) Pro-counselling Legislative Acts.
Vocational Guidance Movement: In 1908, Frank Parsons, founded a Vocational Bureau in Boston.
Parsons concern and belief was that if individuals can understand their strengths and weaknesses, such knowledge can be used to choose vocational opportunities This pioneering effort played a great role in the evolution of modern Guidance and Counselling.The vocational guidance movement was an attempt to reduce problems of unemployment, want and poverty among underprivileged Americans..
This experiments started by Parsons yielded positive results in that many youngsters benefited tremendously from the services rendered by the bureau (Shertzer and Stone, 1976).
Other pioneers in the advancement of counselling associated with the vocational guidance movement are Meyer Bloomfield, who succeeded Parsons as director of Boston’s Vocational Guidance Bureau, Frank P. Godwin of the Cincinnati School system, Jesse B. Davis, Eli Weaver in New York, George Merril in San Francisco and Hugo Munsterberg of Harvard University.
Each of these guidance pioneers put in their best to see to the growth of the service.
For instance, in 1910, Meyer Bloomfield single handedly promoted the first National Conference on vocational guidance in the United States of America.
Eli Weaver, on the other hand, promoted the Second National Conference on vocational guidance in 1912 while George Menil was the first American to practice counselling within the school system when he was a tutor in 1895 at the Californian School of Mechanical Arts, San Francisco.
Hugo Munsterberg also pioneered the development of career guidance in industry with the publication of his text titled “Psychology and Industrial Efficiency”.
Guidance and counselling actually started in United States of America with emphasis on vocational guidance.
It is on the same trend that it started in Nigeria considering the purpose and efforts of the Reverend Sisters at St Theresa’s College Ibadan.
It is worthy of note that emphasis on vocational guidance in the historical evolution of the discipline of Guidance and Counselling in developed and as well as in developing societies may be reflective of the pre-eminence of the institution of work in human civilization.
The Mental Health Movement also contributed positively to the evolution of Guidance and Counselling.
Clifford Beers was one of the pioneers of the mental health movement.
The publication of this book titled “A Mind that Formed Itself” revolutionized mental health practices and invariably it promoted the development of counselling 20 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING which can be regarded as part and parcel of mental health professions.
The testing movement also led to the development of test devices, which greatly improved inventory and appraisal components of Guidance and Counselling.
Another major factor in the evolution of guidance and counselling in the United States is the enactment of series of Pro-Counselling and Pro- Education Legislative Acts.
The great depression as well as expansion of government activities during the new deal era greatly increased public funding for guidance programmes.
Social upheavals, which accompanied great depression and other crisis, forced the American government to enact serious of pro-education and pro-counselling legislations.
Some of these legislations are the Vocational Education Act of 1917, Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1920, the Wagner Peysner Act of 1933, the National Defense Education Act of 1958, the Manpower Development Act of 1964 and the Career Education Incentive Act of 1976.
Of all the legislation, the National Defense Education Act of 1958 more than any piece of legislature promoted the growth of guidance and counselling in the United States.
When the soviet launched the world’s first satellite in 1957, the Americans were worried that Soviet Union had surpassed them in space technology.
With typical competitive spirit peculiar to America’s civilization, the United States space industry took up the soviet’s challenge.
As part of their effort to achieve parity with the soviet in space technology, the Americans decided to overhaul the educational system.
In order to achieve this goal, American’s legislators decided that career counselling should be provided in all American Schools.
That was the basic goal of the passage of the National Defense Act of 1958.
This legislation made massive funds available to Colleges and Universities for training guidance counselors for American Schools.
Ever since that time, guidance and counselling in the United States had been developing rather phenomenally.
Now, having examined the evolution of guidance and counselling in the United States, it is necessary to examine the development of guidance and counselling in Nigeria.
3.2 History and Development of Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria While the date of the formal start of modern guidance in USA is taken as 1908 via the vocational guidance work of Frank Parsons (Father of American Guidance Movement), 1958 can be regarded as the date of the commencement of modern guidance in Nigeria.
That year, the Catholic Reverend Sisters in St. Theresa’s College, Ibadan, recognized the need 21 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING to give adequate career or vocational guidance to their final year students.
Therefore in 1958, the reverend sisters, assisted by Mrs. Oruwariye, invited interested and enlightened members of the society to the school.
Specialists in different areas of endeavour who had made their marks were invited to give career talks on their professions to their final year students.
This effort gave insight to the students about world of work and hence assisted many of the students to select good jobs or higher institutions of learning.
The result was quite encouraging and it geared some other schools in Ibadan and other big towns around to start organizing career talks for their senior students.
This singular move led to emerging of career masters and mistresses while interested teachers in the school system were assigned job of collation and disseminating of career information to students.
In 1962, Ibadan Careers Council was formed.
It was composed of distinguished knowledgeable and philanthropic individuals.
Their aim was to propagate vocational guidance to students or the young ones.
They organized workshops, seminars and symposia.
In 1967, Nigeria Careers Council grew out of the Ibadan Career Council.
The members of the Ibadan Careers Council formed the nucleus and support of the Nigeria Careers Council.
They continued along the line of vocational guidance.
The Council incorporated career masters and mistresses.
A journal named “Careers” was published by this body to disseminate current information about job.
In a move that showed recognition of the guidance and counselling services, Dr. C. I. Berepiki, a Fellow of the Counselling Association of Nigeria, was appointed the first Vocational Guidance Officer by the Federal Ministry of Education, Lagos in 1961.
He wrote An Approach to Guidance in Schools.
For a very long time after him, there were no other trained officers to work actively in this unit but with the current state of the profession, the unit is well manned by trained male and female counselors.
It now has two sections – Careers and Counselling Sections.
They organize workshops and conferences and coordinate counselling activities in the country.
Many States Ministries of Education have similar set-ups.
Another opportunity to introduce guidance and counselling several secondary schools when in 1967, Mr. Rees, an American, organized a workshop at Comprehensive High School, Aiyetoro, Ogun State.
The motive was to plant the seed of guidance and counselling in that area and he did it successfully.
The Association, in 1992, started the same acronym with the Christian Association of Nigeria (CAN), and the Computer Association of Nigeria (CAAN).
In order to avoid confusion, 22 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING at the Kano Conference in 1992, the Association dropped CAN and took up CASSON i.e.
(Counselling Association of Nigeria).
The Association has also encouraged the formation of State Branches.
This is to encourage ‘grassroots’ spread of the Association.
Some state branches are quite active.
They hold various activities, workshops, seminars and handle some counselling cases.
This aspect is done on individual basis or, in some cases; ‘team approach’ is used.
Some state branches have journals e.g.
Imo State has Counselling Spectrum.
December 1, 1976 marked the birth of Counselling Association of Nigeria at the University of Ibadan.
The first president of the Association was Prof. Olu Makinde, (1976 – 1980) he was succeeded by Prof. S. A. Gesinde, (1980 – 1984), Prof. Para Mallum, (1984 – 1988), Dr. (Mrs.) Achebe C. C. (1989 – 1990); and Prof. C. G. M. Bakare (1990 – 1994); Dr. Nsa A. Nsa (1994 – 1996) and 1996 – 2002 Prof. Carew, Prof. A. I. Idowu, (2002 – 2004) and Prof. Okobia (2004).
The Association is a body of trained guidance counselors mainly, but it encourages interested individuals in the helping professions to join it.
The Association produces, through its senior members in the Universities and some Colleges of Education and other counselors for both the private and public sectors of the Nigerian economy.
The journal of the Association is called “The Counsellor”.
Through it, research findings of members, which are discussed at the annual conferences, are disseminated.
Conference proceedings are also published.
In 1975, the first Department of guidance and counselling in Nigeria was established in the University of Ibadan.
The second full-fledged department was established at the University of Ilorin in 1981.
Ever since then, several universities and some colleges of education have been producing well-trained counselors.
As at now, several counselors have had postgraduate training with Master and PhD degrees.
There are some professors already in the discipline.
Several journals have been formed to disseminate research findings.
These include Journal of Applied Psychology (UI); Nigerian Journal of Guidance and Counselling (University of Ilorin, Ilorin); Journal of Counselling and Development (Obafemi Awolowo University, Ife); Journal of Research in Counselling Psychology (Ogun State University, Ago-Iwoye); Journal of Counselling and Consulting Psychology (Lagos State University, Ojo, Lagos).
Several textbooks have been written on different areas of guidance and counselling by the trained counsellors.
23 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING The Federal Government has inserted the need for guidance and counselling in our schools in its National Policy on Education (1981).
This has helped to make all the State Governments to establish guidance and counselling units in their Ministries of Education.
In addition to counselling units in the Universities, there are some private clinics in the big cities such as Lagos, Ibadan and Owerri.
Suffice to say that although guidance and counselling is a relatively new comer to the Nigerian educational scene, it is gradually making its impact.
It is still evolving.
Guidance counsellors are playing their part in the implementation of the ongoing 6-3-3-4 educational systems.
4.0 CONCLUSION Guidance and Counselling as a discipline has an abundant evidence to show that it originated from America at the beginning of the 20th Century because of the society’s emphasis on individual development.
5.0 SUMMARY History of the genesis of what is known today as guidance and counseling was narrated.
It revealed the development of Guidance and Counseling both in America and Nigeria and the efforts of those who are really behind its establishment.
These include the various movements that were involved in America and also the organizations and individuals that saw to its establishments in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Write two important dates and what occurred then in the history of Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria.
2) Justify why guidance and counselling started with emphasis on vocational guidance.
3) Discuss the historical factors that contributed to the emergence of guidance and counselling in the United States.
24 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Kolo, F.D.
(1992): Guidance and Counselling in Perspective.
Zaria Steveno .Chapter 2 Pages 10 – 20.
Akinade, E.A.
et.
Al.
(1976): An Introduction to Guidance and Counselling: A basic text for Colleges and Universities.
Ibadan.
Caltop.
Chapter 2 Pages 24 – 35.
Idowu, A.I.
(1998): Guidance and Counselling in Education.
Ilorin, Inderac.
Chapter 1 Pages 21 – 25.
25 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENTAL PROBLEMS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems confronting development of Guidance and Counselling Programme in Nigeria 3.2 The prospect of Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are lots of hiccups in the different aspects of the Nigerian educational development.
This unit will treat the problems confronting the development of guidance and counseling aspect of the Nigerian educational development.
It will also show the prospects of guidance and counseling in Nigeria 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain why Guidance and Counselling has not developed fully in Nigeria.
2.
List the prospects of Guidance and Counselling services in Nigeria 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems Confronting the Development of the Guidance and Counselling Programme In Nigeria Although, the rationale for the introduction of Guidance and Counselling is inserted in the National Policy on Education (1981), the problems confronting the development of guidance and counselling programme could be grouped as those caused by men, materials and 26 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING money.
Its reception is received with suspicion and a ‘wait and see’ attitude.
This is due to the fact that there is: 1) Paucity of trained counsellors.
APGA recommended that there should be a ratio of 1 to 250 (counsellors-students/clients).
Denga (1985) says the ratio, as at 1980 was 1:800.
The situation could be worse.
This is because the limited members of trained counsellors are moving out of school settings into non-school settings.
A typical school with a population of 1,000 students is expected to have four counsellors; now such a school either has none or at best only one.
This poor counsellor-student ratio does not encourage the growth of guidance counselling in such schools.
However, special schools such as the Federal Government Colleges, ‘Military’ Secondary Schools, University- based Secondary Schools as well as standard/elitist private schools have adequate number of guidance counsellors.
The percentage of such schools compared with the total population of secondary schools in Nigeria is very small.
It is suggested that more guidance counsellors should be trained and encouraged.
In 1984, the Association of Nigeria Conference of Principals of Secondary Schools requested that guidance counsellors be posted to secondary schools.
This should be effected.
2) Relative newness of Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria.
While western education was introduced into the country about 1842, Guidance and Counselling was formally introduced in 1958.
That is after more than a century.
Educational instruction and administration had been entrenched in the educational system long before it.
Some educational practitioners tend to view it as an intruder.
3) Doubt about the efficacy of guidance and counselling.
Some people such as uninitiated colleagues, teachers, principals or administrators doubt the efficacy of counselling.
Psychology has really not attained the degree of precision found in the physical sciences.
People, especially adults are therefore skeptical about reliance about reliance on its use.
Such people think it is more applicable to children who are not yet ripe enough to make vital decisions for them.
They believe adults do not need it.
One may wonder who needs Marital, Rehabilitative, Parent Child counselling if not the grown-ups (Orubu 1986, Akinade 1990).
4) Blurred Role of the Guidance Counsellor.
Several people in the society do not know the specific roles of the counsellor.
Even in the school settings, where awareness is expected to be high, 27 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING school personnel such as teacher and principals do not understand or they misconstrue the functions of the counsellors.
For instance, Makinde (1981) wrote that head teachers see them as rivals-instead of helpers.
5) Resistance by colleagues and principals.
It has been observed by many guidance counsellors that they often experience resistance from institutional heads, influential and significant members of staff of their establishments.
Such officers often act in ways, which prevent the spread of counsellings.
Olaosebikan (1980) reported that counsellors face resistance, which might be stiff and persistent from principals and colleagues.
Most times, counsellors tend to be viewed with suspicion by them.
Some institutional heads might be apprehensive that the ‘new comer’ counsellor does not erode their prestige or popularity and power among students, parents and members of the public (….Ikan 1980).
Resistance of institutional heads may be reflected in their lukewarm, poor or reluctant attitude in supporting the programme or refusal to formally introduce the counsellor to other members of school staff.
6) Feeling of suspicion of the role/integrity of counsellors.
Some school personnel still see the counsellors as having a ‘hidden agenda’ or something to hide when a client goes into the counselling room (where this is available).
Some give counsellors negative or derogatory labels.
This is more so where the other workers doubt the moral integrity of counsellors who give individual counselling to young ones.
This feeling becomes more serious when a male counsellor treats female students and gives the interaction high confidentiality, yet, counselling demand reasonable privacy.
7) Confidentiality: The issue of confidentiality is pertinent in counselling.
Clients expect their secrets or privileged information to be kept secret or confidential and not exposed to others.
However, referral agents such as teachers, peers, parents, and principals expect counsellors to divulge such information to them.
Failure of the counsellor to reveal the ‘secret’ may raise the degree of suspicion of his activities.
Revealing the secrets lead to loss of faith in counselling and counsellors on one part, will lose clients and friends of such clients and counselling will be the big loser on the long run.
Yet, all these are happening.
8) Lack of commitment of Government Officers.
Although, the Federal Government entrenched the guidance and counselling 28 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING programme in the NPE, (1981), there is still much to do when it comes to practical support and its implementation.
More committed action will help the growth of the profession.
For instance, there should be adequate planning that would map out both short and long term goals as well as strategies of evaluating the progress being made.
9) Inadequate funding.
Guidance and Counselling is not well funded.
Today, the education enterprise has become a costly venture.
Enough funds are not allocated to each school to run its various services.
Where fund is available, very little is earmarked for counselling purposes.
It seems the various levels of government (Federal, State and Local) do not want to stretch their budgets with extra demands from an emerging unit such as guidance and counselling.
Yet, it is known that effective counselling demands adequate funding to purchase items such as psychological tests, journals and various publications, play gadgets, cardboards and various felt pens as well as money to organize activities such as Excursions, Career Clubs and Career Day/Week and furnishing a counsellor’s office.
10) Lack of Counselling Office/Room: Because of several factors such as explosion of students’ population and inadequate number of classrooms, problem of space or office accommodation is common in the typical secondary school.
This is particularly so in the urban centers (where counsellors may be found).
This results into a situation in which there is hardly any spare room that can be released for counselling as ‘counsellor’s office’.
Guidance may be given anywhere but counselling needs privacy if it is to be effective.
One may see a counsellor interacting with a client in one corner of the staff room, under a tree or a place seemingly away from people but such areas are never distraction- free.
The best that occurs in schools without a counselling office is guidance or educational / vocational counselling, not socio- personal counselling.
11) Paucity of Psychological Tests: There are very few ‘made in Nigeria’ for Nigerians psychological tests.
Several tests are being constructed but only a few of them have been standardized.
These tests include tests of Prof. C.G.M.
Bakare, Prof. Akinboye, WAEC 21 ID Aptitude Tests and Federal Ministry of Education Battery of Aptitude Tests for streaming JSS III students into course families in SSS 1.
Using psychological tests is one of the factors that make counselling scientific and more objective.
However, there are relatively few counsellors who can identify, 29 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING use and interpret the relevant ones.
The available foreign tests may not be culture-fair and hence may not be appropriate for use on culture in which they were neither validated nor standardized.
Deliberate efforts should be made to construct and standardize more psychological tests.
Counsellors should be trained in ways to use them too.
They should be sold to adequately trained users at affordable prices.
They should be available as well.
3.2 The prospect of Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria The prospect for Guidance and Counselling services in Nigeria depends on the solution to the problems enumerated above.
Alao et al (2003) remarked however that, based on the present trend, it seems that the future is bright for Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria for the following reasons: (1) The entire educational system in Nigeria is aware of the need of Guidance and Counselling services to the students.
This realization has made the Federal Government approve study programmes in guidance and counselling for most Universities in the country.
Of recent, Ahmadu Bello University begins a B. Ed.
programme on Guidance and Counselling by 1991/92 session.
This is in realisation of the need of such services.
With many guidance counsellors we then struggle for professionalization and conditions of service.
Almost all Nigerian Universities have got a Guidance and Counselling Centre to help their students.
All these are indications of awareness.
However effective these are now is another question to be answered by research.
(2) Also many bodies are becoming interested in the Guidance and Counselling services now.
For example, in 1987 Industrial Training Fund organized a National Workshop on Guidance and Counselling.
Also in 1988 Counselling Association of Nigeria organized their Annual Conference around the theme of Counselling outside the schools.
Others from different settings turned out.
With this trend, it may seem in the nearest future that the use of guidance services may permeate other sectors of the economy.
(3) Guidance and Counselling is also being proposed to be integrated into the training of Nigerian Teachers.
This implies that in the nearest future, Guidance and Counselling may be well established in the schools.
With every teacher being adequately educated on Guidance and Counselling, the commonly reported 30 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING rancor between counsellors and teachers may be resolved hence prospect for practice.
(4) Problems of various types are emerging in our society.
Marital problems, family problems, vocational problems, relationship problems and retirement problems.
All these and others demand the attention of the counsellors.
As long as these problems exist in the society, guidance counsellors will always have work to do either as public or private counsellors.
With the factors or conditions still operational in Nigeria, then the future is bright for counsellors and the prospect therein may depend on how effective the counsellors use their skills and competencies to help their fellow human beings to understand and resolve their problems in a more realistic way.
4.0 CONCLUSION The development of guidance and counselling programme was bedeviled with myriad of problems ranging from those caused by men, materials and money.
This informed the rationale for the introduction of Guidance and Counselling inserted in the National Policy on Education (1981).
Notwithstanding the problems enumerated, evidences point to the fact that based on the present trend, the future is bright for Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY A number of problems in Nigeria that are still hindering the advancement of Guidance and Counselling are explained in this unit.
Among these factors is the relative low number of professionally trained counsellors to the entire population that needs the services.
The prospects for Guidance and Counselling in Nigeria were also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Has counselling any future in Nigeria?
Discuss with your friend.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Kolo, F.D.
(1992): Guidance and Counselling in Perspective.
Zaria Steveno.
Chapter 2 Pages 10 – 20.
Akinade, E.A.
et.
Al.
(1976): An Introduction to Guidance and Counselling: A basic text for Colleges and Universities.
Ibadan.
Caltop.
Chapter 2 Pages 24 – 35.
31 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Idowu, A.I.
(1998): Guidance and Counselling in Education.
Ilorin, Inderac.
Chapter 1 Pages 21 – 25.
32 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 5 FUNCTIONS OF THE SCHOOL COUNSELLOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of a School Counsellor 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will read about the functions performed by the school guidance counsellor in the school system.
This will give you an insight into the different kinds of services that are offered by the professionally trained Guidance counselor in the school and its environment.
You should be ready to make use of these services for the benefit of your students.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (1) Discuss the functions performed by the Guidance Counsellor in the school setting.
(2) List the functions performed by the Guidance counselor in the school system.
(3) Enumerate the services offered by the school Guidance Counsellor.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions of the School Counsellor The functions carried out by the school guidance counsellor are made up of the execution of a number of highly specialized services that constitutes the pattern of activities within the school guidance programme.
These services are the basic elements of guidance and counselling programme; they are the formalized actions or steps the school guidance counsellor take to make guidance and counselling operational and available to students.
These functions in the school 33 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING setting include appraisal service, counselling service, information service, planning, placement and follow-up service, orientation service, consulting service, evaluation service and referral service.
1.
Appraisal Service – This could also be termed individual analysis.
Okon (1984) remarked that appraisal is a developmental or longitudinal process of collecting, processing, storing and using a variety of objective and subjective personal and social information to help the school staff have a better understanding of the students as well as help individual student to better know and understand self.
Suffice it to say that appraisal service involves collecting, analyzing and using a variety of tools to gather data through which students are made to understand themselves.
Through this function, the guidance counsellor makes a student to become aware of his characteristics, strengths and weaknesses and further develops rational decision making capabilities.
This service enables the counsellor to provide relevant data that will enable parents, teachers and administrators understand students.
2.
Counselling Service – This function enables the counsellor who is trained to give assistance to and/or to have an interactive relationship with the counsellee who needs assistance.
Through this service, counsellees are helped to deal effectively with self and the reality of his/her environment.
The service regarded as the nucleus of guidance service helps facilitate self understanding and self development which afford individuals or group of people a better understanding of themselves in terms of their confused ideas, hopes, fears, feelings and aspirations.
3.
Informative Service – Through this service, the guidance counsellor is always able to provide the school and the students with better knowledge of educational, vocational and personal – social opportunities in order to have the benefit of making informed decision and choices.
This function involves collection of data in diverse areas of education, career and social life for presentation to students in order to be informed so that they can make decisions with ease in increasingly complex society.
4.
Planning Service – Planning is to decide ahead of time what an individual wants to do, and the way he will do it.
Part of a guidance counsellor’s functions includes assisting the students plan their activities.
The guidance counsellor helps students plan their educational, vocational and personal social activities realistically in order to assist them in achieving their goals.
34 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 5.
Placement Service – The guidance counsellor carries out placement functions in and outside the school setting.
In the school setting, placement can be carried out by placing students in appropriate classes and/or schools, courses, training or vocations.
He or she can also do placement for students who are to go for attachment, practical or industrial training outside the school setting.
The counsellor is always armed with tools that could be used for effective placement within or outside the school setting.
6.
Follow-up Service – This function enables the guidance counsellor to see through the services he/she must have offered the counsellee.
It is an avenue through which the counsellor determines the effectiveness of planning and placement activities.
This service allows the counsellor to see and verify whether the guided or counseled individual or group is coping after guidance or counselling.
7.
Orientation Service – This function serves the purpose of acquainting new students in an academic environment with the facilities, challenges and problems and prospects in their new school.
It is a guidance service that allows the guidance counsellor to make the new students psychologically stable in the new environment (new school) because they will be meeting with new set of people, administration, rules and regulations and environment which may require adjustment for them to be able to cope perfectly.
8.
Evaluation Service – This enables the guidance counsellor to assess the effectiveness of his stewardship in the school system.
The evaluation can be carried out through the use of interview, observation or questionnaire.
These measurement instruments are used to gather data which will reveal whether or not the services provided are adequate in the school.
The gathered information will enable the counsellor to improve upon the services he/she is providing or modify or suspend anyone that is not achieving the desired result.
9.
Consulting Service – Consultation here refers to interaction between the guidance counsellor and other professionals in the school setting.
It is an avenue through which technical assistance are offered to other professionals in the school in order to become more effective in the services they offer to the students and staff.
35 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 10.
Referral Service – This is an act of transferring a client/counsellee to another professional or agency where his/her problem can be appropriately handled.
The professional or agency may be within, or outside the school setting.
Shertzer and Stone (1976) remarked that personnel or agency outside the school setting are used because they provide specialised services that the guidance counsellor cannot claim to have expertise in all sphere of endeavour, he makes referral with the consent of the client / counsellee on matters outside his/her competence.
The entire functions of the guidance counsellor in the school setting are to assist each student to understand himself and live effectively in the society.
The need for guidance services in the school system is therefore based on the assumption that the individual who understands himself and his environment will be more productive and effective in his entire endeavour.
The objectives which the functions performed by the guidance counsellor in the school system according to Ipaye (1983) includes: (i) To help students develop the skills of self study, self analysis and self understanding.
(ii) Guidance services should help students develop awareness of opportunities in the personal, social, educational, vocational areas by providing them with appropriate, useful and useable information.
(iii) Also, guidance services in the school should help students acquire the skills of collecting and using appropriate information.
(iv) To assist all students in making appropriate and satisfactory personal, social, educational, vocational and leisure choices.
(v) Guidance service should help students develop positive attitude to self, to others, to appropriate national issues, to work and learning.
(vi) To help students acquire as early as possible in their lives a positive image of selves through self understanding and self direction.
(vii) Guidance services should help students who are under achieving to use their potentials to the maximum.
36 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (viii) Also, guidance services in the school should help students relate behaviour meaningfully to cognitive achievement and the chances of success in life.
(ix) To help build up or sharpen the students’ perception of reality, development of a sense of autonomy and to whip up the motivation for creativity and productivity.
(x) Guidance services in the schools should assist students in the process of developing and acquiring skills in problem solving and decision making.
(xi) To work with significant others in the life of students by helping them to understand the needs and problems of the students with the purpose of creating, arousing and sustaining their interest in and their understanding of the students’ needs, problems and goals so that the students can be optimally helped to attain their goals, handle these problems and those needs.
(xii) To help route the nation’s human resources into appropriate, useful and beneficial channels thus preventing unnecessary economic wastage.
(xiii) Guidance services should help identify and nurture human potentialities in various fields or endeavours thus ensuring adequate manpower development in various sectors of the economy.
(xiv) To help build up in individuals positive attitude to fellow Nigerians and a sense of total commitment to the unity of Nigeria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the functions performed by the guidance-counselor in the school system according to Ipaye (1983).
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE See Pages 34and 35 above.
4.0 CONCLUSION The services offered by a School Counsellor are the formalized actions or steps the school guidance counsellor takes to make guidance and counselling operational and available to students.
These functions in the 37 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING school setting include appraisal service, counselling service, information service, planning, placement and follow-up service, orientation service, consulting service, evaluation service and referral service.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied what the functions of the school guidance counsellors are.
With this knowledge, you will be able to assist in carrying out the guidance functions in the school setting.
You know why counsellees are on referral to other personnel within or outside the school system.
Orientation services among others are also no longer new to you.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) (1) Enumerate and discuss fully the services offered by the Guidance Counsellor in the school setting 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ipaye, T. (1983).
Guidance and Counselling Practices, Ile-Ife, University of Ife Press.
Okon, S. E (1984).
Guidance for 6-3-3-4 System of Education.
Zaria; Institute of Education ABU Shertzer and Stone (1976).
Fundamentals of Guidance; Boston, Houghton, Mifflin and Company.
38 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 6 FUNCTIONS OF THE MAJOR STAKEHOLDERS IN GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Roles and functions of major stakeholders in School Guidance Programme 3.1.1 Guidance functions of School Principals 3.1.2 Guidance functions of Teachers 3.1.3 Guidance functions of School Counsellor 3.1.4 Guidance functions of the Parents or Guardians 3.1.5 Guidance responsibilities of the School Pupils 3.1.6 The Community and the School Guidance Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are some people whose interest and participation in guidance and counselling services in the school setting are very important.
These people’s participation help determine the success or failure of the guidance programme in the school.
The guidance programme will only be useful if the key persons play their roles individually and collectively for the success of the guidance programme.
In this unit, you will be reading about some of the responsibilities of these key persons.
The key persons include the principal, teachers, the pupils or students, the parents and even the entire community.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you will be able to: 1. identify and discuss the roles and functions of major stakeholders in the school-guidance programme; 39 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 2. state and explain the basic steps involved in ensuring effective community-participation in school guidance; and 3.
Identify the functional advantages of effective community participation in school guidance.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Roles and Functions of Major Stakeholders In School Guidance Services The school-principal, classroom teacher, school-guidance counsellors, parents and guardians of pupils and the pupils themselves are major stakeholders in school-guidance services.
These major-stakeholders have specific roles and responsibilities for the success and effectiveness of school guidance programme.
It should, however, be restated that only through the team-approach could the guidance programme yield the best results.
Perhaps, it is important at this junction to examine the functions of each of these major stakeholders.
3.1.1 Guidance Functions of School-Principals 1.
The school-principal is the chief executive within the secondary school-system.
He is by virtue of this position expected to provide leadership for all school-based programme, including school-guidance.
The following, however, are some of the specific functions of the principal in school-guidance practice.
2.
The principal should recognise and appreciate the need for and the importance of a comprehensive school guidance programme for all pupils.
3.
The principals should make provision in terms of budgetary allocations and physical plant planning for effective delivery of school-guidance services.
4.
Provide the needed facilities, equipment, supplies and clerical and administrative support-systems for effective school guidance.
5.
Direct and coordinate school guidance programme cooperatively with other members of staff within the school.
6.
Take responsibility for setting-up the school guidance committee after consultation with the counsellor and other staff in the school.
40 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 7.
Take responsibility for consulting with members of staff to arrive at unanimous decisions on such matters pertaining to organizational structure, individuals’ roles and functions of all personnel involved in school-guidance programme.
8.
Plan, initiate and develop a tradition of in-service training for school counsellors.
9.
Plan, coordinate and mobilize community based-resources to enhance school guidance programme.
The most important guidance role of the school principal is perhaps to ensure that the whole school climate becomes a growth-promoting environment where pupils and teachers are free to be themselves even while still in teaching-learning contexts.
3.1.2 Guidance Functions of Teachers According to Zeran and Riccion (1962), the following are the guidance functions of school teachers: 1.
Know and use the basic principles of human behaviour.
2.
Develop skills in observing and analysing student behaviour in order to ascertain when an incident is significant, and, also to be sure that it will not be reported out of context.
3.
Provide the student with facts about himself and his environment as a basic framework for thinking logically about his goals and then relating them to his abilities.
4.
Place emphasis on self-understanding, self-direction, utilisation of potentials, and acceptance of responsibilities for actions by the student.
5.
Express to the principal the need for an organised programme of guidance services.
6.
Cooperate with the principal in the evaluation of existing guidance services and in the inventory to staff competencies useful in the guidance service.
7.
Accept the opportunity to participate in the planning and development stages of the programme.
41 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 8.
Recognise the need for specialised guidance personnel and understand the relationships so necessary between the guidance personnel and the classroom teacher.
9.
Assist in providing data for the students’ cummulative record folder and utilize these data in a professional manner.
10.
Develop home and classroom activity materials.
11.
Integrate occupational, educational, and personal-social information into the respective subjects.
12. Review constantly course content and curricular offerings to meet student needs.
13.
Realise the necessity of becoming concerned with all phases of the student’s developmental patterns, rather than just with his intellectual achievements.
14.
Participate in case conferences.
15.
Assist students whenever possible and refer those whose needs are beyond their competencies.
16.
Request in-service assistance in the further development of old, and the acquiring of new competencies useful in performing the guidance activities.
On the whole, teachers must realise that classroom teaching and learning is indeed a therapeutic exercise.
Every teacher therefore needs to have a guidance orientation to his/her teaching-learning activities.
Classroom teaching must be interesting, it must be interactive, it must be animating; it has to have a personal touch.
All these involve that the classroom teacher must develop guidance competencies.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate between the principal’s and teacher’s responsibilities in the guidance programme?
List five.
3.1.3 Guidance Functions of the School Counsellor As discussed earlier, school counsellors perform functions that are very germane to both the academic and personality well-being of school students.
Several authorities in guidance such as Makinde (1984), Ipaye 42 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (1980), Brammer (1996), Makinde & Alao (1987) and others have advocated that the school counsellor must perform his functions in such a way as to carry along the whole school environment where they are operating.
While going through these functions of a counsellor, it should be realized that the functions should be carried out cooperatively with other professional members of the school system.
Zeran & Riccio (1962) beautifully spelt out the functions of the school counsellor as follows: 1.
Evaluate his professional preparation and strengthen areas of deficiency.
2.
Ascertain that his understandings coincide with those of the principal relative to his role and responsibilities as well as line and staff relationships in the organisational pattern.
3.
Obtain the cooperative participation of the staff.
4.
Demonstrate a desire to have a built-in system of evaluation as part of the programme.
5.
Recommend to the principal areas for research and study as well as those supplementary competencies, which should be considered when employing new personnel.
6.
Assist in the development of in-service programmes and participate in those areas of special competence.
7.
Encourage teachers to identify students needing assistance and also those that have special talents.
8.
Identify the potential drop-out and seek to meet his specific needs in an effort to salvage him so that he may complete his formal education.
9.
Encourage students to accept the responsibility for full utilization of their potentials.
10.
Provide help in developing and carrying on case conferences.
11.
Stimulate teachers to provide materials for the student’s individual cummulative record folders and to use them in a professional manner.
43 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 12.
Confer with parents.
13.
Refer students needing assistance beyond their competency.
14.
Maintain good public relations with community, country and stage agencies.
15.
Assist the school librarian in obtaining and keeping current materials on occupational, educational, and personal-social information.
16.
Help teachers obtain materials in the area of the informational services.
17.
Demonstrate his professional competency.
On the whole, the school counsellor is expected to provide technical leadership for school guidance programme.
Most of the functions highlighted above reinforce the role of the school counsellor as the technical and professional leader of all guidance activities in the school.
3.1.4 Functions of Parents or Guardians Parents and guardians are expected to cooperate with the school in the education and guidance of their children.
Cooperation is the best word that summarises the functions of parents and guardians (Zeran & Riccio, 1962).
The following are some of the specific cooperative functions of parents in the school guidance programme.
1.
Parents should provide information.
Parents have responsibility for providing information which would be useful in providing proper guidance for their children.
2.
Parents should also encourage their children to make use of guidance services.
3.
Parents should also utilize guidance services in the school to learn more about their children.
4.
Parents should also examine their own home lives to determine if their children are operating from a home environment that is conducive to learning.
5.
Parents should ensure that they help the school by teaching their children proper attitudes such as those of self-discipline, self- 44 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING improvement, dignity of labour, acceptance of responsibility, and honesty.
3.1.5 Guidance Responsibilities of Pupils The pupils, students or clients are expected to discharge their responsibilities too.
Among them are: (1) To cooperate with teachers and school administration when they are sent to the counsellor for guidance.
(2) To recognize and accept the counsellor as a professional.
(3) To go for counselling as the need arises for them.
(4) To make use of educational and occupational materials provided for them by the school guidance services.
(5) They are to open up i.e.
ready to give the counsellor any information needed to help them in the counselling process.
(6) Pupils or clients are also to help create awareness for others of the importance of guidance and counselling in the school.
In so doing, they will strengthen the programme.
(7) They are to assist the guidance programme by informing their parents of the material, and other needs of the school guidance programme so that they can provide.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Examine the functions of the guidance counsellor.
2.
Identify the guidance responsibilities of school pupils.
3.1.6 The Community and the School Guidance Programme The community is where the school is located.
It has a right to expect the best from members of the school system.
It is also the responsibilities of the community to provide facilities and services that will allow the school to produce the best from the students and other members of the school community.
The attitude of the community affects the tone of the school.
The community must relate closely with the school.
The school guidance counsellor should tap from the pool of resources in the 45 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING community in providing effective guidance services to students.
The following are some of the areas of where the community could be useful for school guidance services: 1.
The community comprises a referral resource base for the school guidance programme.
2.
The community should show interest in the school guidance activities organised for them and their children.
3.
The community provides avenues or opportunities for work-study programme for the students.
4.
Organisation of field trips to places of occupational interest must involve community participation.
5.
Placement services must be based on the good understanding of occupational and educational opportunities in the community.
6.
The community can provide resource persons for career talks and information needed for counselling.
4.0 CONCLUSION On the whole, the school needs to harness the resources available in the community and bring them to bear on the quality of services offered pupils in the school.
The school counsellor must always bear in mind that the cooperation of the community is needed in order to provide effective guidance services to pupils within the school.
5.0 SUMMARY Major stakeholders’ roles in the school guidance services have been examined in this unit.
Cooperation is highly regarded in the discharge of the various guidance roles and functions of the stakeholders in school-guidance practice.
The significance of community participation in school guidance was also discussed in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the guidance roles and responsibilities of three of the major stakeholders in the school guidance programme.
2.
Highlight five ways in which the community can participate in the school guidance programme.
46 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Brammer, L.M.
(1996).
The Helping Relationships: Process and Skills 6th Ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Prentice-Hall.
Brewer, T.M.
(1932).
Education as Guidance.
New York, Macmillan.
Kolo, F.D.
(1992).
Guidance and Counselling in Perspective.
Zaria: Steveno.
Makinde Olu (1984).
Fundamentals of Guidance and Counselling.
Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London.
Makinde Olu & Alao (1987).
The Profile of Career Education, Signal Educational Services Ltd., Ibadan.
Zeran, F.R.
& Riccion, A.C. (1962).
Organisations and Administration of Guidance Services.
Rand McNally and Company, Chicago.
47 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 7 ORGANISATION OF GUIDANCE SERVICES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content Organising and administering a School Guidance Programme 3.1.1 Planning and organising Guidance Programme Problems affecting the effective implementation of Guidance Programme in Nigeria Solutions to the Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about how to organise and administer a guidance programme in the school system.
This will reveal to you how the school guidance counsellor is expected to go about handling his or her professional functions and activities in the school.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you will be able to: 1.
Discuss how guidance services should be carried out in the school system 2.
Identify and explain what is expected of the guidance counsellor while planning and administering the guidance services in the school 48 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organising and Administering of a School Guidance Programme 3.1.1 Planning and Organising Guidance Programme It is a statement of fact that guidance programme is yet to be fully introduced in our schools in Nigeria.
In fact, in few schools where career masters/mistresses provide information and a skeletal form of guidance programme, such service rendered by the personnel are inadequate because of their limited experience, background and training.
An important aspect in the organisation and administration of school guidance is the need to plan the programme of action.
In other words, it is necessary to decide the strategy to be used before any programme of guidance can be introduced.
Planning essentially involves deciding in advance what is to be done and how to accomplish the task.
Therefore, a counsellor must be armed with adequate data on the type of programme to be introduced in the school before embarking on such a venture.
There are certain principles that should be borne in mind in an attempt to introduce a guidance programme into the school setting.
Among other things, the following seems to be prominent: (i) Guidance should rather be introduced gradually than being superimposed on the school and the staff.
(ii) The goals and objectives of the programme must conform to the instructional activities of the school.
(iii) The school guidance programme must facilitate continuous communication among all members of the school.
(iv) Such a programme must have special facilities without which the counsellor cannot function effectively.
(v) Above all, it must constantly be engaged in a process of self- examination, that is, the programme must be evaluated on continuous basis.
Against this background, a school counsellor who is mindful of the fact that the programme must be planned and reasonably executed must 49 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING follow some steps in the attempt to introduce the programme.
Some of the steps are as follows: 1.
Pre-planning Stage: i.e.
preliminary activities.
At this stage, the counsellor carries out the following activities: (a) Need Assessment of the Programme The counsellor on arriving at the school must conduct a situation analysis which refers to assessing the needs for the programme.
This consists of a private and independent investigation of the desirability or otherwise of the programme in the school setting.
The need assessment data will reveal the students problems, the population of the students in the school, available facilities and the acceptance or otherwise of the proposed programme.
(b) Formulation of the Policy and Objectives Armed with the need assessment data on the programme, the counsellor now proceeds to formulate policy and state in clear terms the objectives of the programme.
The objectives must be related to the needs of the students.
In addition, at this stage, attempts will be made to delineate the functions of the programme and the types of personnel that will be needed for the programme.
(c) Determining the means and methods of Implementation The counsellor must determine in advance the approach to be used in executing the programme.
The most suitable approach should be selected for the programme.
2.
Planning Stage: The following sub-stages are note worthy under the planning stage: (a) Consultation This is very vital to the success of the programme.
Having collected relevant information about the desirability of the programme for a particular school, the counsellor must consult the principal, the staff, other school functionaries, the students and the parents.
He must first sell the 50 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING programme and its objectives to them thus, seeking their blessing and support for the programme.
In other words, the programme must be approved by the entire school Community before it takes off.
In addition, the counsellor must determine the site and facilities for the programme, supporting personnel, staff service training, participation and support of the administration and public enlightenment.
It is also essential at the planning stage to discuss and agree upon how the outcomes of the programme will be evaluated.
(b) Formation of the School Guidance team/committee An important aspect of the planning stage is the formation of the guidance implementation committee in the school.
The committee should have the representatives of the administration, staff, other school functionaries and students as members.
The school counsellor should serve as the secretary of the committee.
Among other things, the committee has the following roles and responsibilities: i.
Determining the resources/facilities to be used for the programme; ii.
Outlining/determining the objectives of the programme; iii.
Outlining how the programme should be carried out; iv.
Identifying the essential services to be introduced and implemented; v. Coordinating the programme of activities; vi.
Assigning duties and responsibilities relative to the (guidance) programme to other school functionaries; vii.
Giving feedback on the programme; viii.
Evaluating the programme from time to time; and ix.
Carrying out other activities relating to the programme in the school.
3.
Implementation Stage The counsellor’s role at this stage is very crucial to the success of the programme.
This is because the counsellor’s leadership, 51 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING effectiveness and ability to coordinate the activities of the programme will to a large extent affect the outcome of the programme.
At this point, the counsellor in conjunction with the guidance committee will select or agree on the type of services to be introduced based on the need assessment data.
Also, at this stage, it becomes necessary to plan a time-table of guidance activities.
Among the activities to be implemented in a minimum programme of guidance services include: (a) A complete individual inventory (b) An information service (c) Individual and group counselling service (d) Orientation programme (e) Planning, placement and follow-up service.
Added to this is the need for a summary service card/form in which all the activities relating to the programme will be stated.
4.
Evaluation/Review of the programme The school guidance programme should be reviewed and evaluated from time to time.
This will help to determine whether the objectives of the services provided have been achieved or not.
However, it must be stated that the review should involve the entire school community.
The counsellor can use different techniques such as interview method, observations techniques and questionnaire method for collecting information from the participants and beneficiaries of the programme.
The information collected will assist the counsellor to determine whether or not the objectives of the programme have been achieved.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify and discuss the stages involved while planning and organising school guidance programme.
2.
How will you evaluate the school guidance programme?
3.2 Problems affecting the Effective Implementation of School Guidance Programme in Nigeria Below are some of the problems affecting the effective implementation of school guidance programme in the country.
52 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING (a) Lack of fund; (b) Lack of facilities; (c) Lack of information materials and psychological tests; (d) Lack of cooperation from other school personnel; (e) Rivalry among the school functionaries; (f) Shortage of personnel; (g) Ignorance and lack of adequate understanding of the importance of guidance in Nigeria schools; (h) Lack of appropriate definition of the philosophy upon which guidance should be based; and (i) Inconsistent policy on guidance and counselling.
3.3 Solutions to the Problems (a) Proper education of the public on the role of guidance in the schools; (b) Government should provide adequate fund for guidance programme in schools; (c) Minimum physical facilities should be provided; (d) Development of indigenous psychological tests should be encouraged; (e) Adjusting teacher education programme to include training in the basic skills of counselling; (f) Training of more counsellors; and (g) Need for consistency in the formulation of policy on school guidance.
4.0 CONCLUSION An important aspect in the organisation and administration of school guidance is the need to plan the programme of action.
In other words, it is necessary to decide the strategy to be used before any programme of guidance can be introduced.
Planning essentially involves deciding in advance what is to be done and how to accomplish the task.
Therefore, a counsellor must be armed with adequate data on the type of programme to be introduced in the school before embarking on such a venture.
53 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has showed that functional school guidance requires a proper planning and the fact that it is important that Counsellor should be armed with adequate data on the type of programme to be introduced in the school setting.
Different types of planning divisions are discussed.
It is revealed that lack of funds, facilities, rivalries among school functionaries and lack of cooperation among school personnel are the problems that always militate against good school guidance programme.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write on eight problems affecting the practice of guidance services in the Nigeria school system and proffer solutions to the problems 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ipaye, B.
(1995).
Guidance and Counselling in Nigerian Schools.
Chayoobi Printers and Publishers.
28 Olaniyi Street, Pedro, Lagos, Nigeria.
Odediran, N.O (1995).
Guidance and Counselling Nigerian School Counsellors.
Nato Publicity and Printing Co. 48 Taiwo Road, Ilorin.
Umoh, S.H (1998).
The Need for Guidance and Counselling in the Nigerian Educational System.
In Idowu, A.I; Guidance and Counselling in Education.Indemac Nigeria Publishers Ltd, Ibrahim Taiwo, Ilorin.
54 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING MODULE 2 Unit 1 Records and Record Keeping in School Guidance Programme Unit 2 Process and Techniques in Counselling Unit 3 Techniques of Counselling Unit 4 Group Dynamic Process in Counselling Unit 5 Continuous Assessment in Schools Unit 6 Historical and Theoretical Development of Vocational Guidance Unit 7 Collection, Planning and Dissemination of Career Information UNIT 1 RECORDS AND RECORD KEEPING IN SCHOOL GUIDANCE PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of School Records 3.2 Qualities of Good Record 3.3 Use of Records 3.4 Access to Records 4.0 Conclusion 50 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Records and record keeping is considered to be very important in the school guidance programme.
It is one of the functions of the Counsellor which involves the collection, collation and filling of information about events occurring in the life of an individual.
Principally, records help the counselor to obtain reliable and useful information about students when these are needed to offer him/her any form of assistance in the school.
Proper record keeping helps the school authority and in taking vital decision on students.
It is also a good ground that helps to justify or validate decisions in the school.
55 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to do the following: (a) list at least five different types of school records; (b) mention five uses of the school records.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of School Records 1.
The cumulative record folder The cumulative record folder is the most important single record which provides for the recording of important data on the student.
It serves as the depository for all other record sheets and record data which are regarded as pertinent to the student’s welfare.
2.
Report Sheets/Card This record is mainly for recording the student’s scores in the various tests, assignments, projects etc.
as well as marks obtained in the end of term examinations.
It shows in a summary form, the student’s academic performance during the term/year.
3.
The Transcript This is another important record.
It contains the overall summary of the student’s performance and behavioural ratings for the entire period of his stay in the school.
It is issued at the end of the student’s course or if he/she is transferring to another school.
While some universities in Nigeria issue transcript to students every session, other universities issue it at the end of the programme and not directly to students.
On application by student, such transcript is sent directly to Admission Officers with warning that students should not see it.
4.
Health Record This record provides information about the student’s health, physical appearance and fitness.
56 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 5.
Attendance Record It is an information record on students’ attendance to class.
It also provides information on punctuality.
3.2 Qualities of good Records On a general basis, the following are some of the elements basic to any record devised either for routine class work or for purposes of continuous assessment.
(a) A good record must be easy to keep.
Recording and maintaining the record should take the barest minimum of a teacher’s time.
(b) A good record must fulfill a specific task and still be informative years later when it is reconsidered or consulted.
(c) The record should be based on knowledge and procedures which are common to all teachers or which could be explained to teachers effectively well within a short period.
This means that a good record should be simple to understand.
No matter how well kept a record is, if it is based on an obscure system or on a secret coding system, it will be of no help when a child transfers from one school to another.
(d) A record should be constructive, i.e.
it should provide enough detail about a child – his strengths and weaknesses (behaviourally), socially, cognitively etc.)
for a balanced judgment to be made by another teacher or user of the recorded information/data.
(e) A good record, as much as possible, should be versatile i.e.
where possible; it should serve more than one purpose.
A record which serves two or more functions saves time and sometimes energy.
(f) Every record kept must have a purpose, thus ensuring that the record performs a specific function in the future.
(g) A good record should be cross indexed i.e.
any overall record should provide some means whereby, quick reference can be made in terms of obtaining more detailed information as to how conclusions were drawn.
Specifically therefore, where there is a general, overall record in a school, individual records should also be available.
57 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 3.3 Use of Records (a) School records provide reliable information about students as he/she progresses through school.
(b) Data from the records can be used by the Counsellor to help students adjust o the situation in the school thereby facilitating learning.
(c) Records can be used to assist students to understand themselves, in terms of their physical, intellectual and social development.
(d) Teachers, parents and significant others could also understand the student through the information contained in school records like cumulative record.
(e) Information in school records can help students to make realistic decisions about their future.
(f) School records also provide information about the extent to which the school and its function arises is meeting the needs of the students.
(g) It is s a reference point when there is need to make referral about a student who is transferring from one school to another.
3.4 Access to Records Privacy of students’ records should be part of the legislation that schools must abide with.
As this privacy is guarded, it is important to know the members of the society that should have access to the records and the information therein.
For example, in the United States of America, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 give parents the right to review the official cumulative folder of the child.
Parents or legal guardians are also given the right to inquire about and even challenge any information in the child’s folder.
They could also question the information if they think it is inaccurate, misleading or even inappropriate.
According to Onna (1979), outside the parents and professional school personnel, permanent records are not open to others except by the order of the Court.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the uses of records in the school system?
58 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 See pages 55and 56 above 4.0 CONCLUSION Records and record keeping is in no small way an important component of the school programme.
If records are kept properly just as it will contribute to developing individual learners, schools will also be able to recognise their areas of inadequacy take care of them and improve on their areas of strength which will enhance the general progress of the schools.
5.0 SUMMARY Knowledge of records and record keeping entails understanding the meaning, types, qualities, uses and who should have access to the records.
If records are properly kept and corresponding level of privacy observed, they can be used in a tremendous way to create and sustain good image for the schools in Nigeria apart from other receive which individual learners would benefit from them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (a) What are records?
(b) Mention five qualities of a good record.
(c) Name three groups of people that are qualified to access school records.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED SELF ASSIGNMENT Mention five ways by which school records can be used to create and sustain good image for the University.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ipaye, T. (1982).
Continuous assessment in schools (with some counseling applications).
Ilorin University Press: University of Ilorin.
Ilorin.
Oana K. (1979) Opportunities in Counselling and Guidance.
Oana, K. Illinois.
VCM career Horizons.
59 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Yoloye et al (1981).
Handbook on Continuous Assessment.
Lagos Ministry of Education.
60 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 2 PROCESS AND TECHNIQUES IN COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Counselling Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Counselling process is the procedure and ways by which clients’ problems are worked through.
It is the procedure, which both the Counsellor and the client go through as they seek to find solution to the problem of the client.
Counselling process is therefore systematic and procedural since it is one stage of solution finding that leads to the other and so, it is not a one shot or single snap exercise.
Proper counselling therefore involves careful step-by-step encounter to reach the stage when the client will feel satisfied and the counsellor feel accomplished that counselling services have been properly rendered.
In this Unit, you will be taken through each aspect of this Counselling process.
Recognition of each aspect of the process will show how one leads to the other.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (1) Define Counselling process.
(2) Identify each state of Counselling process.
(3) Describe each stage of Counselling process.
61 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Counselling Process The Counselling process is made up of four basic phases.
Regardless of the type of client, client’s problem or nature of Counselling, the process of counselling is basic and the same.
The four basic phases are: (a) Initial phase; (b) Working phase; (c) Termination phase; and (d) Follow-up phase.
Initial Phase The initial phase is the same thing as preparatory or preparation stage.
Essentially it involves all the activities during the first meeting between the Counsellor and the client.
This phase is important because it is at this stage that the client presents the problem, which necessitated the counselling encounter.
An important factor or an essential ingredient in the stage is the readiness of the client to want to present his/her problem.
Similarly, the nature of the problem and the client’s personality are important for the initial phase to take place.
Sometimes in order to facilitate a quick take-off in this phase, the Counsellor may start by welcoming the client and state why he was sent for (referral) i.e.
your teacher sent a note to me that we (the counsellor and client) should discuss about your poor performance in Mathematics.
If the client came on his own, the counsellor start by welcoming him/her, and introduce each other.
He/she will then find out why the client is interested in seeing him/her.
The initial phase is strictly for familiarization, problem presentation and awareness of the existence of the problem by the counsellor and the client.
It is not the stage where problem is discussed or solved.
Working Phase Immediately after the initial phase during which counselling relationship has been established with an understanding that a problem to be discussed is in existence, then follows the working phase.
The working phase is the problem discussion stage.
In this phase, the counsellor assists the client to work through their feelings as they discuss their concern.
Here, good techniques and professional skills must be used by the Counsellor as the client works through his/her problem to enable them gain better insights into them.
62 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING In this phase, the client should be able to gain better insight into his problem, understand various and alternative course of actions to be taken and take positive actions to solve his problems.
Both the client and the counsellor may have an assignment to carryout in respect of the problem being discussed before the next phase.
For example, the assignment may be to visit the parent, an industry, employment agency, an examination office or the teacher handling a particular subject that is constituting a problem for the client.
Each person is however expected to give a feedback during the next session.
The essence of the given assignments is to gather sufficient information or data that will enhance smooth transition into the next phase and ensure that a sound bases for the next stage is created.
Termination Stage The termination stage marks the end of counselling process.
This stage is necessitated: 1.
When client’s problem have been successfully discussed and resolved; 2.
When client has been referred to another professional counsellor; and 3.
Due to client’s lack of apparent problems.
Follow-Up Phase This is about the last stage in the Counselling process.
The Counsellor must have told the client during termination stage to keep in touch with him.
Specifically, follow-up phase is a counselling activity in which the counsellor finds out whether the acquired behaviour by the client during the counselling session is maintained or not and whether the client has been able to solve his problem or not.
As follow-up, the counsellor can visit the client to have dialogue on how his new behaviour has been maintained or has been helpful in his adjustment process.
Peradventure there is no improvement observed in the client, reassessment of the problem can be done through exploration and new goals mapped out as they both go over through the counselling process all over again.
4.0 CONCLUSION The counselling process could be very effective in solving client’s problem if the various stages/phases are carefully observed and followed without necessarily rushing to take decisions that may make clients to repeat or that may not work out well for the client.
63 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 5.0 SUMMARY It was identified in this Unit that Counselling process is a procedure in which counsellors and clients need to follow carefully and with commitment in order to help the clients go through his problem effectively.
The phases enumerated were the initial phase, working phase, termination phase and the follow-up.
Each phase was mentioned to be very important in the counselling process without which successful counselling may not be achieved.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List those things that need careful consideration when setting up the Counselling Room to meet the client.
2.
Write down what you could say to a client when the session is nearing an end?
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) State how each phase of the Counselling process is linked up with the others.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Margret, H (1996).
Counselling Skills.
Addison Wesley Longman Limited Edinburgh House, Harlow Essex CM20 2JE, England.
Okabia O.
C (1992).
Practicum in Counselling: Training and Supervision.
Hallman Publishers, P. O.
Box 227, Nsukka.
64 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 3 TECHNIQUES OF COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Techniques in Counselling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary Self Assessment Exercise 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Technique can be defined as methods or ways of doing something or performing an act efficiently.
Another word which carries similar meaning with technique is strategy that the Counsellor uses in a counselling encounter.
Techniques are usefully acquired through training by the professional Counsellor to assist their clients understand and solve their daily problems.
It is therefore basic that the acquisition and use of techniques in counselling helps to distinguish a professional Counsellor from someone who is not trained but who tries to practice counselling.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
State the meaning of Techniques in Counselling.
2.
Mention five examples of Counselling techniques.
3.
Mention at least one example on how each stated Counselling technique can be applied.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Techniques in Counselling There are as many examples of Counselling technique as there are approaches or theories in Counselling.
Examples of some of the approaches are psychoanalysis, Behaviour modification, Rational 65 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Emotive Therapy, Transactional Analysis, Gestalt, Logo therapy, Reality Impressive, Client-cantered, Adlerian and Trait and Factor.
While each of these approaches is unique and therefore distinguishable from the others, there still exists relationship among them because they are all tended towards helping the clients to understand himself and lead a well adjusted life.
It is therefore the technique in each of the approaches that often shows which of the approaches is being employed in practice.
However, there are some techniques that cut across some counselling approaches.
Generally, examples of counselling techniques are listening, responding, emphasizing, questioning, prodding, interpretation, reflection, confronting, restatement, probing, self-disclosure, catharsis, assuring, immediacy, encouraging, clarifying, concretising, summarising, homework, silence homework, catharses and exploring some of the major techniques are discussed below: Listening: Listening is a very crucial technique in the counselling relationship.
It involves every part of the body i.e.
eyes, voice, ears and hears.
Listening is often regarded as the foundation stone upon which other lards of helping service are built.
Active listening conveys to chats that they are valued by the counsellor.
If the counsellor does not listen attentively, he may not be able to hear and understand what his client’s problems are and observe the exact nature of both the verbal and non- verbal responses by his client.
Adedipe (1997) states that listening is far from the passive state which some people think it to be.
Active listening is a skill of great sophistication, which is available to all counsellors.
The use of listening as a technique means being able to communicate understanding of the client’s problems, meaning content.
Similarly, it means being able to show to the client that you understand how he feels particularly to show the client that you have an idea of the impact of the existing problems on his psychological well - being.
Responding: This is a technique of counselling that involves the counsellor’s verbal and non-verbal reactions to the problems presented by the client.
Responding is very crucial in the helping relationship.
It is important to mention that adequate response depends on the counsellor’s attentive and understanding skills.
It is important for the counsellor to respond promptly and adequately to the client’s verbal and non-verbal communications.
With appropriate and useful response, it is likely that the client would be able to get help in understanding his problems and be able to take positive actions towards the solution of his problems.
It is essential that counsellors should be able to respond to 66 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING the contents feeling and the meaning of the client’s expression if he, the counsellor would provide effective assistance to the client.
Questioning: This technique helps the Counsellor in probing and thereby explores the problem being presented by the client.
It helps to bring to fore, some important fact that will assist in promoting an effective discussion in the interpersonal relationship between the client and the counsellor.
Questioning readily helps the client in identifying and having clearer understanding of his problem.
Restatement: This involves a process in which the Counsellor having heard and understood what the client said, he (the Counsellor) repeats what was said for the sake of clarification.
Specifically, restatement assists the counsellor and the client to reach a lard of mutual understanding of true nature of the problem as it represents the mind of the client.
It also affords the client the opportunity of explaining further if what he said was not properly heard or understood by the counsellor.
When the counsellor restates the client’s problem, the client is thereby reassured of the counsellor’s attentiveness and ability to follow with the client’s explanation.
According to Adedipe (1997), he opines that, although it is important for the counsellor to maintain a listening role, there are certain kinds of responses which communicate not only that, the counsellor is listening, but also that the counsellor is a person with an active role.
The restatement is one of these responses.
An example is the following interaction: Client: “I don’t know whether to stay in school or to drop out and get a job but if I do, I don’t know what kind of job I can find” Counsellor: “You are wandering whether to stay in school or to drop out and work; Assuring: Assuring as a counselling technique, demands that a counsellor makes a conscious effort to gain the client’s confidence in the process of assisting him to solve his (client’s) problem.
The counsellor exhibits a personal quality, which makes the client to trust and rely on the counsellor as a worthy provider of assistance that can solve his problem.
Silence: This technique involves sudden cessation or suspension of sound by both the counsellor and the client temporarily.
It is important for the counsellor to know the appropriate time and way of using silence if not it can be mistaken for his inability of knowing what to say.
In 67 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING case the counsellor does not know a lot to say when silence is applied, he could make statements such as: You must be deeply touched by your problems.
Are you thinking of a better way to state your problems?
You are not sure; you should discuss certain aspect of your problem with me.
These statements will enable the client to know that you are still in the process of helping him to follow through his problem.
Self-disclosure: This technique refers to the act of making known someone’s feelings/reactions or uncovering someone’s feelings or reactions to situations or persons.
Such feelings are of course secret until they are made known.
A counsellor who uses self-disclosure will definitely make known his feelings and reactions to his client’s presentations.
It is, however, important to note that such feelings that are made known must be genuine, sincere and authentic.
The use of self-disclosure also demands that the counsellor must have understood his client and in fact gained his confidence in their interpersonal relationship.
This is because if the counsellor disclosed his genuine feelings upon first contact with client, the client may withdraw from counselling session.
But if he understands the client, and the client has developed trust in him, then self-disclosure will serve its functions in helping the client to develop: (a) develop appropriate honest behaviour; (b) Complete counselling relationship.
When a Counsellor is genuine and transparent in his interaction with the client, he could be: (a) seen as a model to the client who also learn to imbibe the counsellor’s behaviour; (b) able to succeed in expending less energy in withholding his real self; (c) able to provide a conducive and facilitating environment for himself and the client.
Both the client and the counsellor are therefore able to feel very free in their discussion.
Where the client is initially reluctant, a good use of self-disclosure by the counsellor would help the client express his problem fully.
An example of self-disclosure is when the counsellor ways “I have heard similar problem before and it was resolved”.
68 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 4.0 CONCLUSION The use of counselling technique has been identified to be sine-qua-non to the practice of counselling.
It is therefore important to note that professional counsellors must always be equipped with the appropriate use of counselling technique in a counselling process.
5.0 SUMMARY The term counselling technique was defined as the method, which is adopted by the counsellor to carryout effective counselling.
Reasons why technique are needed were stated with some examples of technique and how they can be used by the counsellor help the client solve his problem and be adjusted to life.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE (a) What are the necessary conditions for counseling process?
(b) Mention two reasons why counselling technique is important in a counselling encounter.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Write an explanatory note on counseling technique.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adedipe, V.O.
(1997).
Counselling Practicum, International Publishers Limited.
Johnson, D. W (1972).
Reaching Out: Interpersonal Effectiveness and Self- Actualization Condon.
Prentice-Hall International Inc. Pietrosfessa J. J (1978) Counselling: Theory Research and Practice.
Rand Mc Nally College Pub.
Co. Super, D.E.
and P.L.
Overstreet (1960).
The Vocational Maturity of Ninth Grade Boys.
Teachers College Press.
New York.
69 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 4 GROUP DYNAMIC PROCESS IN COUNSELLING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Group Dynamic Process in Counselling 3.2 Advantages of Group Dynamic Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Efficiently organisd school guidance programmes do not rely solely on the one-to-one counsellng relationship in assisting students to self- organise optimally for successful development.
Integrated into the total guidance programme are a variety of group experiences on a one-to- several or one-to-many basis.
In group counselling, one counsellor is involved in a relationship with a number of clients at the same time.
The number of clients that can constitute group counselling encounter span between four to twelve clients; though the most acceptable number is often six or eight.
The utilization of group procedures in guidance is anchored in the commonality of the developmental tasks characteristically encountered in certain periods of life.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
State the meaning of Techniques in Counselling.
2.
Mention five examples of Counselling techniques.
3.
Mention at least one example on how each stated Counselling technique can be applied.
70 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Group Dynamic Process in Counselling Group counselling process is developmental because the group work transit from one stage to the other until the group is ended.
Specifically, the group process starts from the initial phase to work; termination and then follow up phase.
The essentials of each phase are stated below: Initial Phase At this stage of group counselling, the Counsellor introduces himself by name, occupation and his mission in the meeting.
He also states to members about confidentiality and that he expects everyone to keep secret whatever is discussed in the group.
The members are also encouraged to appreciate the essence of observing confidentiality by mentioning the punishment to be meted out to individuals who commit the offence of divulging the group’s secrets.
Then the members of the group introduce themselves, their names, their programme, work, marital status, number of children and then major things they like best and those they dislike most.
After this, the counsellor states to them, the purpose of meeting and informs the members that they all have similar problems.
The counsellor and the clients then fix the meeting schedules.
They also formulate the ground rules e.g.
nobody outside the group should have knowledge of what goes on, in the group, there should be respect for one another, and no one should make fun of any other person etc.
The counsellor summarizes the session’s discussion.
Working Phase It is during this stage that the members introduce their problems while others listen attentively.
After each member has introduced his problem, members are guided to ask questions where necessary.
They are also guided to help each other to understand their problems.
Goals are then set for each member based on the problems stated.
There could be conflicts and a development of group within the group during sessions.
The counsellor should take note of this and take control so as to be able to achieve the set goals.
The working phase can last for several sessions with about one hour in each session.
Summary of the group activity in the session is made and stated to the members.
In the absence of further discussion, the session could end.
The counsellor also states to the members that the group encounter was 71 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING already going towards the termination stage.
Members are encouraged to mention the impact of the group work on their studios and adjustment generally.
Assignments are given to group members and feedback expected at the next session.
Sometimes, some members are either asked to assist other members to work through their problems in counselling or in-between counselling sessions, some members volunteer to assist others in this direction.
Termination Phase This is the stage in which group counselling comes to an end principally because: (a) Most issues have been discussed; (b) The goals set have been achieved; and (c) Necessary steps have been taken to refer some difficult cases to the appropriate professional who is competent enough to assist such clients.
It is essential to mention that all the assignments and homework given in the group must have been submitted before termination is effected.
Follow-Up Phase This is an important phase in the group dynamic process in which effort is made by the counsellor to follow-up with all the decisions or resolutions arrived at by the group members.
This is essential because it is follow-up activity that will help detect and reveal those clients who still needed assistance.
The assistance may demand a re-assessment of the problem.
It can sometimes necessitate arranging for an individual counselling; where the group meeting cannot be re-convened.
3.2 Advantages of Group Dynamic Process The following are some benefits that can be derived when group procedural method is employed in counselling: 1.
Limited number of available counsellors in the immediate environment makes delivery of counselling services very effective.
2.
It provides an economic use of the counsellor’s time when compared with individual counselling.
72 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 3.
Clients are able to use group members’ interaction to understand and accept their problems, values and goals.
4.
Group members learn and unlearn certain attitudes and behaviours.
5.
Group work provides client with the opportunity to develop positive and natural relationship with others.
6.
Those who require assistance in identifying and clarifying their problems benefit a lot from the group counselling encounter.
7.
It provides the facilities for confidence building.
4.0 CONCLUSION The group counselling process can be very useful approach to rendering counselling services to many clients at the same time particularly where there are few professional counsellors on ground.
It is however important to state that counsellors who are engaged in a group process must always be sensitive to every bit of group activity if not it can easily be rowdy without being able to achieve the stated goals in the group.
5.0 SUMMARY The meaning of the concept of group counselling shows that, group process is procedural and developmental.
Each stage of the group work is essential and must be observed.
Members of the group are also to be encouraged to participate in group work so as to be able to derive the benefits that abound in the adoption of group dynamic process for assisting help-seeking clients.
SELF -ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What stages exist in group counseling and what techniques and considerations are important at each stage?
2.
How do we make a distinction between group guidance and group counselling?
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) How can we use group counsellng methods in our schools?
73 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alao, A.
A (1983).
Group Counselling in U. Uba (Ed) Introduction to , Ile – Ife: University of Ife Press 4761.
Okobia, O.
C (1978), Practicum in Counselling, Training and Supervision.
Hallman Publishers P. O.
Box 227, Nsukka.
74 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 5 CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT IN SCHOOLS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods of Continuous Assessment 3.2 Uses of Continuous Assessment 3.3 Problems of Continuous Assessment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Continuous assessment as a concept means periodic assessment of students’ academic achievement with the basic aim of providing a reliable feedback to the students and to identify weaknesses and areas of learning difficulties, which could be remedied.
It also means a method of evaluating the progress and achievement of students’ educational institutions.
It therefore aims to get the truest possible picture of each student’s ability, at the same time helping each student develop his or her abilities to the fullest.
With continuous assessment as a technique, the final grading of students in the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains of behaviour systematically takes account of all his/her performances during a given period of schooling.
This enables the school make objective decisions or judgments on his/her cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, youould be able to: 1.
State, in a sentence, what Continuous Assessment in Schools means.
2.
Mention three methods of getting Continuous Assessment.
3.
State five uses of Continuous Assessment scores.
75 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods of Continuous Assessment The three domains of educational objectives would be the area of concentration in discussing the methods of continuous assessment.
The three domains are: cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
This is principally because educational attainment objectives are usually classified into: (a) Cognitive domain deals with rational, intellectual thought processes and is concerned with knowledge outcomes, information intellectual skills and liabilities.
The method of assessing the cognitive domain are: (i) Paper and paper test (ii) Oral discussions (iii) Questioning (iv) Written assignments (v) Projects (b) Affective domain lays emphasis on attitudes, interest, values, appreciations, feelings and emotions including modes of adjustment as well as attendance and punctuality to classes.
Method of gathering information on/about a student in the affective domain are: (i) Questionnaire (ii) Oral interview/discussion (iii) Inventories (iv) Observation (c) Psychomotor is concerned with muscular and motor skills including the manipulation of materials requiring the eye and hand coordination with body movements.
Observation is basically the most effective method for assessing students in the area of psychomotor domain.
Specifically, observation schedule is prepared to address particular area of assessment.
For example, in a typical classroom situation, a teacher may want to observe how students handle the pencil, his writing and drawing.
In the Science Laboratory, the teacher could want to know students that use chemicals, intro technological materials wood, metal work, typing with speed and accuracy.
The summary of the number of times a particular behaviour was exhibited.
Generally, proper record of observation exercise must be correctly and sincerely kept.
76 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING As these various methods (tools) are used in gathering information in continuous assessment, it would be possible to have good and reliable representation of the periodic academic record of the student performance in each course or subject area.
Role of teachers in the practice of continuous assessment in schools demand that any teacher that is put in charge of assessment or record of it must be able to: 1.
Combine all relevant scores from tests, homework projects and examinations to obtain an overall score for a given period.
2.
Keep in close watch and assess the personality development of each student in such traits as: (i) Character; (ii) Temperament; (iii) Interest; (iv) Attitude; and (v) Adjustment.
3.
Obtain information concerning students’ learning and personality characteristics, which should be used for both academic and psychological advertisement of the student.
4.
Convert raw scores to more meaningful scores for both academic and psychological advice for the students.
5.
Give appropriate weights to the scores from different sources.
6.
Combine scores from different measures to get an overall score.
7.
Possess skills in interpreting scores from assessment instrument.
8.
Possess skills in keeping records and preparing reports.
3.1 Uses of Continuous Assessment Continuous assessment can be very useful in the following ways: 1.
Enables the teacher give periodic assessment of the child throughout the course in the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
77 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 2.
Provides the truest and most comprehensive picture of each student’s ability in a school setting than could be got from a single examination.
3.
Serves as a monitoring device giving feedback to the pupils about his/her performance and also to the teacher about effectiveness of his teaching.
4.
Provides information on the strengths and weaknesses of students with a view to applying immediate corrective measures.
5.
Provides reliable information about students on the basis of which guidance services can be rendered by the teacher and the school counsellor.
3.3 Problems of Continuous Assessment Operation of continuous assessment can be linked with problems in the following areas: 1.
Use of different standards of measuring performance from school to school.
2.
Transfer among students from school to school.
3.
Task of operating continuous assessment without appropriate remuneration to the teachers.
4.
Insufficient provision of materials and the financial cost of applying continuous assessment procedures.
5.
Poor teacher and teaching qualities in schools.
6.
Lack of standardization of most continuous assessment tests and grades.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is no doubt that Continuous Assessment is a better form of gathering reliable information on the educational attainment of students in schools rather than just using a single shot examination.
It is however important to state that for Continuous Assessment scores to serve the purpose it is meant, no aspect of its 78 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 5.0 SUMMARY It was mentioned in this unit that every aspect of the knowledge of continuous assessment in school is important for practitioners to be able to operate it well right from the meaning of the concept Continuous Assessment, to the methods, the problem, uses and role of the teachers.
A proper understanding of each area of continuous assessment will help both the teacher and the student and will also make learning more practical and meaningful while scores obtained in respect of each student would be more reliable.
Problems mentioned in the unit for the operations of continuous assessment are important for the stakeholders to consider so that there can always be an improvement with the way continuous assessment is operated in the Schools.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is Continuous Assessment?
2.
Mention five methods by which Continuous Assessment can be obtained.
3.
State five reasons why Continuous Assessment is preferable to the one single shot examination.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) State five reasons why Continuous Assessment is preferable to the one single shot examination of determining students’ academic performance.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bloom, B.
S (1956).
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives Handbook 1: Cognitive Domain: New York Mackey.
Ipaye, T. (1985).
An evaluation of Continuous Assessment in Schools.
Education Today 1, 49 - 53.
79 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 6 HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT OF VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical developments of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria 3.2 Theoretical development of Vocational Guidance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Vocational Guidance is a very crucial aspect of the help giving service (Guidance and Counselling).
This is because it is concerned with assisting people to gain awareness, acquire knowledge and be led to enjoy placement in the world of work.
Knowledge of Vocational Guidance is needed by everybody particularly because of the role of work in a person’s life.
For instance, it is work one does that determines a person’s social status, income, lifestyle, choice of friends, with mental and physical well being.
Put in a clear term, vocational guidance is therefore the process of helping a person match his personal attributes and his background with suitable jobs and employment opportunities.
Most adults of over 40 years of age attest to the fact that they had little or no opportunity while in school to assess their personal, self characteristics or to plan ways by which their values and goals could be achieved in life.
This unwarranted development should not only be discouraged but it should be continually prevented through a sound vocational guidance programmes properly entrenched in the school daily activities.
Knowledge of the vocational guidance is very necessary because, Nigeria is presently facing: (a) Increase in unemployment of school learners.
(b) Shortage of manpower in different sectors of the economy.
(c) Unutilization of potentials in the country.
(d) Vocational maladjustment among youths.
(e) Unending influence of parents on choice of career.
80 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING All these issues are problems, which bedevil the vocational life of Nigerians but which activities of Counsellors and teachers alike can help to prevent in the schools.
In particular, proper planning and designing of activities and services will help facilitate the career development needs of the students.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to do the following: (a) Mention at least five stages in the historical development of vocational guidance in Nigeria.
(b) Enumerate three stages in the theory of vocational development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Historical Development of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria Common observation of the reminiscence of the traditional system of guidance in Nigeria will reveal that before the advent of western education, formal guidance has been part of our traditional customary practices in Nigeria.
Within the Nigerian context, there are so many agencies of guidance and counselling such as: the family, the elders, the clan heads or leaders, the religious leaders and priests.
All these people provided some form of rudimentary Guidance and Counselling assistance; particularly in the area of choice of vocation.
Whether the arrangement was good enough or not, the system was the only option Nigerians had access to.
The first known indication of vocational guidance in Nigerian school was in form of the concern some humanitarian Catholic Reverend Sisters had for young Nigerian secondary school pupils who are about to graduate were experiencing difficulty in finding the right jobs and in achieving vocational maturity.
In 1959, the Reverend Sisters of Saint Theresa’s College, Ibadan invited twenty people from different occupations and professions in and around Ibadan to talk to the students about work life and the possibilities of absorbing the students after graduation.
Following this was the formation of Ibadan Careers Council and Guidance Services to other schools in and around Ibadan.
In 1963, the Ibadan Careers Council metamorphosed to Nigeria Career Council with the principle of widening her services to cover other schools in Nigeria.
This Council also launched a Newsletter called 81 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING CAREERS aimed at providing adequate information on vocational guidance to career masters and mistresses in schools.
Similarly, Aiyetoro Comprehensive High School (a government school aided by USAID) in 1963 had a trained Guidance Counsellor on her staff list.
With such a development, school guidance since then was made to play a number of vocational related services among which are: The education of staff on the purposes of school guidance.
Gathering of student background information on a more comprehensive scale.
Assessment of student personality characteristics through the use of standardisd psychological tests.
Maintenance of cumulative records which contained information used for streaming promotion, retention or when the student or his parent wanted it.
Personal counselling for students.
Related to Aiyetoro Comprehensive High School was also established in Port Harcourt in River State.
Within this period, the Olunloyo College of Education in Ibadan started training careers masters and mistresses for the Nigerian secondary schools.
By 1977, the place of vocational guidance became entrenched in the first edition of the National Policy on Education published by the Federal Ministry of Education.
Principally, this was done to arrest the ignorance of career prospects and personality maladjustment prevalent among the school children.
By 1973, in the Northern Nigeria, the Institute of Education of Ahmadu Bello University organizs a four-week in-service course for guidance teachers and careers masters and mistresses in particularly, Kaduna State Ministry of Education.
As far back as early 1970s, most Nigerian Universities like University of Nigeria, Nsukka produced its first Master’s degree students in guidance and counselling in 1971.
By 1972, University of Ife (now Obafemi Awolowo University) and Ahmadu Bello University started courses in Guidance and Counselling at their Master’s degree programmes.
Today, many Nigerian Universities do have guidance and counselling as a specific course in their academic programmes leading to the production of graduates at first degree, Master’s and even Doctorate level.
The implication is that a wide and far-reaching opportunity is provided for the training of specialists in the art of rendering vocational counselling services in the schools.
82 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING To cap up this development, the Counselling Association of Nigeria was born in 1976.
This Association is an umbrella body for all trained personnel in guidance related areas of knowledge.
Most of the time, the association has been responsible for the regulation of members’ activities, promotion and development of vocational guidance in Nigeria.
3.2 Theoretical Development of Vocational Guidance There are three basic stages in vocational development.
These are: fantasy, tentative and realistic.
1.
The Fantasy stage refers to the period when one is still day- dreaming about many careers that are attractive to an individual.
At this stage, a person acts like a child who wants to have everything shown to him/her.
It is a period that is filled with indefinite decision, because vocational decisions taken are constantly changed.
For example, you want to be a doctor today but by the next day you have changed your mind and so now, you want to be an engineer.
At this stage, decisions are constantly being changed.
2.
Tentative stage is another stage when the individual begins to settle down in his vocational development based on the decision to stick to an attractive vocation.
For example, if you are to be in a fantasy stage and ten vocational areas are opened to you, and they are all attractive, you may begin to reduce the number using the principle of preference one after the other until you are left with few which you still drop to one or two later.
3.
The Realistic stage.
It is at this stage that you are regarded to be matured enough to make a concrete decision on the type of vocation you feel is good for you.
By this stage, all the factors that affect vocational choice (i.e.
ability, interest, aspiration, parental background and societal needs) have been considered.
You are now convinced that choice of teaching as a vocation is best for you since you would have considered the type of subjects taken, training needed and possibility of getting quick employment.
The choice is more realistic at this stage since proper consideration has been given to the above mentioned factors.
It is important to note that as you transit from one stage of vocational development to the other, you need to be in constant counselling interaction with your counsellor who is in a good position to guide you as you weigh the options that are opened to you before taking decisions.
83 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 4.0 CONCLUSION There is harmony between the historical and theoretical development of vocational guidance.
As stated in the Unit, the knowledge of the two aspects will help in understanding and appreciating the essence of the concept, vocational guidance in the life of students in Nigeria, who will one day find himself in the world of work.
5.0 SUMMARY The existence of the traditional approach to vocational guidance before the advent of western education is more organisd vocational guidance typifies how vocational development has come a long way.
It also shows that vocational guidance cannot be trivialised in the life of individuals who are expected to transit to work life and be adjusted.
The characteristics of each stage of vocational development theory also show that every stage has meaning in the life of individuals.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention five stages in the historical development of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Mention the essential characteristics in each of the three stages of theoretical development of vocational guidance.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chauhan, S. S (1982).
Principles and techniques of Guidance.
Viices Publishing House; India.
Bojuwoye, O (1986).
Vocational Guidance in T. Ipaye (Ed) Educational and Vocational Guidance: Concepts and approaches.
Ile – Ife.
University of Ife Press.
84 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING UNIT 7 COLLECTION, PLANNING AND DISSEMINATION OF CAREER INFORMATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Career 3.2 Collection of Career Information 3.3 Career Planning 3.4 Dissemination of Career Information 3.5 Stages in Career Planning, Collection of, and Dissemination of Information 3.6 The use of tests in Career Guidance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is basic that anybody found engaged in a long lasting job called career would have explanation to give on how he came about joining such a job.
Some people display happiness and contentment while others regret to find themselves in the particular career either because their goal in the career cannot be accomplished or for the fact that the demands they have to meet are incongruent with their expectations and resources.
Most people who are in teaching career often show regret and disappointment simply for economic reasons whereas members in the law, medical and engineering profession seems to be happier.
It is however a common knowledge to find lawyers changing to the teaching or pasturing careers simply because they feel they are not comfortable with the conditions or demands of their career in law.
All these point to the fact that there is a need to plan, collect and be accessible to relevant information that are needed before a decision is taken on which career to pursue in life.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to do the following: 1.
State the meaning of Career.
85 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 2.
List two reasons each why it is important to: (a) plan what to do before taking career decision; (b) collect relevant information on careers; and (c) be accessible to source of information on careers.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Career Career is a life long activity.
It is a chosen life work or an overall work one does in a given job in one’s lifetime.
Career includes the different types of work you do as a teacher, the different types of positions you occupy in teaching throughout your life in teaching.
If your career is teaching, you will find yourself doing other jobs like marking examination scripts, sporting activities, gardening and prep supervision.
At other times, you occupy the position of class teacher, assistant headmaster/mistress, headmaster/mistress, NUT official, schools inspector.
All these are part of teaching career.
3.2 Collection of Career Information It is essential for the counsellor or career master to gather sufficient facts, possess sound knowledge and ideas about different careers for him to be able to assist students in their career decision making process.
The two major areas of importance where information is needed for career guidance are: (a) Information about self (b) Information about the career of interest.
Information about Self – i.e.
person who wants to choose a career.
Although self assessment is needed by an individual in areas which include: (i) Area of his interest; (ii) The type of person he is.
Is he an introvert or extrovert, aggressive or lovely person?
You need to know this.
(iii) The educational background of the person.
(iv) The performance in the school subjects.
All these you need to know about the person for a good career decision making.
86 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Information about the Career of Interest – You will gather information on career of interest by considering the following: (1) Study of occupational information that are available in publications like: (a) Periodicals in Ministry of Employment, Labour and Productivity; (b) Magazines and books in the National Directorate of Employment (NDE); (c) Books, Periodicals and Magazines by Labour Unions/Associations/Organisations/Institutes such as Michael Imoudu Institute of Labour Studies; (d) Business and Commercial Publishers; and (e) Magazines, newspaper publications on job vacancies.
(2) Use of films, filmstrips, slides, etc.
which present occupational information.
(3) Use of career exploration kits and career games.
(4) Personal visit to employers in the fields of interest.
(5) Interviewing workers in occupations.
(6) Securing part-time or long vacation jobs in occupations of interest.
Scanning newspapers and magazines for information on occupations.
3.3 Career Planning Planning is time tabling of how activities will be carried out.
In planning, attention should be paid to material resources that are available for use in carrying out the plans.
In a similar way, one needs to make a time-table of how he wants to get into the type of work one intends to do in the future.
The planning of the type of work one wants to do in the future involves acquiring the necessary education needed and taking the type of subjects to qualify one for the job.
It also involves preparing your mind towards the job.
All these are part of career planning.
You should consider the following points while you are engaged in the career planning exercise: 1.
Quality of education provided by the client’s parent.
2.
Peer-group influence on the client’s life.
87 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 3.
Type of school attended i.e.
a student who attended a teacher training college has already been prepared to be a teacher.
4.
Subject combination i.e.
a child who wants to be a medical doctor should offer subjects like physics, chemistry and biology.
5.
Prospect of employment.
6.
Prestige of the career of interest.
7.
Economic gains to be derived from a career.
Most people plan for career that attract high salary while others look for retirement benefits, allowances, holidays etc.
8.
Safety – Most people prefer careers that involve limited amount of hazard so that they can live long and in good health.
There are other careers that involve great deal of hazards which can suddenly terminate life like military, industrial engineering.
All these are important for the counsellor and student clients to consider in the process of career guidance.
3.4 Dissemination of Career Information As a counsellor or career master, you should be able to make available, present, interpret and explain all the facts, ideas and other data already collected about occupations to the students.
This can be done by considering the following: 1.
Establishment of career resource material centre where career materials are carefully organised and made available.
The Centre should be composed of: (a) occupational descriptions; (b) occupational outlook projections; (c) post-secondary educational and training information; (d) apprenticeship and internship information; (e) information for special populations, and (f) financial aid information.
2.
Lending to students, all career related materials.
3.
Organisation of career days, field trips, parent conferences, career club, work study/tour, work experiences and library.
4.
Counselling interview (individual or group) through the use of audio-visual, tape recorders, overhead projectors, flannel graph and magnetic board, bulletin board, films and filmstrips, periodic announcements and career education.
88 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING 5.
Guidance on choice of appropriate subject combination that is congruent with choice of particular career of interest.
6.
Provide specific information about each occupation with reference to: (a) Definition; (b) Work performed; (c) Personal requirements; and (d) Training opportunities and entry requirements.
3.5 Stages in Career Planning, Collection of and Dissemination of Information Three basic areas to be considered here are the fantasy, tentative and realistic stage.
1.
The Fantasy stage refers to the period when one is still day- dreaming about many careers that are attractive to an individual.
At this stage, a person acts like a child who wants to have everything shown to him/her.
Fantasy stage means that the individual wants to be a lawyer today, tomorrow it is teaching career he wants, the next day it is accounting he wants.
It is actually a period of confusion for the individual.
2.
Tentative stage occurs when the individual begins to get settled down to a career that appeals to him.
For example, if in a fantasy stage he has about 10 careers that appealed to him, at the tentative stage, he may settle down to consider seriously may be only five or six.
He then begins to plan for these careers, some of them, he may drop later.
3.
The Realistic stage.
At this stage, the individual is mature to make a concrete decision of the type of career he thinks is good for him.
By this stage, all the factors affecting career planning as indicated earlier have been considered.
The individual is now convinced that possibly going into teaching career is best for him.
The choice becomes realistic because he would have considered the type of education he has, the school subjects taken and the possibility of getting quickly employed.
Every individual in the process of planning, collecting and using information goes through the above mentioned stages.
Any counselling interaction should be used for assisting clients, after 89 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING gathering all the necessary information to enhance career decision making process.
3.6 The use of Tests in Career Guidance There is an overwhelming number of tests which may be used in career guidance.
Using a classification, which in various forms has a very long history; tests can be divided into three main categories, namely: tests of ability, of personality, and tests of attitudes and interests.
Ability tests can in turn be divided into two main sections, often called achievement tests and aptitude tests.
A distinction between these two, is often difficult to sustain, but is considered to depend on the idea that achievement tests are usually of school subjects – English, Mathematics, Economics and so on and are used after a period of deliberate teaching of that subject, while aptitude tests are more abstract and aim to test thought processes and ideas which are common to and generalised from a wide range of subject and other learning.
The intelligence test is the most widely known type of aptitude test.
In all cases, aptitude tests are used to predict future performance of the person being tested.
Tests of ability have been used very widely in all forms of guidance in schools.
Personality tests have a chequered history in careers guidance.
This is probably due to the very elusive concept of personality, which is usually taken to mean the relatively constant emotional qualities of a person, his major needs and drives whether conscious or unconscious.
But over and above, problems of definition, Adedipe (1986) shows that, there has been extreme difficulty in establishing a clear dependable relation between any test estimate of personality and a work setting.
Perhaps the most useful type of personality test in careers guidance work is the self- report in careers.
Attitude tests in careers have been widely developed; there is a tendency for such tests to be specific to research problems rather than for general use.
Super and Overstreet (1960) have used such tests in an interesting way in their study of vocationally maturity.
Interest tests on the other hand have been widely developed.
In recent years, interest tests have been revised and developed in Nigeria.
Tests such as Bakare’s “Vocational Interest Inventory” (VIT), Akinboye’s “Vocational Interest Data Inventory” (APDI) and Adedipe’s “Self Evaluation of Vocational Interest (SEVI) are a few examples of tests used in Nigerian schools.
All of these aim at exploring the personal interests of the client, and comparing the pattern of interests with that of 90 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING people in general or with patterns commonly found in occupational groups.
4.0 CONCLUSION Career is a life long activity.
It is a chosen life work or an overall work one does in a given job in one’s lifetime.
Career includes the different types of work you do as a teacher, the different types of positions you occupy in teaching throughout your life in teaching.
5.0 SUMMARY Choice of career is very important in the life of human beings.
Sometimes, it is the type of career that determines a person’s happiness, comfort and level of adjustment in the world of today.
A person’s social economic status is also being determined by his career.
While choice of career is important, the process of planning, collecting and disseminating information is considered to be equally very fundamental because it is all these areas that will assist the counsellor in helping the client to take a long lasting and reliable decision on the choice of a lifelong work.
When a careful consideration is given to career planning, collection and information dissemination it is likely that most people would be better adjusted to the careers of their choice.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 (1) Mention two reasons why it is important to plan what to do before taking career decision.
(2) What is Career information dissemination?
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 (a) What is the meaning of the concept career?
(b) Mention five reasons for planning, collecting and disseminating career information.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Achebe, C. C (1986).
Techniques of educational and Vocational Planning in T. Ipaye (Ed) Educational and Vocational Guidance, Concepts and Approaches.
Ile – Ife: University of Ife Press.
Adedipe, V.O.
(1997).
Counselling Practicum.
Internal Publishers Limited.
91 EDU 421 FUNDAMENTALS OF GUIDANCE AND COUNSELLING Oladele, J. O (1978) Guidance and Counselling: A fundamental Approach.
Lagos.
John Lad Publishers Ltd. 92
