NoneEDU 704: MONITORING AND EVALUATION IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2Table of contents What you will learn in this course Course aims Course objectives Working Through this Course, Course materials Study Units Assignment File Presentation Schedule Assessment: Tutor - Marked Assignments (TMAS) Final examination and grading Course Marking Scheme Course Overview How to get the most from this course: Tutors and Tutorials Summary 3COURSE GUIDE EDA 704 Monitoring and Evaluation in Educational management is a First Semester Course.
It is a year one, 2(two) credit units and 700 level elective course available for all students offering M.Ed.
Administration and Planning.
It may also be taken by candidates who wish to learn about the activities involved in Monitoring and Evaluation in Educational Management.
The course will expose you to an understanding of the functions involved in Monitoring and Evaluation.
It will assist you to be able to apply some of the concepts and principles of monitoring and evaluation to actual school management practice.
The course consists of 17 units which consists of Course Guide, Concepts and Nature of Monitoring and Evaluation, Rationale for Evaluation in Educational Management, Evaluation Techniques, for Evaluating Teachers' Performance, Evaluation and External Agencies, Planning a Programme of Evaluation, Utilizing Evaluation Findings, Duties of a school Inspector, Qualities of an Inspector of Schools, Guidelines for Inspection, Management functions in the school system, Characteristics of Effective School Management, strategies for Monitoring and Evaluating Curriculum and Instruction, Monitoring and Evaluating.
Students and, Students Services, Teacher Performance Appraisal and, Techniques of school self - Evaluation.
This Course Guide tells you briefly what materials you will be using , and how you can work your way through these materials.
In addition, it suggests some general guide lines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the courses in order to complete it successfully.
It gives you guidance in respect of your Tutor Marked Assignments which will be made available in the assignment file.
There will be regular tutorial classes that are related to the course.
It is advisable for you to attend these Tutorial sessions.
What you will learn in this course The main aim of Monitoring and Evaluation in Educational Management is to acquaint you with important principles and techniques of school monitoring and evaluation.
The context in which these strategies are used will be discussed.
The management functions of the school principal will be 4described.
External agencies which assist the school head in monitoring and evaluating the activities of the school will be highlighted.
During the course of his job performance as a principal, the school head monitors and appraises the entire operations of the school.
The approaches he devices to do these are part of the things you will learn in this course.
The course will expose you to the main characteristics of school effectiveness.
Some of the records and forms used in monitoring and evaluating students and teacher’s performance will be examined.
The course will enrich your knowledge of school practices in the area of evaluation and it will prepare you to be able to face the challenges of monitoring and evaluation in the school system in Nigeria.
Course aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: To give you an understanding of the principles and practices of monitoring and evaluation in the school system.
This aim will be attained by aiming to: - Introduce you to the meaning and definitions of monitoring and evaluation in educational management.
- Describe the nature and scope of the activities of monitoring and evaluation.
- Explain the rationale for evaluation in educational management.
- Identify the strategies for monitoring and evaluation in the school organization.
- Explain the practices of monitoring and.
evaluation of school system.
- Outline the characteristics of school effectiveness.
- Describe the challenges ahead of school principals in monitoring and evaluating their school systems.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out, the course has a set of objectives.
Each unit has specific objectives which are usually included at the beginning of a unit.
You should read these objectives before your study of the unit.
You may wish to refer to them during your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
By doing so you will be sure that you have followed the instruction in the unit.
5Below are the comprehensive objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course you should be able to: 1.
Define the terms monitoring, evaluation, effectiveness and accountability.
2.
Explain the nature of monitoring and evaluation.
3.
Describe the main types of evaluation.
4.
State the importance of evaluation.
5.
Outline the purposes of evaluation.
6.
Outline the reasons for establishing standards of accountability.
7.
Identify the functions of evaluation.
8.
Describe the factors of effective school management.
9.
Explain the relationship between evaluation and effectiveness of school management.
10.
Describe different evaluation techniques.
11.
Apply appropriate evaluation techniques to meet different situations.
12.
Identify the basis for evaluating teacher's performance.
13.
State teacher's personal traits.
14.
Explain the significance of classroom visits to teacher's performance.
15.
Describe the essential aspects of teacher's job performance.
16.
Identify external agencies of evaluation in the school system.
17.
Plan a suitable evaluation programme for your school.
18.
Integrate the analysis of evaluation findings into school decision making process.
19.
Relate the quality of evaluation findings to the level of effectiveness of the school management.
20.
State the reasons for school inspection.
21.
Describe some techniques of conducting school inspection, 22.
Describe the professional qualities of an inspector 23.
Prepare an inspection guideline for general school inspection.
24.
Write a standard inspection report, 25.
Apply knowledge, skills and attitudes in educational management for a more effective managerial practice.
26.
Explain the concept of effectiveness in school management 27.
Describe the activities of the school head in monitoring and evaluating curriculum and instruction in the school.
28.
Describe some monitoring and evaluation devices used for students.
29.
Explain techniques of monitoring student services.
30.
Identify the procedure for expending school funds.
31.
Display some knowledge of management and controlling of school funds, 32.
Explain the rational for a school evaluating itself.
33.
Describe devices used for school self-evaluation.
6Working through this course To complete this course you are required to read each study unit, read the set books and read other materials which may be provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at point in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course there is a final examination.
The course should take you about 17 weeks in total to complete.
Below you will find all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course on time and successfully.
Course Materials The main components of the course are: 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 3.
References 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation Schedule.
Study Units The study Units in this course are as follows: Unit 1: Concepts and Nature of Monitoring and Evaluation.
Unit 2: Rationale for Evaluation in Educational Management.
Unit 3: Evaluation Techniques.
Unit 4: Techniques of Evaluating Teacher's Performance.
Unit 5: Evaluation and External Agencies.
Unit 6: Planning a Programme of Evaluation.
Unit 7: Utilizing Evaluation Findings Unit 8: Duties of a school Inspector.
Unit 9: Qualities of an Inspector of schools.
Unit 10: Guidelines for Inspection.
Unit 11: Management functions of the school Head.
Unit 12: Characteristics of Effective school management.
Unit 13: Strategies for Monitoring and Evaluating curriculum and Instruction.
Unit 14: Monitoring and Evaluating Students and Students’ services 7Unit 15: Appraisal of school Finances.
Unit 16: Techniques of School Self Evaluation, The first two Units focus on the concepts, nature and rationale for monitoring and evaluation in educational management.
The importance, purposes and types of evaluation were described.
The need for accountability in educational management was high lighted.
Units 3 and 4 centres on evaluation techniques and the method of evaluating teacher's performance were discussed.
Particular attention was paid to teacher's all-important function - teaching in the classroom.
Those aspects of the teacher's personal and professional traits which make him effective were closely examined.
The next three units focuses on the role of external agencies in evaluating the school, their functions were examined and the procedure for planning an evaluation programme by the school head was described.
This was followed by a detailed discussion on how to utilize evaluation findings.
In units 8,9 and 10 we examined the role and qualities of an inspector of school, and guidelines for school general and subject inspection were analyzed.
In order to understand what goes on in the school setting, unit 11 takes a look at the main managerial functions of the school head, while the next unit examined the characteristics and factors of effective school management.
Units 13 and 14 deals with the approaches and strategies for monitoring and evaluating curriculum and instruction as well as students' work (learning) and students' services.
The last two units explained the procedures for monitoring and evaluating school finances, and techniques of school self evaluation.
Each unit consists of one to two weeks work, and includes an introduction, objectives, reading materials, exercises, conclusion, summary, Tutor marked Assignments (TMAS), and marking scheme, references, and further reading and other resources.
The units direct you to work on exercises related to the required reading.
In general, these exercises question you on the materials you have just covered or required you to apply it in some way and thereby, help you to gauge your progress and to reinforce your comprehension of the material.
Together with Tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Assignment File There are eight assignments in this course.
The eight assignments are: 1.
Examine the role of evaluation in school administration.
82.
Prepare a checklist similar to the one described in unit 4 to evaluate three (3) teachers in your school.
Write a brief report on your findings and suggest ways to assist the teachers improve on their job.
3.
Identify a problem or issue in your own school which could be evaluated.
Plan a programme of evaluation following the processes described in unit 6.
4.
Prepare a format for general school inspection of your school.
Carry out the inspection (to last for 3-4 days) and write a report on your observation.
5.
Prepare a list of activities you might engage in your school in the following areas: planning; organizing; directing; and evaluating (controlling) 6.
Prepare a daily routine for a boarding secondary school.
Remember to indicate the time and activities for the period from students' rise up to lights out (bed-time).
7.
What are some of the main factors of student crisis in the secondary school?
How can these be stemmed?
8.
Conduct a self-evaluation of the following areas of your laboratory performance school system: 1.
Schoollibrary 2.
SchoolBiology laboratory 3.
SchoolAcademic performance Presentation schedule Your course materials give you important dates for the early and timely completion and submission of your tutor marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Do remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You school guide against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course: first are self- exercises, second are the tutor-marked assignments and third is a written examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation 9schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final examination of about three hours duration.
This examination will count for 60% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAS) There are eight tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You are encouraged; however, to submit all the eight assignments in which case the highest four of the eight marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more other references which will give you a broader view point and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment file.
If.
for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for course EDU 704 will be of three hours' duration and has a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which will reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
10 Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS ASSESSMENT MARK Assignment 1 - 8 Eight assignments, best four marks of the eight count at 10% each = 40% of course marks.
Final Examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course materials Table 1: Course marking Scheme Course Overview This Table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignment that follow them.
Unit Title of work Weeks activity Assignment(end of nit) 1.
Course Guide concept and nature of monitoring and evaluation in education 1 2.
Rationale for evaluation in educational Management 1 Assignment 1 Evaluation Technique 4.
Techniques of Evaluating Teacher’s 1 Assignment 2 Performance 5 Evaluation and External Agencies 11 6 Planning a programme of Evaluation 1 7.
Utilizing Evaluation Findings 8.
Duties of a school Inspector 9.
Qualities of a school Inspector 1 10.
Guidelines for Inspector 1 11.
Management function of the school head 1 12.
Characteristics of effective school 1 management 13.
Strategies for Monitoring and Evaluating 1 Curriculum and Instruction 14.
Monitoring and evaluating students and 1 Assignment 7 student’s services 15.
Monitoring and appraisal of school finance 1 Assignment 8 16.
Techniques of school self-Evaluation 1 Table 2: Course organizer How to get the most from this course In distance learning, the study units replace the unit lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distant learning; you can read and work through the specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your other materials.
In addition, just as the lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercise for you to do at appropriate point.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives; which enable you to know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have completed the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from a Reading section or some other sources.
Self-assessment tests (exercises) are interspersed through the units, and answers are given at the end of the units.
Working through these tests will 12help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units.
Work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical approach for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need help do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this course guide thoroughly.
2.
Organize a study schedule which is most convenient for you.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Vital information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available.
You need to gather together all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose you should decided on and writes your own dates for working each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you encounter any problem, with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
Turn to unit 1 and the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the reading materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in "the overview" at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your references on your desk, at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit; the content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7.
Well before the relevant due date's, check your assignment file and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
138. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit; keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor's comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 17 hours of tutorial provided in support of the course; you will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, as well as the names and phone number of you tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you, as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, and discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: - You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
14- You have difficulty with the self-test or exercises.
- You have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussing actively.
Summary Course EDAP 704 intends to introduce to you Monitoring and Evaluation in Educational Management.
Upon completing this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the nature, scope, principles and techniques of Monitoring and Evaluation in Educational Management.
You will be able to answer these kinds of questions: - What is evaluation?
- What is monitoring?
- What is the importance of monitoring and evaluation in the school organization?
- What are the purposes of evaluation?
- What are the main functions of evaluation?
- How do you carry out evaluation?
- Identify some techniques/devices of monitoring and evaluation in the school set up.
- What are the basis for evaluating the teaching - learning process?
- What are some of the criteria for evaluating teacher's performance?
- How do you measure teacher effectiveness?
- Identify and describe external agencies evaluating school performance?
- How do you go about planning for an evaluation programme in the school?
- What are the uses and importance of evaluation findings?
- What are the main duties of a school Inspector?
- Why and when do we carry out school inspection?
- How do we conduct school inspection?
15- Identify the main qualities of an Inspector of schools?
- Prepare the guidelines for subject inspection (Art and Science).
- Write a detail report on your observation and data collection during an inspection exercise.
- Describe the managerial functions of the school head.
- What is school effectiveness?
- What are the components of school effectiveness?
- Identify the main strategies for monitoring and evaluating curriculum and inspection?
- Describe some of the devices for monitoring and evaluating students and students' services in the school.
- What is book keeping?
- Identify some of the books kept to ensure proper accounting of school finance.
- What is the procedure for security of funds in school?
- Outline the procedure for expending school funds?
- Name some of the finance records you use when accounting for school funds?
- Give reasons to justify the use of such records.
- Describe the accounting principles involved while making financial records.
- Why should a school head embark on self-evaluation of his school?
- Name areas of the school that can be evaluated.
Identify devices for school self-evaluation.
Of course the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to those listed above.
In order that you benefit the most from this course you should try to apply the concepts and principles to your everyday life and practice of educational management.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
In the longer term, we hope you enyoy your acquaintance with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) and we wish you every success in your future.
Introduction to the Module: Schools and education authorities have become increasingly aware of the need to be effective.
This is partly due to the pressures for accountability brought about by governments at the Federal, State and Local government levels and the parents, and by the economic down turn and resulting reduced resource allocations.
At the same time a realization of the importance of the 16issue has grown as school heads and staff has sought to increase effectiveness in the school setting as a part of the development of professionalism.
This module deals with monitoring and evaluation.
The terms relate to the policies and devices that the school puts in place to ensure that the goals of the school are attained.
There are administrative policies which may differ from statutory ones; some are documented, while others are traditions and a part of the school ethos, whatever they are, it should be noted that having a policy is one thing, ensuring that it is implemented is another.
This is where the crucial role of the school head comes into focus as he seeks to monitor and evaluate the school staff and students and their behaviours and performance.
The means the school head adopts to monitor the school policy will vary, depending on the nature of the policy.
Monitoring and evaluation are essential for an effective school system, and do involve many agents and elements, and especially all the staff and selected students at different levels.
Monitoring and evaluation are therefore features of what goes on in every school, Objectives: By the end of this module, you should be able to: 1. identify some devices used in school for monitoring and evaluation 2. describe some of the procedures for monitoring and evaluating staff and students in the school 3. list the features of an effective school 4. explain the role of the school head in monitoring and evaluating the school.
Definition of Terms In order to avoid ambiguity in interpretation of the contents of this Module, the following terms are defined as follows.
Monitoring and Evaluation: are mechanisms for ensuring that plans are effectively implemented and kept under regular review.
Monitoring: is the continuous assessment of a programme in the context of its implementation schedules.
Monitoring: examines the differences between the planned (programme) and the actual (achievement).
It is also the collection of information at regular intervals about on-going projects or programmes within the school system, concerning the nature and level of their 17performance.
Regular monitoring provides bases for judging the impact of inputs.
Evaluation: means the determination of the value of a thing.
It is the determination of the quality, effectiveness or quality of a programme, project or process.
It is the assessment of an organization in relation to its goals and objectives over a period of time, Effectiveness: This is the extent to which the set goals or objectives of a school programme are accomplished.
Such effectiveness can be seen in relation to either the quality, quantity or equality of educational instruction given in a school.
Accountability: Refers to the process of justifying to others job performance in relation to agreed goals and targets.
18EDU 704: MONITORING & EVALUATION IN EDUCATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer DR (MRS.) D.O.
OTU Unit Writer Programme Leader DR.
I. O SALAWU School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator MR. T. O AJADI School of Education National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 19UNIT 1 CONCEPTS AND NATURE OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Meaning of Monitoring and Evaluation 3.1.1 What is Monitoring?
3.1.2.
What is Evaluation?
3.1.3 Evaluation for what?
3.2 The Nature of Monitoring and Evaluation.
3.2.
The Nature and Importance of Monitoring 3.3.
The Nature of Evaluation 3.4 Importance of Evaluation 3.5 Purposes of Evaluation 3.6 Types of Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment (TMA) and marking Scheme 7.0 References, Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is concerned with the basic concepts and nature of monitoring and evaluation.
The unit focuses on the meaning of monitoring and evaluation.It guides you through the nature of evaluation emphasizing the importance as well as the purposes of evaluation, 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should able to: 201. explain the concepts and nature of monitoring and evaluation 2. describe the main types of evaluation 3. state the importance of evaluation 4. outline the purposes of evaluation 3.1 MEANING OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION 3.1.1 What is Monitoring?
In simple terms, monitoring refers to watching or checking on a person, things or objects in order to warn or admonish.
It entails warning about faults or informing one in respect of his duty.
Monitoring could also mean giving advice and instruction by way of reproof or caution.
It can be said to mean keeping order in a particular situation.
Monitoring can be defined as collecting information at regular intervals about ongoing projects or programmes within the school system, concerning the nature and level of their performance.
Regular monitoring provides basis for judging the impact of inputs that have been fed into the system, 3.1.2 What Is Evaluation?
Evaluation is the determination of the value of a thing.
It is the formal determination of the quality, value or effectiveness of a programme, project or process is primarily concerned with measuring the impact of input the quality of people's lives.
Educational programmes have intended outcomes.
They have plans that are being followed in order to achieve these outcomes.
These plans consist of a range of components working together to ensure their successful implementation.
It is by monitoring plans and evaluating their outcome once completed that educators seek to ensure that they are being accountable to their stake-holders (parents, government, students and society), true to their intentions, and that they themselves will learn from past experience of the programme for further work they might do.
3.1.3 Evaluation For What?
Evaluation of the educational Organization and programme is one of the most difficult and most important phases of educational administration.
Evaluations are constantly being sought by various individuals or groups.
The parents and members of the public want to know how good their schools are.
The government must make continual judgments regarding the schools as such judgments are basic for the establishment or review of the various 21policies adopted by the government.
The administrators are not in a position to make recommendations in the desirable developments in the school system unless they have available the results of evaluations.
Teachers also are interested in evaluation, in order that they may have some knowledge of the results of their efforts.
Their morale is highly related to the understandings that they have in respect of the smooth running of the school system of which they are a part.
In view of the foregoing, you can see that evaluation is inevitable in order to measure the effectiveness and efficiency of the school system.
Exercise 1.1 1.
What do you understand by the terms: monitoring and evaluation?
2.
Briefly explain the need for evaluation.
Answer kit 1.
You would have observed that monitoring and evaluation are twin terminology that go hand in hand.
Monitoring means checking on a person or thing to ensure that he is doing the right thing at the right time.
It entails informing a person in respect of his duty.
Evaluation is the determination of the value or worth of a thing or programme.
2.
Evaluation is relevant to educational management.
It is the last phase of management function and it helps to measure the effectiveness and efficiency of the school system.
3.2 The Nature and Importance of Monitoring Monitoring is concerned with whether a project or programme is implemented in a manner that is consistent with its design.
In other words, in monitoring we are interested in determining if the inputs were delivered at the times and in the quantities envisaged by the plan; if activities occurred qualitatively and quantitatively in the manner prescribed by the plan; if resources were expended at the times and levels outlined in the plan; and, if the individuals and communities targeted by the plan were the ones who were actually served by the project.
Monitoring is important for many reasons, some of which are described here: 1.
It enables us to describe the programme we will subsequently evaluate.
If we do not know the degree to which it is implemented, it 22is difficult to arrive at conclusions about the adequacy of that programme.
2.
It is a powerful tool for programme managers who wish to determine the specific "nuts and bolts" they must address in order to improve a project's impact.
3.
It is an essential element of accountability to counterparts, employers and colleagues.
3.3 The Nature of Evaluation Monitoring is a prerequisite for successful project valuing.
Monitoring and evaluation are two activities which support each other and enable stakeholders to make informed decisions about a project's future.
Essentially evaluation is ultimately concerned with the worth and value of a project or programme.
However such judgments are made in the context of programmed operations.
For example, if a State Government in the country decides to supply free lunch to its students in its Day Secondary Schools, we may wish to know whether the students learn more or become better nourished?
Thus, evaluation is concerned with the "so what" of inputs, that is, the long - term changes that a particular project helps bring about in the behaviours and conditions of those whom it touches.
From the data generated through monitoring and evaluation, one may decide to do either of the following: 1. discontinue the project if it is beset with basic faults that can not be easily solved, 2. revise the project's design.
3. continue the project with no changes.
You should note that monitoring and evaluation are continuous activities.
They occur throughout the life of a programme.
3.4 Importance of Evaluation The significance of evaluation in educational management lies in the fact that evaluation is the springboard on which the future development of education and the entire school system repose.
Parents, students, members of the public, teachers, government and administrators have their views and judgments with respect to the strengths and limitations of given schools or school systems.
Educational administrators recognize that evaluation is a part and parcel of their function, however they are often confronted by issues of validity and credibility of data collected as some of these may be inadequate.
While it is 23understood that the task of evaluation is difficult and complex, however, these are no sufficient reasons for failure to recognize its importance in the school system.
If a problem arises in the other numerous tasks of the administrator, carrying out an evaluation of the problem area would assist him in no small measure on how to go about solving the problem.
3.5 Purposes Of Evaluation Evaluation is carried out for a variety of purposes.
Some of these are listed below: 1.
To secure the basis for making judgments at the end of a period of operation; for example, at the end of a school term, school year or even a week of school term.
2.
To ensure continuous, effective and improved programme operation.
3.
To diagnose difficulties and avoid destructive problems.
4.
To improve staff and members of the public's ability to develop the educational system.
5, To test new approaches to problems and to conduct pilot studies in the consideration of which advancements and progress can be effected.
Essentially, management of schools involves the evaluation of the following educational objectives.
a) To evaluate instructional programmes b) To assess students' progress c) To facilitate students' progress d) To understand the individual student e) To facilitate self - understanding by students f) To contribute to a knowledge of students' abilities g) To assist in administrative judgment.
Let us take a brief look at each one of these.
a) To evaluate instructional programme The evaluation of instructional programmes is compulsory for both the teacher and the learners to determine the causes of poor learning situation.
It could be that the objectives are not realistic; methods of teaching may be ineffective; examination tests may be too hard or inadequate; or that specific characteristics of the students had resulted in poor performance.
b) To assess students’ progress 24A student needs to know when he is making progress in his learning and when he is not in order to help him improve, c) To facilitate students’ progress In daily, weekly and long term learning tasks, the teacher should ascertain how well the student is learning and on this basis to award him a grade or a rating.
d) To understand the individual student Various interest inventories and academic aptitude tests should be used to facilitate the evaluation of the student's abilities in the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
e) To facilitate self-understanding by students The impact of school on the student’s life is crucial on his later life.
By the time students finish secondary school, they are expected to set realistic goals and evaluate their progress towards these goals.
This depends however, on teacher-student collection of information about ability and the teachers task of interpreting such information to them if the student is to achieve self-understanding, f) To contribute to knowledge of students' abilities.
The improvement in the teaching - learning process can be better induced through an increased knowledge of abilities and instructions, g) To assist in administrative judgment We need to know which of the students shall be retained in a particularclass; who shall we promote; and who shall we give accelerated promotion.
In addition we need to know the student’s mental state of fitness.
Exercise 1.2 Pause and think for a little while what our school system will be like if there is no evaluation.
Answer kit Your reflection may include ideas such as this: the school system may not run smoothly as there would be no way of knowing the areas of strengths and weaknesses in the system.
We may therefore, make very little or even no progress at all as we would be unable to measure the achievement of our 25predetermined goals.
There would be no checks and balances in the way they behave and perform their tasks in the school.
3.6 Types of Evaluation.
Evaluation uses inquiry and judgment methods including: a) determining standards for judging quality and deciding whether those standards should be relative or absolute; b) collecting relevant information; c) applying the standards to determine quality.
There are four dimensions to evaluation: the formative and the summative, the internal and the external dimensions.
i) Formative evaluation is conducted during the operation of a programme to provide the programme managers with evaluative information that are useful in improving the programme.
For example, if we are developing a curriculum package, formative evaluation would involve inspection of the curriculum content by subject experts, pilot tests with small number of students, field tests with larger number of students and teachers in several schools and so on, Each stage would result in immediate feedback to the developers who would use the information to make necessary revisions.
ii) Summative evaluation is conducted at the end of a programme to provide potential consumers with judgments about the programme's worth or merit.
For example, after the curriculum package is completely developed, a summative evaluation might be conducted to determine how effective the package is with a national sample of typical schools, teachers, and students at the level for which it was developed.
The findings of the summative evaluation would then be made available to consumers.
You would note that the audiences and uses for these two evaluation roles are very different.
In formative evaluation, the audience is programme personnel, that is, in our example they are those responsible for developing the curriculum.
Summative evaluation audiences include potential consumers such as students, teachers, and other professionals, funding agents such tax payers, and supervisors and other officials as well as programme personnel.
Formative evaluation leads to decisions about programme development including modification, revision and the likes.
Summative evaluation leads to decisions concerning programme continuation, termination, expansion, adoption and so on.
26You should be aware that both formative and summative evaluation are essential because decisions are needed during the initial, developmental stages of a programme so as to improve and strengthen it, and again, when it has stabilized, to judge its final worth or determine its future.
Unfortunately, many educators conduct only summative evaluation.
This is unfortunate because the development process, without formative evaluation, is incomplete and inefficient.
Try to imagine a situation in which a new aircraft design was developed and submitted to a summative fest flight without first testing it in the "formative" wind tunnel.
Educational test flights can be expensive too, especially when we do not have a clue about the probability of success.
Evaluation may also be classified as either internal or external.
An internal evaluation is one conducted by the programme employees, and an external evaluation is one conducted by outsiders.
An experimental remedial programme in a secondary school may be evaluated by a member of the school staff (internal evaluation) or by a team of inspectors from the school's Zonal Education Office (external evaluation), These two types of evaluation have advantages and disadvantages some of which are listed below: 1.
The internal evaluator surely knows more about the programme than an outsider, however this closeness to the programme may make her not to be completely objective in her judgment of the programme.
2.
It is difficult for an external evaluator to learn as much about the programme as the insider knows, 3.
Sometimes, an internal evaluator may have unimportant details about the programme but overlooks several critical factors, 4.
The internal evaluator may be familiar with important contextual information that would tamper with evaluation recommendations.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt a number of basic and important issues that relate to the concepts of monitoring and evaluation in educational management.
You have known the reasons for evaluation.
The nature and importance of monitoring and evaluation have been highlighted.
In addition, we have pointed out that educational administrators require evaluating their school programmes regularly and continuously.
The purposes of evaluation were also described, and the four main types of evaluation were outlined, 5.0 Summary 27What you have studied in this unit relates to the meaning and nature of monitoring and evaluation.
It has served to give you some background information on monitoring and evaluation in educational administrations.
The units which follow shall build on this introduction.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Examine the role of evaluation in school administration.
7.0 References Nwalor, J.I.
(1998) Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
Ibadan.
Spectrum Books Ltd, Worthen, B.R.
and Sanders, J.R. (1987) Educational Evaluation: Alternative Approaches and Practical Guidelines.
London.
Longman.
28UNIT 2 RATIONALE FOR EVALUATION IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Need for Accountability 3.2.
Functions of Evaluation 3.2.1 Diagnosis 3.2.2 Prediction 3.2.3 Selection 3.2.4 Grading 3.3 Evaluation and Target Setting 3.4 Evaluation and factors of Effective school Management 3.4.1 School Organization 3.4.2 School Curriculum 3.4.3 Parents Teachers Association (PTA) 3.4.4 Staff Meeting 3.4.5 School Records 3.4.6 School Accounts 3.4.7 Inspection Reports 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References, Further reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction In this unit you will learn why evaluation is a necessary tool in monitoring school effectiveness.
It is unfortunate that in our school system, school administrators do not utilize evaluation as much as they should do.
They 29usually examine students for examination purposes and ignore other important areas of school management.
In their view, examination is evaluation and such examination results is the end of the process.
However, evaluation involves reviewing the entire school process to find out why certain things have happened or what should be done to improve poor performance.
School heads therefore, need to be aware that they are accountable not just to the government for what goes on in the school, but also to students, parents and the community which is served by the school.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
Outline the reasons for establishing standards of accountability 2.
Identify the functions of evaluation 3.
Describe the factors of effective school management 4.
Explain the relationship between evaluation and effectiveness of school management, 3.1 The Need For Accountability One main objective of education is to produce persons who are able to appreciate the values and benefits of education and contribute to the development of the community in which they live in different spheres of life whether political, economic, social, moral and technological.
In developed and underdeveloped countries, governments see education as an important investment and therefore, devote huge sums of the nation’s revenue each year to the provision of education at all levels.
The governments spend money on infrastructure, such as school buildings, payment of teachers and other personnel and on the provision of materials.
Thus, the government needs to ensure that the money provided for education is wisely spent.
The government also needs to know that the aims of education are being achieved.
It needs to know through regular evaluation, where there are areas of short comings which require to be corrected so that the goals of education can be achieved.
Furthermore, schools get their students from the community; therefore, school administrators are accountable to the community in many ways.
For example, the kind of curriculum that is being operated must be relevant to the needs and development of that society; the quality of examination results must be such that can enhance the youths employment opportunities in the wider society as well as opportunities for higher education and professional training; and the safety of students while in school must be given proper attention.
30The need for a comprehensive measurement of the students' performance is becoming more and more evident.
If teachers are to be held responsible for what is learned by their students, then the students performance must be measured at regular intervals, so that what they learned can be identified (as it is being practiced with the Continuous Assessment system in schools).
With the Continuous Assessment method, one can see that measurement and evaluation of student’s performance and achievement have been extended to many more areas such as cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
We like to point out here that no programme of performance measurement alone, no matter how comprehensive or sophisticated, is sufficient to meet the requirements of accountability.
It is only by knowing the total contributions of individual staff or schools that it would be possible for a school system to operate a profitable system or for parents to make informed decisions about the right schools for their children, 3.2 Functions of Evaluation It is through evaluation that we learn to what extent the goals of education are being achieved.
It enables us to review the progress of education and to devise new measures for its improvement and development.
Four main functions of evaluation are described here.
3.2.1 Diagnosis Your can use evaluation to discover or locate weaknesses in your students as to what they do not know.
Diagnostic testing will enable you to decide whether some of your students need remedial courses or not.
Pre-tests given at the beginning of a class are good for determining what the students already know and what they do not know.
For example, at the beginning of an English lesson, you may ask for the meanings of some words to find out if your students have come across those words.
You may then have to explain the meanings of such words even before the passage is read.
This is to facilitate the reading exercise.
This is a form of diagnostic evaluation you have got some information by which you have judged the knowledge of the students and finally you have taken action to remedy the situation.
3.2.2 Prediction Sometimes we give tests to identify the aptitudes and abilities of the students.
This sort of test is varied so that different types of abilities are catered for.
From this test you can predict students who are creative, technically inclined or arts oriented and as teachers you give them exercises that will help develop each individual's interests, The National Examination given in Nigeria to select gifted children is a good example of this.
313.2.3 Selection Through evaluation we learn where additional and better resources human, material and financial are required.
Thus evaluation is used to identify suitable persons for particular courses, jobs, entitlements and others.
3.2.4 Grading Evaluation whereby students are ranked and graded in order of performance is commonly used in schools.
Grading between schools in terms of examination results and other performance criteria provide parents and the public with a measure for choosing which school to send their children to.
3.3 Evaluation and Target Setting In target setting, you need to have a specific objective (or target) you want to accomplish, a plan as to how you will achieve that target and then evaluation procedures to indicate whether it has been achieved.
For example, you may have some under-qualified teachers in your school, who can adversely affect the quality of education.
You may decide your need to enable them to obtain training, through upgrading.
You will need to set a time limit for this upgrading programme and also decide what method of upgrading will be immediately useful.
After setting the time target for the upgrading, you will need to plan your approach.
As teachers on the job, their upgrading programme has to be an in-service course.
You then need to decide on how many of them should go for Sandwich programmes held in universities during the holidays.
The final step in the process is to decide on criteria for evaluating whether the objective has been achieved - and to ensure that the results of any evaluation are utilized to plan the next development.
Exercise 1.1 Can you provide examples of ways in which the neglect of evaluation reports has hindered the development of effective teaching and learning in your school.
Answer kit You may be able to cite examples of evaluation projects undertaken with particular goals, for example improving the quantity and quality of food in your school, repairing damaged furniture, improving discipline and so on.
When actions are not taken as recommended in evaluation reports then there in unlikely to be any improvement and the quality of teaching might be affected.
323.4 Evaluation and Factors of Effective School Management Earlier in unit 1, you have learnt that monitoring and evaluation were identified as important school management functions, necessary for ensuring effective and efficient schools.
A school is considered effective if the following elements are found existing in it.
3.4.1 A well Organized School A school is established to ensure that teaching and learning take place.
A school that is able to discharge effectively its daily routines is providing value for money.
For this to happen, the school should be well planned so that learning can take place in a conducive atmosphere.
A democratic management style is required where planning is done in advance of events occurring.
An efficient school should have good communication channels to enhance effective administration.
There must be discipline in the school.
To each office in the school are specific duties attached and failure of one officer will affect the effective administration of the school.
3.4.2 School Curriculum At the beginning of a new academic year, the school head would collect the school calendar from the Zonal Education Office and he must ensure that all school activities are in line with the calendar.
Before the school resumes, he must see that text books, stationery, furniture, games equipment, and library books are ready.
The syllabuses of all the classes must be available, and with the assistance of his assistants, - the vice principals.
Teachers are helped to prepare scheme of work.
The school head and his assistants should ensure that lesson notes are prepared daily and that teachers' teaching does not deviate from the lesson notes.
Assignments, tests and examinations should be marked and recorded promptly and corrections done where necessary.
3.4.3 Parents-Teachers Association (PTA) The school head should ensure that a functional PTA exists in his school, and that its meetings are held regularly, at least once a term.
It essential that there is a cordial relationship between parents and teachers for effective administration of the school, If parents are properly approached, they can do a lot to help easing some of the financial problems in the school, In this country, the PTAs have assisted schools with building of classrooms, provision of school buses, purchase of laboratory equipments and others.
3.4.4 Staff Meetings There may be staff meetings of the entire school staff, departments and special committees.
These should be held regularly to review the running of 33the school.
School heads should use a democratic approach by listening to their staff and understanding their personal and professional problems.
Participative decision making would also enhance the performance and productivity of the staff.
3.4.5 School Records The school head should ensure that, complete and accurate records on students and staff, stock ledgers and registers, and other vital records which provide a full picture of the school life are kept.
3.4.6 School Accounts The school head should keep proper accounts of income and expenditure and bills and receipts must be accompanied by vouchers.
These are required in the auditing of the school accounts as well as in promoting the principles and practice of accountability and evaluation in the school.
3.4.7 Inspection Reports A record of all Inspection records must be kept by the school head and he must discuss these with the staff so that recommendations with respect to how the system can be improved and developed may be implemented.
Exercise 1.2 1.
Identify the main features you should look for in an inspection report, 2.
Discuss how you currently use inspection records to improve the teaching - learning situation in your school.
Answer kit Your list would probably include observations of lessons which will focus on the effectiveness of the teaching-learning process.
It is important to point out that the data contained in an inspection report should provide information for the school head to use as a means of effecting changes in the school.
If this is done, then monitoring and evaluation become major tools for effective management.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have learned that school heads are accountable for whatever goes on in the schools.
They are answerable to the government who has expended a lot of its resources on education, parents whose future hope is the students and to the members of the public who as taxpayers contribute substantially to education.
It is through regular evaluation that they can make the school system profitable.
345.0 Summary To sum up this unit, you have learned about the need for evaluation and accountability in educational management.
We have described the four main functions as diagnosis, prediction, selection and grading.
We pointed out that for evaluation to be beneficial, there must be set goal.
You have also seen that evaluation is a vital tool towards effective school management; some of the elements of effective school management are school organization, school curriculum, staff meetings and the PTA.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Describe how you would use the following evaluation activities: diagnosis, prediction, selection and grading to improve students academic performance in English language in your school.
7.0 References Federal Ministry of Education and Youth Development (1993) Better Schools Management: A Read Teacher Education and Resource Materials .Lagos, F.M.E UNIT 3 35EVALUATION TECHNIQUES TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Various Techniques Evaluation 3.1 Questionnaires of check lists 3.2 Systematic Reporting 3.3 Interviews 3.4 Peer evaluation 3.5 Discussion Groups 3.6 Observation of classes 3.7 Continuous Assessment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment (TMA) and marking Scheme 7.0 References, Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction In this unit you will learn about the different evaluation techniques which the school administrator can use in assessing the performance of different components in the school.
Evaluation involves collecting information at regular intervals about ongoing programmes within the school and then analyzing it.
Data collection can be in form of general observation of students, seeking opinions through discussion groups, peer evaluation, interviews and observation of classes.
2.0 Objectives By the en of this unit you should be able to: 1. describe different evaluation techniques 2. apply appropriate evaluation techniques to meet different situations.
363.0 Various Techniques Of Evaluation Evaluation involves making judgments about achievement in terms of set goals, but before you can pass judgment, you must identify an area of activity which you seek to evaluate and then seek information about it.
Based on the information you have collected, you will then be in a position to pass judgment on the quality of the activity or the particular situation in relation to the criteria set.
Any one or all of the following techniques may be used to gather information.
3.1 Questionnaires Or Checklists These can be used by the school head to obtain from students or teachers, an assessment of various aspects of school life; for example, the standard of catering services in the school; the standard of work of some specific teachers; the success of some innovations introduced to the school.
It is particularly important not to try to evaluate too much at one time; instead you should focus on a relatively discrete and manageable topic.
Supposing you want to assess a teacher in Senior Secondary Class II, how would you go about the task?
In order to obtain information on the teacher's class performance, you might decide to design a questionnaire to be filled out by the students.
Some of the variables to be included in the questionnaire might be following: Class: age of student completing the questionnaire; * punctuality; * commitment of the teacher to work; * communication skill of the teacher; * teacher's use of a variety of teaching methods; * correction of students' work; * relationship with students; * relationship with colleagues; and so forth.
You may wish to add other areas as you consider necessary or perhaps exclude some of these.
In short, a questionnaire for only level of student should be simple, straight forward with short and close ended questions.
After designing the questionnaire, you will need to ensure that it is distributed to the entire group (if it is not too large) or a representative group if the target population is too large.
After administering the questionnaire, you will have to analyze the information in it and together with other collected or available data pass judgment on the ability of the teacher as fast as the set goals of the 37school are concerned.
For example, you might want to express the results in terms of percentages and to say whether the results are significant.
Exercise 1.1 The Literary Dramatic Club in your school has not been particularly functional in recent times.
Draw up a questionnaire to be administered to students which would evaluate the state of affairs of the club and provide an indication of how to remedy the situation.
Answer kit Your questionnaire should be comprehensive and cover all the various aspects of the club such as regularity of meetings, quality and variety of activities, effectiveness of patrons, fees charged, contributions of members during meetings, issues such as conflicts with dates of other meetings, etc.
The use of a questionnaire is an important technique where concrete information can be collected from the staff and the students on the issue to be evaluated.
In order to get some objective responses, there may be the need for anonymity.
However this could be supplemented by more subjective data from interviews, for example.
3.2 Systematic Reporting This technique involves written reports or diaries on a daily or weekly basis written by students or teachers on, for example, chronic latecomers or absenteeism from school; the incidence of various acts of indiscipline in the school; or the quality of the co-curricular programme.
It is a useful exercise for the school head to draw up a checklist of important school records which should be in place at regular times in the school; and then to evaluate the purpose which such records are expected to serve in the school and their quality.
In the process, the school head will not only have a handy list or records, but will also have a list of staff who are responsible for keeping such records.
You will see an example of a checklist in figure below of equipment, records and facilities which should be in place for the effective administration of the school laboratory (excluding a list of specific science equipment).
38Figure 1: Equipment and facilities record S/No.
Equipment and Record Officer/Teacher Responsible Remarks 1.
Send bucket Science Teacher Available at all times 2.
Fire extinguisher Head of Department Functioning 3.
Fire blanket Head of Department Available 4.
First Aid box School Nurse Contains essential drugs 5.
Stock book Science Teacher To be kept up-to-date 6.
Breakage book Science Teacher To be kept up-to-date 7.
Fume box Head of department Available 8.
Gas/Electricity supply Head of dept./Science Teacher Available 9.
Rules and regulations on Science Teacher To be displayed use of the laboratory consciously 10.
Subject syllabus Head of Department Current syllabus is in use 11.
Schemes of work Head of dept./Science Teacher Breakdown on weekly 12 Mark books Science Teacher Available at all times 13.
Departmental library Head of Dept Available but requires to stock with useful books .
Exercise 1.2 Draw up a checklist similar to the one given in figure 1, of the records and equipment which should be available for the general operation of the Fine Art Department of your school.
Answer Kit Your own checklist may look like this: S/N o. Equipment/Material Officer/Teacher Responsible Remarks 1 Drawing board Art Teacher Available at all times 2 Drawing sheets Art Teacher Available at all times 3.
Caligraphic pen Art Teacher Available at times 4.
Donkey bench Art Teacher Not available 5.
Paints Provided by students To be brought to School when need arises 6.
Colour pencils Provided by students To be brought when necessary One of the important points to remember about systematic records is that for them to be useful for monitoring, the effectiveness of management and administration, they must be maintained and regularly updated.
They can provide a criterion against which evaluation can be made.
For example, taking Figure 1.
Item 5, a quick assessment can be made as to whether the information in the stock book is up-to-date, 393.3 Interviews Interviews may be structured (following a set list of questions) or unstructured (a discussion following no set plan) or semi - structured (partly set questions and partly free discussion).
The last is the most common approach.
You will probably have used informal interviews many times to collect information from members of staff, and will be aware of some of the problems surrounding this face-to-face technique of asking questions and noting answers (either mentally or recording on paper or tape).
You might like to spend a few minutes jotting down some of the advantages and disadvantages of interviews.
You will no doubt agree that a major advantage of interviewing is its adaptability, A good interviewer will be able to following up leads: "You mentioned that "could you explain mentioned .
.
.
?”; probe responses: "why do you think that ......
?"
and generally get closer to the interviewer's true feelings, motives or attitudes.
This is something which a questionnaire can never do.
The disadvantages are, of course, that a good interview can be very time consuming, and there are many opportunities for bias.
This can be as a result of the way in which the questions are asked, and also as a result of respondents giving an "acceptable" but inaccurate answer.
Preparing for and undertaking interviews and analyzing the information collected requires considerable care and attention.
Just as with the other techniques discussed in this unit, the choice should be determined by the sorts of information you wish to collect, why and from whom.
For example, if you want to obtain information from younger students and illiterate parents, you would likely get better results from talking to them than asking them to write responses in a questionnaire.
3.4 Peer Evaluation Evaluation often seems to imply someone more senior evaluating the work of someone junior.
Peer evaluation involves co-workers (school head, heads of departments, teachers or students) using the techniques described in this unit to help each other.
Peer groups in schools can be used to obtain information which can contribute towards school effectiveness.
For example, various character, traits manifest themselves more within the student peer groups than in class and could be brought to the attention of the school head by members of the peer group.
The school head might consider exploring this avenue to help identify 40students who have particular character traits, or who have the potential to take on responsibilities such as the head prefect, class captains, house captain, games or labour prefects and so forth, However, it is an "evaluation" technique which needs to be treated with some caution and sensitivity.
3.5 Discussion Groups Sometimes in a school, specific situations may arise where an evaluation can only be made by using the views of a range of appropriate groups in the school.
For example, let us consider a situation where there have been about the repeated complaints by students about the general quality and quantity of food available and served in a school dining hall.
It would be difficult for the school head to obtain an accurate evaluation of the catering services in the school without seeking the views and opinions of all involved: the catering officers, cooks, stewards, house masters and mistresses who supervise the students during meals and the students themselves.
Thus, one obvious strategy to evaluate the catering system would be to call a meeting of this group of people to address the issue.
The opinions and advice of this group of people will no doubt go a long way towards an accurate evaluation of the effectiveness of the school's catering services.
Can you suggest other methods or sources of obtaining information?
You will probably have thought that a questionnaire might be useful if administered, or individual interviews undertaken.
Frequently, a combination of evaluation techniques are most likely to provide the range of information which is needed in order to draw conclusions.
3.6 Observation Of Classes This s a technique to evaluate the effectiveness of teachers and the overall teaching/learning environment in terms of physical facilities, for example, chalkboard, classroom seating arrangements, ventilation and others.
We can also use this technique to check the students' stationery/textbooks and the teachers' classroom control.
The technique can be used in assessing the classroom performance of teachers and providing a check on the state and use of classroom facilities.
The school head may find it useful for organizing routine observations of classes at different times of the day in the school by different teachers, including his or her own lessons.
3.7 Continuous Assessment Continuous Assessment of students' work involves a range of techniques by which the school head ensures that students' work in the various subjects is regularly and comprehensively evaluated.
This could include the use of 41regular assignments, class tests, projects, practical work as well as observation and oral tests.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have been introduced to some vital techniques of evaluation including: questionnaires, observation, interviews, peer and discussion groups, continuous assessment and records.
You should note that whichever technique you use, you first have to record the information gathered carefully in order to be able to analyze it and make judgments concerning the questions being asked and issues addressed, 5.0 Summary Developing evaluation instruments and analyzing information may sometimes be a little technical and you may therefore need to set up a committee in your school to design proper school assessment instruments like questionnaires, interviews, observations, diary keeping and to analyze the information collected.
Such a committee can also help guide the planning and execution of an ongoing programme of school evaluation which will be explained in a later unit, The Zonal Education Office of your school should also be able to give you considerable help in this.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Make a list of ten items you would observe in monitoring a teacher's effectiveness in delivering a lesson in the class, 2.
Compile a list of the forms of continuous assessment used in a classroom in your school over a period of a week in selected subjects.
Assess the adequacy or otherwise of the techniques used by the teacher and the quality of reporting.
7.0 References Federal Ministry of Education and Youth Development (1993) Better Schools Management: Head Teacher Education and Resource Materials, Lagos, FME.
UNIT 4 TECHNIQUES OF EVALUATING TEACHER'S PERFORMANCE.
42 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.2.1 Teacher's Personal Traits 3.2.2 Teacher's Performance on the Job 3.3.3 Teacher's Mastery of Subject 3.3 Classroom visit 3.4 Teacher Effectiveness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment (TMA) and marking Scheme 7.0 References, Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction The central task of a school organization is teaching and learning.
It is the focal point of the existence of a school.
The most important input into the school system is the student who is being processed to become a useful product in his society.
In this unit you will learn about the role of the teacher in the teaching-learning process.
You will also study some of the techniques used in evaluating the teacher's performance so as to achieve maximum efficiency 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1. identify the bases for evaluating teacher's performance 2. state teacher's personal traits 3. describe essential aspects of teacher's job performance 4. explain the significance of classroom visits to teacher's performance, 3.1 Bases for Evaluating the Teaching-Learning Process, Evaluation is a value judgment about a given situation in accordance with either qualitative or quantitative and acceptable criteria.
Evaluation is embedded in every aspect of school administration and the person during the evaluation must: 43i, determine the purpose of the evaluation ii, define what areas are to be evaluated, iii, establish the basis of judgment and, iv, proceed to measure what the evaluator is attempting to discover.
For example, the evaluation of the capabilities and future promise of students can compromise, a) their academic performance measured in terms of test scores, b) their social relationships based on sociometric tests, and (c) their behaviour as described in records.
You should note that academic achievement usually receives the greatest attention of the school, and consequently is most frequently assessed, very often to the serious neglect of the more intangible traits of attitudes, interests, aptitudes and personality.
You should also note that it is not always easy to determine the success of teachers in making their students learn successfully because the factors which shape human behaviour are numerous and complex.
Technically, teacher evaluation should focus on the ability of the teacher to inculcate effectively in his students accepted social behaviour as expressed in real - life situations.
This ideal is hard to realize since the stimuli which impinge upon the students are too many and diverse, subtle and long-run to be measured and attributed solely to a particular teacher.
The results of the teacher's teaching, for example, are not immediately apparent, and it is always difficult to tell whether students' behavoural changes are the results of the teacher's influence or that of other factors.
Consequently, teacher evaluation usually entails indirect appraisal of those traits considered likely to produce desired results in the students and the teaching act itself.
Exercise 1,1 From your own personal experience, why do you think that it is difficult to assess student's learning from the teacher's teaching alone?
Answer Kit: Your response may include the fact that there are so many variables at play in student's learning - we can consider his background - social, mental, learning readiness etc., If the student is from an enlightened environment he may have access to other materials and resources which can enhance his learning.
3.2 Criteria For Evaluating Teacher's Performance.
44The selection of what to evaluate is entirely the prerogative of the evaluators or supervisors but we shall consider the underlisted areas.
3.2.1 Teacher's Personal Traits.
A.
Personal qualities i. physical and emotional readiness to teach.
ii.
enthusiasm and alertness about his teaching.
B.
School relations, i relationship with colleagues and his head of department, ii appearance and manner - are they reasonably good?
iii sense of responsibility and being punctual to class, iv is he a worthy and active member of the school?
v does he respect the ideas and contributions of others?
vi is he friendly and just in his dealings with colleagues?
vii is he aware of school policies and procedures?
viii is he concerned about the welfare of others?
3.2.2 Teacher's Performance on the Job A.
Lesson Planning i can he formulate clear, valid, general and specific objectives in terms of changes in student behaviour?
ii does his lesson plan make provision for introduction, presentation, application and conclusion?
B.
Delivery and Development of ideas, i are learning activities clearly related to objectives, content and evaluation?
ii.
do the examples and assessments he employs contribute to these objectives?
iii.
is the sequence of learning activities reasonably coherent?
iv.
does he use questioning?
v. does he use the chalkboard and other audio-visual aids effectively?
C. Effective teacher-student relationships.
i. does he maintain discipline without relying unduly on compulsion?
ii is he able to establish good rapport with his students?
45D.
Communication Skill.
i does he give his students plenty of opportunity to practice listening, speaking, reading and writing?
ii does he himself maintain acceptable standards as regards speaking, reading, spelling and language usage?
F. Mastery of Subject.
i. does he understand his subject well enough to ensure his students do their best?
IV.
Attainment of Aims.
i. does he provide for the evaluation of objectives?
ii is he able to obtain valid evidence of his student’s achievement in them?
Iii does he use this evidence in subsequent planning?
Almost all the above can be obtained from direct observation of the teacher during his lesson.
Information can also be obtained from personal records and the students' ratings.
3.3 Classroom Visits.
These visits are an important aspect of evaluating teacher performance.
Such visits are carried out by the school head.
However, he must avoid supervisory approaches which are likely to cause interpersonal tension and dissatisfaction among his teacher.
Generally, teachers accept the right of their supervisors to evaluate them if (i) they, the teachers, have contributed to the formulation of the evaluation policies which affect them, (ii) the evaluations are reasonably frequent; (iii) they are conducted in an atmosphere free of emotion and ostentation; and (iv) they are followed by a mutual exchange of views that leads to the improvement of teaching.
Evaluation must be made of all teachers, including the most experienced and successful of them, to guard against complacency.
In addition, complete evaluation records should be kept so that they can be given to, and discussed with the teacher concerned.
3.4 Teacher Effectiveness The effectiveness of a teacher is measured by how well he plans and organizes his teaching.
The following are guidelines for an effective teacher in planning and organizing teaching: 461.
He must be clear about the objectives for each lesson and the entire programme 2.
He must plan each lesson well; anticipate where questions, explanations and feedback will be appropriate.
3.
He must allow learners to reach out in different ways.
4.
He should provide resources such a way that allows learning to progress with little interruption.
5.
He should use learning groups of different and appropriate sizes.
6.
He should match methods and tasks to the abilities of students.
7.
He should use the space available to best advantage including the use of displays.
8.
He should set tasks and activities in diverse imaginative ways.
9.
He should adapt other approaches to learning used by colleagues.
10.
He should always put students' interest first.
The collection of information about teaching styles and the extent to which they are successful is very crucial if teachers in your school are to improve their learning and teaching processes.
Observation of classroom practice and the systematic collection and reporting of data about the quality of teaching is essential.
For effective monitoring, the school head should check on a daily and weekly basis what learning has taken place in this case, the main judgments about effectiveness will be in terms of the quality the quantity and the variety of activities engaged in by the students.
Apart from the teaching that the teacher does in the school, the teacher performs other duties and function in order to ensure the smooth running of the school.
He is assigned responsibilities such as year group tutor, house master/mistress, head of section/unit/department, games master and others.
He is constantly assessed for the performance of these duties.
One of the main instruments called Annual Performance Appraisal (APA) is one such methods of evaluating teacher's performance for purposes such as staff development, promotions, assignment to higher duties and general information on a continuous basis of the staff.
4.0 Conclusion The teacher's activities must be evaluated from time to time.
The evaluation should include the continuous examination of the effects produced by the ways in which teaching and learning activities are performed.
The procedural steps are: 1. the determination of the purpose of the evaluation, 472. the definition of the areas to be evaluated, 3. the establishment of the evaluation criteria, and the collection of the data with which to measure what the evaluator wants to discover.
The learning achievement of the students is usually the most frequently assessed areas by the teachers.
5.0 Summary The quality of the student’s academic performances depends partly on the quality of the classroom teaching.
The teacher's teaching abilities must therefore, be evaluated, although it is always difficult to asses teacher effectiveness.
However, his effectiveness may be inferred from: (i) teacher's personal trait and characteristics (ii) teacher's actual teaching performance, (iii) his mastery of subject matter and (iv) his attainment of the educational objectives as the observed effect of his teaching on his students.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment.
Prepare a check similar to the one described in this unit to evaluate three teachers in your school.
Write a brief report on your findings and suggest ways to assist the teachers improve on their job.
7.0 References Ojelabi, A.
(1981) A Guide to School Management.
Ibadan, Valuta Educational Publishers.
UNIT 5 EVALUATION AND EXTERNAL AGENCIES 48 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 External Agencies evaluating school Performance 3.1 Federal/State Inspectorate of Education 3.2 West African Examination Council (WAEC) 3.3 National Examination Council (NECO) 3.4 Internal and External Auditors 3.5 Health Inspectors 3.6 School's Governing Board 3.7 Educational Researchers.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment (TMA) and marking Scheme 7.0 References, Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction In education, we do not only have evaluation of programme performance but we also have external agencies that assist in assessing the performance of the school system to ensure quality performance.
In this unit you will learn about some of these agencies; you will know their functions, the devices they employ in evaluating the education system, and their significance to educational management.
2,0 Objectives By end of this unit you should be able to: i. identify external agencies of evaluating the school system.
ii.
describe some of the evaluation devices used by the agencies.
iii.
explain the functions of each agency in ensuring effective school management.
iv.
state the significance of these agencies in school management.
3.0 External Agencies Evaluating School Performance 49It is vital for the school head to be familiar with the work and methods of operation of external agencies who are involved in evaluation, such as the inspectorate service.
It is possible that some of the techniques used by these bodies for the evaluation of schools can be adapted for use in schools, and exposure to new ideas and innovative practices in the evaluation of schools will be useful.
3.1.1 Federal/State Inspectorate of Education At both the Federal and State levels of the Ministry of Education, there is an Inspectorate Department whose main task is to ensure quality and maintain standards in all schools in the federation and the states.
Inspection is described as the critical examination and evaluation of a school as a place of learning so that necessary and relevant advice may be given for its improvement.
Such advice is usually embodied in a report.
Some of the purposes of inspection are: i. to provide a basis for an effective dissemination of concrete and constructive educational advice and ideas designed to improve the quality of the teaching ability of the teachers and ultimately the education of the students; ii.
to ensure minimum desirable standards so as to provide an appreciable degree of equal opportunity for children in the area by preventing the declining of efforts in the schools; iii to stimulate desirable educational practices and prevent undesirable ones from being carried out; iv to ensure that regulations are complied with and that government investment for education is being wisely used; and v. to stimulate public interest in education in the broad sense and in the narrower district sense, for example, through reports and advice on the activities of the Parents Teachers Associations (PTAs).
3.1.2 Types of Inspections The following are the main types of inspections used in the country.
1.
Routine Visits These are short visits made to schools in which no formal reports are written but brief comments are made.
What the inspector does on such short visits and how he does it depends on him as an individual or on the specific aim of the visit.
For example, the aim of a routine visit may be to check on the punctuality of teachers.
502.
Special Visits This kind of inspection is limited to one or a few aspects of the school, for example, teaching of Biology and Physics.
3.
Investigation Visit This is an inspection carried out to examine an aspect of administration or organization of the school, for example special problem of discipline; investigation of an allegation of fraud.
4.
Follow-up Visit This is paid to a school following a full inspection in order to see that recommendations made in an earlier inspection are carried out or implemented.
5.
Sampling and Survey Visits A sample or survey visit may be undertaken by the Ministry of Education to find out the situation in a particular area of school subject or school head's functions.
In this case, a number of schools in a state may be involved.
6.
Visits for Approval for Opening Such visits are paid o new schools to find out whether they satisfy the conditions necessary to obtain approval for opening.
7.
Assessing Visit When the inspector pays a fairly longer visit to a school than on a routine visit and looks more into the activities of the school.
8.
Full Inspection This is an inspection which consists of a team of inspectors visiting a school for several days - usually a week for a large school or less for a smaller school - enquiring into every aspect of its work and examining its buildings and surroundings.
Such a visit is usually followed by a comprehensive report, copies of which are made available to the school and the Ministry of Education.
It is recommended that every school should be inspected fully at an interval of 3 to 5 years.
In addition to the inspections listed above you also have subject inspection, advisory inspection, appraisal inspection and administrative inspection.
Exercise 1.1 Why should our schools be inspected?
51Answer Kit Schools should be inspected so that: 1. an acceptable minimum standard of teaching and learning take placee.
2. teachers and school heads take their job seriously.
3. facilities and materials of good quality and in sufficient quantity are provided to schools: 4. financial investment in education is adequately and wisely spent and accounted for In connection with full inspection the inspector is expected to: (a check on punctuality and attendance of teachers, (b) inspect all official records for example, admission and attendance registers, class diaries, time tables, (c) investigate thoroughly the organization of the school, its work programme, the method and character of instruction, that is, class lessons, the aptitude and working habits of the students, distribution of staff, the size of classes, grouping of students for instruction where necessary, the school head's teaching work load and the help given to teachers, the discipline and tone of the school, school community relationships and so on; (d) observe school and classroom environment and how well the children are acquiring the habits of co-operation, self activity, regularity, punctuality, neatness and cleanliness, (e) check on the amount of work done and how it has been developed; (f) inspect school grounds and the conditions of buildings, furniture and equipment and their suitability for carrying out the work of the school; (g) inspect health and sanitation facilities and organization of co- curricular activities; (h) collect statistical data on enrolment and number of students present on the day of the visit, the number, qualification and distribution of staff, number of classrooms etc.
(i) assess the teachers in class teaching and organization: i. preparation of lesson notes, ii.
knowledge of the topic, iii.
command of language, iv use of teaching aids v teacher/students interaction vi.
class management/control.
vii.
teacher's personality - general impression and grading.
52You should note that at the end of a full inspection there should be a staff conference (meeting) for all the teachers.
At this meeting the inspector will discuss matters needing attention and refer to strengths and weaknesses he has noted.
The inspector will try to clarify difficulties, offer suggestions and make recommendations, demonstrate methods and where necessary, required changes should be made.
The inspector will endeavor, in general, to guide and encourage the teachers to be zealous and enthusiasm in their work.
You should note however, that such a conference between the inspector and the school staff does not in any way prevent an inspector from making comments offering suggestions, on the spot, during the inspection.
A conference of this nature gives a teacher the opportunity to put forth his own point of view or to present additional evidence that may effect the inspector's estimate of his efficiency.
3.1.3 Guidelines for Inspections 1.
Inspections should be planned before hand, well ahead of the inspection day.
2.
The inspector should in preparation, read and take with him, if possible, previous inspection report and collect further information on the background of the school if he is not familiar with the school.
3.
Make note of recommendations made on previous visit.
4.
Prepare a list of what to look for during the inspection.
5.
Try to find out the name of the school head on arrival.
6.
Arrive early in time for assembly and see the school head on arrival.
7.
Check whether previous recommendations have been carried out and discuss further line of action, if necessary.
8.
He should acquaint himself with names and qualifications of teachers on arrival, 9.
Do not criticize teacher in front of students or the school head in the presence of teachers.
10.
On completion of inspection, hold staff meeting, if possible, to discuss criticisms and recommendations, to give teachers and school head the opportunity to explain short comings or reasons for adopting certain procedures.
11.
Give teachers and school head an opportunity to see you personally if they wish.
12.
See the school head before leaning the school.
13.
Write inspection report as soon as possible when impressions are still fresh in your memory.
14.
Follow-up visit be carried out after 3 - 6 months .
53Exercise 1.2 What are the major problems of school inspection in your state?
Answer Kit Your response may include the following factors: 1. lack of adequately trained inspectorate staff, 2. shortage of staff, 3. lack of funds to be able to go round all schools in the States 4. lack of motorable roads within the State 5. lack of vehicles to go round the schools.
You may wish to make some suggestions to improve the situation.
3.2 West African Examination Council This is the main examination body in the country.
It conducts a summative evaluation to test final year students in senior secondary schools yearly with a view to selecting those who qualify for Senior Secondary Certificate Examination (SSCE), It also conducts the General Certificate in Education (GCE) Ordinary Level ('0' level) and Advanced Level (AL), The results of WASC examinations are performance indicator for the school.
3.3 National Examination Council (NECO).
This examination body came into existence in Nigeria to augument the efforts of the WASC, Whereas, WASC is an international body consisting of other West African Countries such as Ghana Gambia S/leone and Liberia, NECO is a national body.
For now, it conducts the Senior Secondary School Certificate Examination all over Nigeria.
3.4 Internal and External Auditors These are professional personnel sent by the State Government to examine, from time to time and on regular basis, the accounts of the schools.
Documents such as cash book, expenditure book and receipt booklets are scrutinized and thoroughly examined to see that accounting procedures are strictly followed.
3.5 Health Inspectors Health Inspectors visit the schools to assess the health and sanitation facilities and services available in the school.
3.6 School's Governing Board.
54As members of the school’s governing board, these people also serve as inspectors to evaluate the school programme and make appropriate recommendations.
3.7 Educational Researchers They serve as evaluators of schools because the findings of their report serve to show the school its areas of weaknesses and strengths and very often, make useful recommendations to assist the school to improve.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you would have noted that there are several external agencies that assist to evaluate the school programmes.
The efforts of these bodies go a long way to highlight to the school its areas of strengths and weakness and give advice on how to remedy some of the problems.
5.0 Summary You have been introduced to external agencies which evaluate the school programme; some of these are: Federal/State Inspectors of Education, WASC, NECO, auditors, health inspectors and educational researchers.
You have learnt that there are different types of inspections some of which are: routine visit, follow-up visit full inspection and investigation visit.
The purposes and guidelines for inspection were highlighted.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Draw up a proforma (check list) for full inspection of your school.
Use this checklist and write a report of what you observed in the course of your inspection visit.
7.0 References Ojelabi, A.
(1981) A Guide to School Management.
Ibadan.
ValutaEducational Publishers_ Federal Ministry of Education (1993) Better Schools Management: Head Teacher’s Education and Resources Materials.
Lagos FME.
UNIT 6 PLANNING A PROGRAMME OF EVALUATION 55 TABLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 School readiness for self evaluation 3.2 Preparing an evaluation Programme 3.2.1 Identify the Issues 3.2.2 Formulate questions 3.2.3 Fix a time Scale 3.2.4 Match resources to the Programme 3.2.5 Collect the information 3.2.6 Collate the information 3.2.7 Interpret the data 3.2.8 Write the Report 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References, Further Reading and other resources 1.0 Introduction Evaluation is a key managerial skill, required both by those from outside the school, and those working within the school.
Those outside the school are: school inspectors, examiners and researchers.
The focus of this unit is on the process of each school evaluating its own work as part of the planning and managerial process.
This builds on our earlier discussion on evaluation techniques in Unit 3.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. analyze the variables which determine how self-evaluation could be carried out in a school, 562. plan a suitable evaluation programme for your school.
3. identify priorities and time-scales within which such plans could be achieved; 4. identify the resources available for the evaluation taking into consideration other pressures on resources; 5. collect, record, collate, analyze, interpret and report information, 3.1 School Readiness for Self-evaluation For successful teaching and learning to take place, the school must operate in a conducive atmosphere.
It is also a necessary condition for undertaking a self-evaluation exercise.
This implies that both the school head and the staff have the right type of attitude that will enable successful self-evaluation projects to be conducted.
The school head and the staff must co-operate and work as a team for an evaluation programme in a school to be effective.
When the staff are consulted in all aspects of school matters, they are more likely to feel committed and to carry out assignments given by the school head.
Therefore, ensuring a conducive school climate is a necessary step towards introducing a systematic self-evaluation scheme into a school.
A conducive school climate consists of the following factors: i. commitment of the management of the school which is expressed in clear statements acknowledging the importance of self-evaluation as a necessary and ongoing area of policy, ii.
a management style based on openness, trust and confidence, iii.
an institutional climate which fosters collaboration, innovation, and the expression of ideas and opinion formed through rational argument, iv.
a school culture in which there is an expectation of critically reflective practices, access to information on current educational thinking and development, v. consideration of the resource implications of self-evaluation procedures', vi.
an awareness of the time implications of self-evaluation activities, vii.
an expectation that identified needs will be satisfied.
Exercise 1 .1 Make a list of what you would do to carry out a small survey to find out how ready you and your staff are to undertake a programme of systematic evaluation of your school.
Answer Kit Your response may look like this: 571. prepare a simple questionnaire to study staff views on a variety of aspects of your school.
You may include things like: i. the learning process and level of performance ii.
the curriculum and how it is implemented in your school, iii.
the physical environment, including provision of facilities and maintenance.
2 You may simply state ideas about each area and let your staff react to it.
3.
You may hold informal discussions and interviews raising questions related to the above mentioned conditions.
4.
You may also need to carry out your own self-evaluation using a questionnaire like the one below.
Figure I. Self-Assessment Questionnaire.
Indicate the degree to which you agree or disagree with each of the following statement by putting a score of 0 to 5 (0 totally disagree, 5 totally agree); Score 1.
One should ignore certain faults in the work of subordinates in order not to discourage them 2.
I spend too much time sorting out problems that my subordinates ought to be able to deal with 3.
I try to tell my subordinates exactly what they have to do and how I want it done 4 I know enough about my area of responsibility to be able to take most decisions quickly and without seeking the views of my subordinates.
From your answers you would be able to see whether you are making all the decisions affecting your school alone, or if you believe in teamwork and participatory decision-making which would involve your staff.
You should note that some seek "agree" answers while others seek "disagree" or even neutral answers.
An important point you must bear in mind is that in assessing the climate of your school; note that there is no perfect school.
No one is likely to agree with you about everything.
Some of your teachers may tend towards being helpers while some others may be hinderers.
Needless to 58say that it is your job to try to carry every one along and make each one see how he may contribute to the evaluation and change process in his own way.
3.2 Preparing an Evaluation Programme 3.2.1 Identify the Issues In planning a suitable programme of evaluation for the school, the problem areas must be identified and sorted into categories, and then ranked according to criteria such as urgency and feasibility, Thus, you can isolate the problem or issue to be studied.
Such an issue must be important and manageable.
You must note that you do not try to evaluate too much at one time.
3.2.2 Formulate Questions After selecting the problems or issues, to be studied, you now decide on the specific questions to be asked, and to whom they will be addressed.
For example, the priority may be the performance of students in a certain subject, or the behaviour of a particular group of students who exhibit deviant traits by playing truant or by destroying school property.
Formulating questions requires the discipline and self control of keeping within the limits of your enquiry and the number of questions asked.
3.2.3 Fix a time-scale You need to fix a time-scale within which to conduct the evaluation.
In doing this, you are taking into consideration the earliest time for the evaluation to be accomplished, the latest allowable time, and the slack periods, during which the evaluation could be delayed.
If the evaluation goes on for too long people may lose interest and introducing changes may become more difficult.
3.2.4 Match Resources to the Programme It is also very important o Identify the resources available, in particular, the time of those who may be involved.
This is necessary because the successful completion of the programme will be eroded a if for example, the staff are too busy to participate.
Once resources are allocated they must be matched to the time scaled and progress monitored to ensure that the exercise is completed on schedule.
3.2.5 Collect the Information As soon as you have completed the preliminary stages, the investigation team can begin the work of the evaluation proper.
Basic information on the problem which has been isolated for study could be obtained using one or more of these techniques: i, using diaries that are kept systematically by individual teachers.
ii.
interviews .
59iii.
observations, including shadowing selected teachers or students iv.
brain-storming discussions.
v. questionnaires.
3.2.6 Collate the Information The information needs to be gathered and arranged in a systematic order which will help you or your team to analyze, and interprete the data.
3.2.7 Interprete the data It is important that an evaluation exercise such as we are proposing is not intended for a higher degree in a university, but as a practical problem - solving exercise to provide new solutions to old problems , The analysis and interpretation of the data should, therefore, be limited to describing the problem and identifying ways forward.
3.2.8 Write the Report You should first of all consider very carefully the form of your report and how it will be disseminated.
The purpose of the evaluation and the target- audience must be kept in mind while compiling the final report.
It must be short, and straight to the point.
Unduly long reports divert attention from the set objective.
A good report will do the following: 1. state the problem 2. describe briefly the methods used to collect the information 3. identify alternative ways forward 4. make recommendations about which way to choose and what needs to be done to implement it.
4.0 Conclusion School heads who are socially and professionally committed often consider a periodic self-analysis of all or part of their schools' activities.
Such an analysis has the advantages of involving the entire school staff in evaluation, increasing departmental understanding, bringing into focus the quality of the work of the constituent parts of the school, and highlighting the weaknesses and strengths.
If properly planned and executed, analysis can lead to disco- veries that are more comprehensive and thorough, and more enlightened and useful than the familiar reports which usually follow the inspections made by government inspectors.
5.0 Summary School activities must be evaluated from time to time.
The evaluation should include the continuous examination of the effects produced by the ways in which teaching and learning takes place.
In this unit you have examined the 60process of planning a programme of self-evaluation in your school.
You must remember that managerial skills, the purpose of which is to bring about change in all areas of school life.
Self-evaluation as an important evaluation should be a continuous process, taking each part of school - life in turn.
Such an approach to school development is likely to lead to more self-reliance, more accountability and a more confident, more motivated and higher achieving school.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Identify a particular problem or issue in your own school which could be evaluated.
Plan a programme of evaluation following the processes described in this unit.
7.0 References Federal Ministry of Education (1993) Better Schools Management.
Head- Teacher Education and Resource Materials, Lagos, F.M.E.
UNIT 7 UTILIZING EVALUATION FINDINGS 61 TABLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Evaluation Findings 3.1 The Importance of Evaluation Findings 3.2 E Evaluation and Effective School Management valuation 3 3.3 Reports 3.3.1 Students Enrolment 3.3.2 Leadership Effectiveness 3.4 Monitoring, Evaluation and Decision-making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction From the preceding units, you can now understand that evaluation is a systematic planned enquiry undertaken in order to enable decision-maker to make judgments concerning the worth of an educational policy, project or programme and to achieve certain aims and purposes.
Evaluation can be a costly waste of time and effort, but when done efficiently, vigorously and with the intention of improving educational provision, it is likely to be worthwhile, because the new knowledge gained can be fed back into the system to improve what goes on in education.
However, it is unfortunate to find that, the findings of evaluation are not implemented.
In this unit, you will learn how to disseminate evaluation findings.
You will also learn how we can ensure that the evaluation findings are used by all concerned to enhance school effectiveness.
2,0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. state the importance of reporting the results of monitoring and evaluation programme to those who need them.
622. integrate the analysis of evaluation findings into the school decision- making process.
3. relate the quality of evaluation findings to the level of effectiveness of the school management.
3.0 Evaluation Findings 3.1 Importance of Evaluation Findings A lot of the educational problems which plaque schools today, such as students crisis and indiscipline, truancy and low academic achievement, point to the need to over-haul our educational systems and programmes.
However, before we can do this, we need to have reliable and objective data in respect of the current status of programmes.
It is through regular monitoring, evaluation and reporting that we will know much better where we are and, therefore, be able to decide what changes are needed to bring about improvement.
As we have seen in the previous units, monitoring is the regular collection of information about ongoing projects and programmes within the school system with a view to determining the nature and level of their performance.
A report from a monitoring team should thus be an objective account of progress in carrying out plans, which provide a baseline against which to judge the impact of inputs into the system under study.
Monitoring should be done mainly by school heads and inspectors as well as officials of the Ministry of Education.
Evaluation also concerns judgments made for the purpose of improvement or accountability.
It is a formal process which may be formative or summative in nature, but it is designed for a particular educational purpose.
Exercise 1,1 1.
What are some of the reasons why you think that reports from evaluation exercise are not always made widely available?
2.
How can this situation be rectified?
Answer Kit The reasons you may give could include the following: i. lack of a requirement to document and report findings, ii inadequate mechanisms to disseminate findings, iii need for secrecy when findings are critical, iv unreliability of data which makes the evaluation report valueless.
2.
The steps to rectify the situation are by: 63i, writing reports which can be read that is, they must be brief to the point and use intelligible language, ii.
improving the means of production and reproduction of the report, iii.
recognizing that knowledge and power are for sharing; they do not belong to only a privileged few; iv.
ensuring accuracy and reliability in our reports through setting and demanding high standards.
3.2 Evaluation Report A good report should have the following features: 1.
The report must have a title, purpose and date of investigation, 2.
The report should be divided into sections with appropriate sub-titles, 3.
While it must be clearly understood, the report must be written in concise, simple English, free from ambiguity and jargons.
4.
The findings should be stated objectively so as to avoid dispute over the facts and figures stated, 5.
The report should not be written in condemnatory tone; rather, faults should be stated in form of recommendations, 6.
Concluding paragraphs should contain acknowledgement for the co- operation of the staff, school head and others, 7 The name(s) and rank(s) of investigator(s) should be indicated and the report duly signed.
The information gathered should be seen as relevant to the purpose of the evaluation.
The credibility of an evaluation process and its findings can be established in relation to the following: i, It has to pass scrutiny among all those concerned with the overall quality of schooling, ii.
It needs to be seen to be credible in the school, for example, in respect of what is being evaluated, iii.
Finally, it has to satisfy people that any conclusions drawn derive from good quality information and are valid and reliable.
Exercise 1.
2 Using your school experience and knowledge of reports by inspectors, identify the qualities of a good evaluation report.
Answer-Kit You will probably include qualities such as: systematic, relevant, useable, valid, reliable and readable.
64If the purpose of an evaluation is absolutely clear, it is more likely that the correct information will be gathered to enable conclusions to be drawn and recommendations made as a basis for decision-making.
It is, therefore, very important that after an evaluation is done one or more meetings between the evaluation team and the rest of the staff are held, during which the findings can be discussed before the release of the evaluation report.
Results can also be disseminated, for example, to parents, through other means such as a newsletter, or a briefing at one of the P.T.A.
meetings.
Evaluation findings by external agents, such as inspectors or researchers, can help to justify the huge amounts of money spent on education every year, as well as to clarify the progress of major innovations in education such as the introduction of Computer Literacy and Apprenticestrip into the Curriculum.
This highlights how important it is for school heads to be able to analyze evaluation findings and decide whether, for example, the advantages claimed for a particular innovation which formed the focus of an evaluation, are valid enough for them to continue to use it or perhaps to adapt it more precisely to the school's needs.
3.3 Evaluation and Effective School Management There is a relationship between evaluation and the use of evaluation findings for effective school management, We shall consider two examples in this unit.
3.3.1 Students Enrolment Sometimes, school enrolments do fluctuate from year to year; many factors may account for this.
It might be difficult for the school head to explain such a phenomenon, let alone suggest solutions to rectify the situation, unless some evaluation is conducted and the findings disseminated.
Such an evaluation might enable factors like school performance in public examinations, distance of school from the village, safety and security of students, availability and quality of transport, movement or transfer of parents and others to be taken into account in an analysis of the situation.
A school may wish to evaluate the influence of some of these factors to try to rectify the situation.
On the other hand, the government might decide to evaluate the situation in a sample of secondary schools, the results of which might provide useful conclusions and solutions which may apply to all schools.
3.3.2 Leadership Effectiveness 65Evaluation can be used to assess leadership effectiveness in a school.
Firstly, you may need to consider what leadership effectiveness is, and the extent to which it is determined by such variables as: i. personal characteristics of the leader, ii.
nature of the situation, iii.
personal characteristics of the subordinates.
Next you would need to develop evaluation criteria in order to assess your own leadership effectiveness together with that of your other staff.
Below is a chart which suggests five criteria for judging leadership and you may wish to develop this by adding more evaluation criteria.
If you were to undertake such a self-evaluation exercise, how would such findings be useful to you as a school head in improving your management practice?
Figure 1.
Assessing Leadership Effectiveness INDICATOR'S LOW HIGH 1.
Readiness for responsibility 2 Ability to delegate 3.
Maturity 4.
Interest and Motivation 5.
Knowledge and expertise in education 3.4 .
Monitoring, Evaluation and Decision-making The essence of any effective managerial activity can be seen in the relationship between monitoring, evaluation and decision making.
Decision making is central to school management.
Making the right decision is an art which the school head develops over time, and this is enhanced through regular monitoring and evaluation as the school head is constantly fed with needed information.
Figure 2: Monitoring, Evaluation and Decision –Making.
MONITORING - a regular overall collection 66of information Decision-making EVALUATION - by the head and -targeting questions and staff specific activities and drawing conclusions 4.0 Conclusion From your study of this unit you must be convinced about the importance of monitoring and evaluation and of using the findings to bring about school improvement.
We are only able to give a few examples here.
There are many other areas where an evaluation exercise is likely to produce findings which could inform the school decision-making process and contribute towards school effectiveness, for example, in such areas as: i. students' discipline, ii.
staff performance, iii.class-room teaching, iv.
school community relations.
5,0 Summary In this unit you should have noted that monitoring school effectiveness involves the regular review of all the facilities of your school.
Through the collection and analysis of relevant information and the setting of appropriate criteria, you may draw conclusions about the extent to which the objectives and goals of your school are being achieved.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment.
Prepare a one page proposal for an evaluation of one specific area of concern in your school.
7.0 References Federal Ministry of Education.
(1993) Better School Management: Head Teacher Education and Resources Materials.
Lagos F.M.E.
67UNIT 8 DUTIES OF A SCHOOL INSPECTOR, 68 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 What is school Inspection?
3.2 Why do we inspect school?
3.3 When do we carry out school Inspection?
3.4 Now to conduct school Inspection 3.5.1 General duties of an inspector 3.5.2 Specific functions of an Inspector 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 70 References 1.0 Introduction The inspector grew with the educational system in Nigeria.
Originally, the inspector was appointed to establish and maintain the educational system, to ensure that money was being properly spent and that curriculum was taught as laid down by government regulations.
The inspector was also concerned with holding the classroom teacher accountable for the students learning, sometimes not taking note of other determining factors such as instructional materials.
However, times have changed and the kind of inspector required in our school system today is one who can provide opportunities for which teachers can develop potential leadership.
The National Policy on Education (F.G.N;1981:13) stresses that “school inspectors should be acquainted with their new roles as advisers, guides, catalysts and sources of idea to teachers in their instructional endeavours " and also to " ensure quality of control through inspection and continuous supervision of instructional and educational services".
By definitional implications the purpose of inspection is to ensure quality in the level of instruction.
In this Unit, you will learn about the Functions of School Inspector.
2.0 Objectives By the end of the Unit, you should be able to: 1. define school inspection 2. state the reasons for school inspection 3. describe some techniques of conducting school inspection 4. explain the general and specific function of school inspector.
3.1 What is school inspection?
69School inspection is the constant monitoring and polishing of teachers, equipment, buildings and others in the school system so that they are always of good standard in terms of their contribution to the achievement of educational goals.
School inspection is concerned with specific activities which are intended to maintain and improve the effectiveness of teaching and learning by working directly with teachers.
Inspection thus aims at facilitating effective teaching and learning through constant visits to schools to observe and evaluate the adequacy or otherwise, of all factors that combine together to ensure meaningful delivery of the curriculum, qualified teachers, suitable teaching materials, learner - and teacher-friendly environment.
3.2 Why do we inspect schools?
Education occupies a prime position in national development.
One of the factors that have been responsible for the continuous deterioration of our education system from primary through the tertiary level is the almost total absence of regular and sincere inspection in the whole system.
This is quite glaring when we compare public schools with privately owned schools.
Thus, school inspection specifically aims at improving teaching and learning so that the right knowledge and appropriate skills and attitudes are imparted to the learners thereby guaranteeing quality education in the society.
3.3 When do we carry out school inspection?
All visits to schools or inspections must be primarily concerned with the welfare of the learners.
This is because students are the most important part of a school.
Thus, since school inspection is concerned with the welfare of the learners, that is, their education it should be carried out as regular as possible.
The following are the categories of inspection undertaken in schools in Nigeria: 1.
General inspection - where every aspect of the school is systematically covered.
2.
Curriculum inspection - where an inspector concentrates on one aspect of the school's work.
This could be an examination of the curriculum to find out how a particular subject is being taught.
3.
Surprise visits - this is undertaken by an inspector to a school without a prior notice to the school head and teachers.
Surprise visits are generally not liked by teachers but they are useful, provided the 70inspector makes good use of them by being friendly rather than being seen as a fault finder.
4.
Specific Enquiry - this is a visit to a school for a single specific purpose.
It may be a visit to investigate an administrative problem, a storm damage in the school and others.
The inspector must have a clear idea of the purpose of his assignment or visit and concentrate on fulfilling it, Though visits for specific enquiry are brief, a good inspector must keep his eyes and ears open to see a blown roof and advise for something to be done or hear that a particular class lacks a teacher in a particular subject and acts as necessary.
5.
Special investigation: A special investigation is carried out by an inspector when something really appears to have gone wrong.
For example, the school head may have reported a member of staff for misconduct or a report of indiscipline on the part of the students.
In cases like these, the inspector needs to be very careful, just and fair in taking his decision.
It is a great test of his integrity.
Exercise 1.1 1.
What is school inspection?
2.
Give 2 reasons why school inspection is carried out.
3.
Identify and briefly describe 3 types of inspection.
Answer Kit Your response may include: 1.
School inspection is the constant and regular monitoring and assessment of teachers, equipments, buildings and others in the school system to ensure that they are of good standard in terms of their contribution to the achievement of educational goals.
2.
School inspection is carried out in order to: a) improve teaching and learning b) ensure that the right knowledge and skills and attitudes are imparted to learners c) ensure (guarantee) quality education in the society.
3.
Types of inspection i.
General inspection ii.
Curriculum inspection iii.
Surprise visit 3.4 How to conduct school Inspection 71Except for surprise visits, the school head should be notified in advance of the inspector's visit.
This, in a general inspection, enables the school head to put together all the necessary information the inspector may want to see.
Thus, on getting to the school, the first thing the inspector must do is to go and see the school head.
In the course of the inspection, the inspector should ensure that: i. he does not disturb teaching-learning during lessons, ii, he avoids criticizing teachers in front of their students, iii.
he does not interfere with the time - table except where very necessary, iv.
he endeavours to see students both at work in the class and at play.
Through such observations, he gets to know of the students' health and their standards of behaviour out side the classroom.
3.5.1 General duties of an inspector The schools inspector is an important person in the education system.
In broad general terms, his duties are: 1.
Ensuring that teaching - learning in schools activities are conducted under conducive atmosphere that is learner friendly.
This is to say that there is the availability of instructional materials, conducive classroom, qualified teachers and others.
2.
Providing guidance, support as well as offer necessary advice to teachers in every possible way to assist them in the performance of their duties.
These duties or responsibilities place a very important professional and personal role on the inspector.
3.5.2 Specific duties of an Inspector Thus, to adequately fulfill these important duties the inspector should see himself as: 1.
Teacher trainer and counselor.
The inspector should be able to assist the teacher in his personal and professional problems, by placing his knowledge and experiences at the disposal of the teachers.
2.
Professional educator.
The inspector must make himself adequately familiar with every aspect of those formal and informal school activities.
He must be acquainted with the details of the school curriculum having a general 72idea of the contents/methods of all subjects and not just the time table or the instruction issued by either the Ministry of Education or the Inspectorate Unit.
3.
An Administrator.
He needs to possess a firm grasp of the basic principles of administration.
This does not suggest that he must under-go some form of professional training in administration, but he should be able to relate properly with people so as to get things done in the right manner and at the right time.
4.
Government Representative.
As a civil servant, it is quite obvious that the inspector is a government representative and must, therefore, comply strictly with government policies and directives.
This notwithstanding, it is the duty of the inspector to inform his superiors of not only what goes on in the school, but also of all other matters that have bearing on the education of the students.
Cases like riots, bush fires and others that may affect any school(s) would certainly have a bearing in the students' learning and so, the inspector has the duty of fully informing his ministry.
Similarly, he must keep abreast of government policy, so that he can help to bring government more closely in touch with the people, particularly teachers who should be made to know that they are very important agents in the process of development.
5.
Auditor.
The inspector should see himself as an auditor, ensuring that supply of basic instructional materials are adequate and properly stored and where issued, are put into proper use for the education of the students.
6.
Building_ Inspector, This simply refers to the safety of school building as it affects the lives of students as well as the teaching-learning process generally.
Broken glasses, jagged wire fencing, falling roofs, collapsing walls and others are common features in most schools today.
A good inspector should be able to watch out and identify defects in school buildings and report back accordingly to the appropriate quarters for repairs.
7.
Health inspector.
Similarly, an inspector is certainly not required to be a professional doctor as he is not required to be a professional engineer, auditor, and administrator and so on, however, he should be able to keep an eye on 73the general health of the students in the schools he is visiting.
He should be able to discuss simple hygiene rules with teachers and make sure they are applied.
For example, the provision and use of pit toilets, clean source of drinking water, methods of water purification, common diseases and how to prevent them and others.
8.
As a liaison officer.
The inspector should as much as possible endeavour to acquaint himself with what other government agencies within his inspectorate area are doing.
Information properly gathered by the inspector would meaningfully enrich the school curriculum by making it more practical to both teachers and the learners.
For example, an agricultural scheme or an ongoing health campaign, could be used to make teaching-learning more practical and lively to students.
9.
Counselor The school inspector offers advice to teachers and school heads as the needs arise.
10.
External Examiner (Evaluator) This is his central function in the school.
He assesses all the activities of the school to ensure that good quality is maintained.
Exercise_ 1.2 Stop for a moment.
Identify ten(10) other duties of the inspector.
Answer Kit Your list might include the following: Subject specialist, public relations officer, critic, goal setter, planner, welfare, and community development officer, selector, supplement, creator, guide and participator.
4,0 Conclusion The inspector is an important personnel in the education system; he plays the crucial role of ensuring that quality teaching - learning is offered in schools.
We have also seen the need for schools inspection, when and how it should be carried out.
5.0 Summary This unit has described the inspector as an educational leader whose central goal is to improve the quality of school instruction and guide teachers and 74students to better performance.
The unit defines inspection as specific activities that are intended to maintain and improve the effectiveness of teaching and learning.
The main categories of inspection were discussed and the reasons for inspection were highlighted.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment Examine the role of the school inspector in your State.
7.0 References Usman, B.
(2000) "The school Inspector and His duties lead paper presented at the workshop for School Inspectors in the Northern States of Nigeria, organized by the Institute of Education, A.B.U , Zaria .
15 – 17, November.
Out, D.O (2000) “Changing perceptions of the role of School Inspectors”, paper presented at the Workshop for Inspectors of Schools in the Northern States of Nigeria organized by the Institute of Education A.B.U , Zaria 15 – 17 , November.
UNIT 9 QUALIFICATIONS OF AN INSPECTOR OF SCHOOLS 75 TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Personal and professional characteristics of an Inspector of Education Personal Qualities 3.1.1 Helpful Attitude 3.1,1 Understanding 3.1.2 Zeal and enthusiasm 3.1.3 Patience 3.1.4 Frankness and Honesty 3.1.5 Reliability 3.1.6 Good Relationship with others 3.1.7 Professional qualities 3.2 Professional qualifications 3.2.1 Outstanding skill as a teacher 3.2.2 Experience 3.2.3 Willingness to go on learning 3.2.4 Thorough knowledge of his job 3.2.5 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor marked Assignment 6.0 References 7.0 1.0 Introduction Education is universally accepted as the main vehicle for development and social mobility.
It is in realization of this indisputable fact that governments and societies all over the world commit enormous resources towards the development and improvement of their educational systems.
Nigeria is not an exception.
Both at Federal and State government levels, various policies had 76often been formulated that would promote the educational development of the citizenry.
However, it is not enough to invest huge amount of human and material resources without commensurate gains by the recipients or beneficiaries of efforts made.
Among the factors that combine together to influence the success of an educational system is the collective efforts of all involved in the management of education.
One of such persons is the school inspector.
The inspector, of education plays a very vital role in external evaluation of the school system.
It is thus necessary to know the type of person who is likely to be selected to do the job.
In this unit, you will learn about some personal and professional qualities that an inspector of education should possess so as to perform his job satisfactorily.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. identify the personal traits of an inspector of education 2. describe the professional qualities of an inspector.
3.0 Introduction An inspector of education is first and foremost an adviser to teachers, whatever his official title may be.
He is to provide, by every means possible, concrete and constructive advice to teachers so that the quality of education in schools may be improved.
He is not merely an inspector of schools but he is also a person who uses other means to help the teachers grow on the job and motivate students learning.
3.1 Personal Qualities of an Inspector Teachers who are selected for appointment as inspectors should have the following personal qualities.
3.1.1 Helpful attitude The inspector’s attitude and approach in dealing with teachers must be constructive and helpful not critical.
Such an attitude is noticed by the teachers, and reports of the helpfulness of an inspector spread almost as quickly as reports of his failings.
Such helpfulness should colour all what the inspector does, that is his inspections, courses, seminars, exhibitions and even his conversation.
3,1.2 Understanding There is always a danger that because of a lack of understanding, the inspector may be concerned only to put across his own ideas irrespective of 77the problems of the school or the character or background of the teacher.
Every school has its own problems which affect the learning situation; perhaps a shortage of textbooks, a lack of continuity of the staff or poor student attendance.
The essence of this quality is that the inspector should make only those promises which he knows he can fulfill.
The inexperienced inspector may be tempted to tell the teachers at a school that he will send them certain books or equipment, or that he will arrange a course in the holidays for them, or that he will return to the school very shortly.
Such promises indicate helpfulness, and consequently the inspector leaves the school in disrespect if the books or equipment never arrives, the course is never held and the inspector never returns.
Of course, such promises are popular and seeking popularity is a great temptation to be resisted.
Rather, the inspector should seek the respect of the teachers by promising only what he knows with certainty he can achieve.
3.1.3 Zeal and enthusiasm Zeal and enthusiasm are commendable qualities in any occupation not least the inspectorate.
The genuinely enthusiastic and zealous inspector will influence those with whom he comes into contact and especially the teachers.
His enthusiasm is infectious and will set the tone in the schools in his area.
Teachers and school heads will respond more favorably to the advice and requests of a person wbl1 is really keen.
Teachers readily notice whether an inspector is prepared to stay at the school discussing their problems or whether he disappears unceremoniously, without any body knowing it.
School heads will notice whether the inspector approaches them with accurate information about the deficiencies of certain instructional materials, and they would respect and respond to him accordingly.
3.1.4 Patience Yet the enthusiasm must be tempered with patience.
The inspector who expects immediate improvement or who assumes that his advice will transform the school or a teacher overnight is doomed to be disappointed.
Some teachers will ignore his advice; others will misunderstand it, and if they understand his advice and act upon it, its impact will not always show immediately.
Several visits to a schoolmay be necessary before a new technique is grasped.
Books may be out of print; suppliers of school materials may be slow; a teacher specially trained or coached in a subject may be sick or be transferred or resign; money may not be available for new furniture; and, carefully planned courses may have to be cancelled.
The list of possible set backs is endless.
Put even if all goes well in terms of organization and teachers response, the response from the students may only slowly become apparent.
The inspector must therefore, learn to be patient He must learn to condition himself to looking for results in the long term.
78Such problems may cause the inspectors to modify his assessment of the school and to vary his approach.
As each school has its own peculiarity so has each teacher.
The inspector should study the character and.
background of the teachers he meets.
Some respond only to praise and encouragement; other, will willingly accept balanced criticism; others have to be convinced by patient argument.
Some always want to use "new methods" as if "new methods" are necessarily better than the old, others are hostile to new ideas.
It is in this sphere of teaching method that the inspector will find that he has to be tactful, most adaptable and most understanding.
3.1.5 Frankness and Honesty While emphasis has been placed on helpfulness and understanding, this does not imply that a weak or sentimental approach on the part of the inspector is recommended.
The inspector who praises all he sees, who is desperate only to gain popularity, will in the long run lose the respect of teachers and serves the teachers and students to the point of stress.
Important criticism must never be glossed over in an attempt to be friendly.
Teachers always appreciate their work provided the appraisal is made with tact and understanding, and provided that the frankness is seen to step from knowledge and a desire to help.
You should note here however, that discouraging, negative criticism however well founded, do nothing but harm.
The teacher who receives a written report that differs radically in tone from the oral advice and comment given at the school is justified in his annoyance that the inspector says one thing and writes another.
It is both unprofessional and dishonest for an inspector to do this.
3.1.6 Reliability Close to frankness and honesty is the quality of reliability, which also gives the teachers confidence in the inspector and the inspector's words.
Whatever happens, whatever the set backs, the inspector must not despair, because provided that he has the knowledge, the enthusiasm and the right approach, he will succeed with time.
3.1.7 Good Relationships with other people The inspector requires to develop good relationship with other people, for he must learn to work with others (teachers, school heads etc) and to seek their help.
The success or failure of the inspector depends largely upon the kind of relationship he is able to develop with the teachers and others in the school.
A bad relationship will ruin his best endeavours.
The right kind of relationship resting on confidence and respect ensure success.
Exercise 1.1 79Pause and think back to the last inspection exercise undertaken in your school by the officials of the State Ministry of Education, what were some flaws (faults) in personal traits that you found in any one of the inspectors?
Answer kit You might have found a few of them, to be rather impatient, high handed, critical and unsympathetic.
3.2 Professional Qualities In addition to the personal qualities described above, the inspector also require certain professional qualities which will enhance his job performance.
Some of these qualities are described below 3.2.1 Professional Qualifications The inspector should possess a recognized teaching qualification at least a good university degree in Education.
A higher degree and substantial experience would be an added advantage for him to earn the respect of the school head and teachers.
3.2.2 Outstanding skill as a Teacher The inspector must have taught for some years in schools where he must have held some administrative positions such as year group master, house master, patron of a club, head of department and maybe a vice-principal.
It is something of this skill that the inspector tries to pass on to other teachers, and it is this which gives the inspector confidence when advising others.
3.2.3 Experience An inspector must have had considerable experience in the school system before he is appointed to the inspectorate department.
The length of years depends on what each state requires but it is advised that the inspector should have sufficient seniority to have some standing among other teachers and sufficient knowledge of the day-to-day application of this craft to enable him to be helpful to others.
3.2.4 Willingness to go on learning This quality is usually reflected in attendance of and in the acquisition of additional qualification since the complete of initial training.
It is this ability to go on learning that is so important in an inspector.
Exercise 1.2 List other personal and professional qualities that are required by an inspector.
80Answer kit You may include traits such as tolerance, self-confidence, fairness in dealing with teachers, and others.
3.2.5 A thorough knowledge of his job Skill as a teacher and a thorough knowledge of the matter of education, the syllabus, the text books and materials are essential for the inspector.
This skill and knowledge give the inspector a confidence in himself and earn the respect of the teachers.
All other qualities which the inspector may possess will achieve little or nothing unless he is more skilled and better informed about the business of education, than most of the teachers.
He must have a general knowledge of the syllabus for all subjects and for every class, various teaching methods, what is happening in the colleges of education and teacher training in general, and the latest general trends in education.
4.0 Conclusion The personal and professional qualities required of an inspector are such that will enhance his efficiency on the job.
As an instructional leader, teachers and heads of schools have high expectations of him to guide them to good quality work in the school.
He can not afford to disappoint them.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have described the personal and professional qualities an inspector needs to possess.
His personal traits are helpful attitude, understanding, zeal and enthusiasm, patience, frankness and honesty, reliability and good relationship with others.
The professional qualities he needs to have include among others: professional qualification, outstanding skill as a teacher, experience, willingness to go on learning and a thorough knowledge of his job.
6.0 Tutor Marked.
Assignment Describe the qualities required of an inspector of schools.
7.0 References Ojelabi, A.
(1981) A Guide to School Management.
Ibadan.
Valuta Educational Publishers.
81UNIT 10 GUIDE LINES FOR INSPECTION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 822.0 Objectives 3.0 Formats for Inspection 3.1 General Inspection format 3.2 Format for Science Subject Inspection 3.3 Format for the Inspection of Art subjects 3.4 Report Writing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References.
1.0 Introduction In this unit, we shall turn our attention to the guidelines for general and subject inspections.
The format for each type of inspection will be examined.
Finally, a sample of an inspection report is given to guide the learner.
Let us look at the objectives below to see what you will learn in the unit.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
Prepare an inspection guide for science subject, 2.
Plan an inspection format for general school inspection, 3.
Collect and collate information using the format for inspection, 4.
Write a standard inspection report.
3.0.
FORMATS FOR INSPECTION 3.1 General Inspection Format In dealing with general inspection, we are actually covering most of other inspections except for those by professional bodies, such as external examination inspections.
The other exception is that of investigations for complaints including professional assessment.
A full general inspection is that data gathering exercise that covers all aspects of the operation of a school.
83It is a comprehensive assessment that covers administration, staffing, records, curriculum, subjects, library, physical facilities, finance and store.
The information to be collected in each of these areas for the purposes of evaluation, as earlier indicated, must be in line with already specified minimum standards.
This is to say, therefore, that for the inspector to be able to do his work properly he must be familiar with such standards.
i) Organization and Administration Information to be collected includes: background in terms of the date of establishment of the school.
Location, catchments area, the aims and objectives of the school, its history, the administration including style, organizational chart, management and information flow, relationship with the community through the PTA and the prospects and problems of the school.
ii) Students The concern is to establish admission procedure, catchments area, roll and enrolment, type of school distribution by classes, the corporate life of the school including officials/duties, daily routine, feeding, welfare, recreations, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities such as educational visit and relationship with other schools.
iii) Staffing Information is gathered on the principal and teaching staff in comparison to number of students and on non-teaching staff to determine qualification adequacy, and optimum deployment.
Staff discipline and other problems are examined.
Of importance in the area of staffing are the channels of communication between principal and staff, delegation, feedback, use of communication media, e.g notice- boards, bulletins, staff meetings, assemblies, etc.
It is not enough to determine the staff by number or qualification but especially how well they are all involved in the operations of the school.
iv) Records The concern with regards to records is not only that they are kept but that, they are used.
The use of records includes monitoring the school so as to be able to detect problems and to deal with them early.
Problems could be within all the different areas, thus inspection of records would also include the strategies used for analyzing all the records.
v) Curriculum 84Information sought include: aims and objectives of the school and that of the proprietor and the appraisal of these aims, the subjects offered in terms of their coverage to meet the aims and objectives, syllabus and scheme of work in terms of their separation intosubjectfields and whether the syllabus has been broken into scheme; class organization to include class sizes, time-table in weighting and coverage, staff strength and deployment to meet this allocation without over-loading staff, existence of a time-table committee; students academic progress including tests and examinations and how their records are kept; external examination records and analysis and methods used to inculcate good study habits such as prep, home work, tests, and others; also included are guidance and counseling services and the roles of the different functionaries such as Principal, Vice-principal, Heads of department, senior master, staff and prefects in promoting the implementation of the curriculum.
vi) Library Information sought includes; the type of library building whether temporary or permanent and seating capacity; furniture used including shelves, tables, chairs, cabinets and their number; books stocked including subject coverage in relations to the curriculum of the school, general materials such as encyclopedias, dictionaries, atlases, etc, and periodicals as well as non-book materials such as maps; films, tapes, radios, and others.
Information required for a library includes also, the classification scheme used; funding including the different sources of funds; security in terms of fire and theft; library use including library hours, rules and regulations borrowing and loan period, loss/damage and use of library fines.
It includes checking whether library times especially for junior classes to teach them library use have been included in the time-table.
Staffing for the library is an important area as is the nature of their training.
As in other areas, prospects and problems are to be identified.
vii) Physical Facilities Information required includes the structures on the ground including school buildings and furniture, dormitories/dining facilities, utilities and security against fire and theft.
The physical structures are a physical representation of the curriculum so that they should match the curriculum as well as the enrolments.
Included in physical facilities are equipment available and their state including those for direct teaching and those in special laboratories.
viii) Finance and Store 85This area includes the crucial and sensitive area of finance.
The concern, however, is to certify the adequate provision and optimum use of school resources as well as the use of accepted accounting procedures.
For finance, therefore, inspection is involved in; examining all account books by listing and commenting on each one individually, examining the overall costs of the school; other account books not directly related to running the school such as student bodies accounts, caution fees, PTA, private deposit and security arrangements for cash and finance documents.
Required also is a copy of the last auditors report.
Inspection would also reflect the special needs or circumstance of the school, the adequacy of allocation and the control by the principal.
For the stores, the concern is with the organization of receipt and issues of equipment and materials and of their safe-keeping.
Others include: general book and record keeping principles and procedures, inventory of school property and the security arrangements for the stores.
Exercise 1.1 What are some of the problems encountered in your school in the area of record keeping.
Answer Kit You may include problems such as: 1.
Lack of adequate storage facilities to keep these records; some of them have been damaged by insects such as termites.
2.
Some staff members are careless in making entries into records as well as in handling them 3.
The school improvises for same records which have not been supplied to it by the State Ministry of Education.
.
I.
General Inspection Format Background Information, 1.
Name of School.
2.
Brief History of the school.
3.
Site Plan, 4.
Number and type of.
blocks (buildings) ----------------------- 5.
Number of classrooms ------------------------------------------- 6.
Number of special rooms ---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------- (their availability and adequacy) -------------------------------- II.
Administrative Chart and Communication Channels, 1.
The organizational chart (and its effectiveness) 862.
Principal - staff - students 3.
Morning Assemblies.
4.
Staff meeting (regularity).
5.
Food committee meeting, III, Administrative Staff, Name Qualification Experience Functions 1.
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 2.
------------------------------------------------------------------------- 3.
------------------------------------------------------------------------- 4.
------------------------------------------------------------------------- IV, Staffing position - Academic Staff.
1, Name Qualification Experience Subjects Taught (a) ------------------------------------------------------------------------ (b) ------------------------------------------------------------------------ (c) ------------------------------------------------------------------------ V. Teaching Equipments available.
(a) -------------------------------------------------------------------------- (b) --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (c) --------------------------------------------------------------------------- VI.
Admission policy and enrolment, 1 Admission procedure, 2.
Catchments areas, 3.
Enrolment per class: Class No in class VII.
Statutory Records kept by the Head of the School 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------- 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------- 3.
----------------------------------------------------------------------- 4.
----------------------------------------------------------------------- VIII.
Students' administrative set up in Hostels, (a) Type of House system --------------------------------------------- (b) Prefect system - selection or election procedure ----------------- 87(c) Dining Hall and Kitchen situation --------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (d) Menu time table ------------------------------------------------------- (e) School rules ----------------------------------------------------------- (f) Supervision techniques and of staff on duty.---------------------- IX.
Non-teaching staff (Labour force) (a) Staff quota -------------------------------------------------------- (b) Staff Strength ---------------------------------------------------------- (c) Staff deployment ------------------------------------------------------ (d) Staff disciplines ------------------------------------------------------- X.
Facilities available to staff.
(a) Staff common room (availability and adequacy)------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (b) Staff room (availability and adequacy) ---------------------------- (c) Toilets ----------------------------------------------------------------- (d) Transport --------------------------------------------------------------- (e) Staff houses/accommodation ---------------------------------------- XI.
Academic.
(a) General Time - table, (b) Individual Staff time-table, (c) Subject allocation, (d) Balance of subjects, (e) School library.
(f) Number of books in the library.
(g) Pre record, (h) Prep time-table.
( i ) Pre supervision.
XII, Facilities - Recreation and non-recreation,.
a) Sports, b) Clubs c) Societies, d) Games, e) Health services, f) Transport services, g) Guidance and Counseling h) Water supply, 88i) Common rooms, j) Electricity supply, k) Toilets, l) Play ground, m) Garden/farm, (Their availability, effectiveness or adequacy), XIII Financial Matters and stores, (a) Record concerning finances, L,P,O,, Vouchers, D.V.A.
books, staff salary records, (b) Security arrangement for cash and stores, (c) Store situation - ledger kept, (d) Issuing process, (e) Policy used for supply of textbooks and equipment, (f) Inventory of school and last auditor's report, XIV.
Files kept, (a) Secret files, (b) Personal files, (c) Subject files (academic), (d) Time-table files, (e) Subject files e.g, accommodation, general staff matters, employment etc XV.
Tone of the School, (a) Disciplinary process, (b) Punishment record, (b) Reward/Prizes record, (d) General students' problems, (e) Students' attitude to work and authority, (f) General staff problems, (g) The school as an effective learning environment, XVI.
School Relation with the local Community, (a) P.T.A.
(availability, effectiveness) -------------------------------- (b ) Open day programme.
----------------------------------------------- (c) Community development project in the school (if any) --------- (d) Old Students' association (if any) ----------------------------------- (e) Young Farmers Club ------------------------------------------------- 89XVI.
General Observation and Recommendation,............................................ ............................................................................................................... XVII.
Conclusion (a) Summary (b) Name of Inspector, (c) Qualification of Inspector, (d) Experience of Inspector, (e) Signature of Inspector.
3.2 Format for Science Subject Inspection Science subject inspection is the second area of concern in this unit.
This inspection is applied to each subject individually and is aimed at confirming the extent to which the curriculum is actually being effectively implemented.
This is for the purpose for instance, of ensuring that students will be able to perform as expected especially in final or external examinations.
The inspection would state the subject and deal with the following areas: i.
Staffing Inspection is to establish the number of teachers teaching the subject, their qualification and years of experience and the organization of the subject, for example by department.
Other concerns are to do with subject staff meetings, the availability of support staff, staff turnover and succession or hand-over arrangements to avoid creating a vacuum.
ii.
Syllabus and Scheme Inspection is to establish the availability and source of the syllabus, time allocation on the general time-table and the assignment of classes to teachers.
Of particular concern is the record of work done by each teacher in terms of past lesson notes as well as how the lesson are prepared and the notes written.
This has to do with the quality of lesson notes as to whether the school has a specific lesson note format.
iii.
Textbooks in Use The concern is to establish availability of recommended books in the subject for both teachers and students, the methods of supplying them, how long they have been in use and the library facilities available in the subject area in terms of other supplementary books.
90iv.
Teaching Methods and Teaching Aids This inspection pre-supposes that the inspector must himself be a highly trained and professional teacher in the subject area.
Teaching methods includes both general and special methods.
Teaching methods include the approach and the use of prepared teaching aids and of any other relevant and improvised materials.
It includes adequacy of written and practical work in terms of assignments, practical, case studies, and an assessment of the understanding of the subject by the students.
To be assessed also includes the performance of the teachers.
Indeed it is as a result of such an assessment that professional assessment inspection to assess the competence of individuals could result when inspection is not satisfactory in respect of the performance for example of a teacher.
This inspection also assesses the capacity of students for independent work through home-work, projects, and others.
v. Internal and External Examination The concern is to establish the method of assessing pupils student’s performance, and the use of continuous assessment.
It also assesses the quality of tests through examining test items used.
To be able to see how well students are doing and the school is implementing the curriculum, there is an analysis of the results of external examinations of the school over a period of time for example, three years.
vi.
Specialist Accommodation and Physical Facilities Each subject might require specialist accommodation such as a subject laboratory, or studio.
This area is to confirm whether or not the subject has been provided with such a specialist accommodation housed in its own physical facility.
It is concerned to establish the number of such rooms, how well they are equipped for the purpose, the safety precautions taken and to take an inventory of the equipment.
vii.
Relevant Clubs.
Societies and Committees There is a tendency to attribute learning only to the classroom and to down- play the role of co-curricular activities by students such as in clubs and societies, Subject clubs and societies also play a significant role in subject learning in promoting activities relevant to it.
The concern is with such organizations (if any that have established by the students).
91This concern includes membership, organization and supervision and frequency and timing of meetings.
Other concerns include an evaluation of club/society activities, the relationship with other activities within the school as well as other schools.
Exercise 1.2 Stop for a little while.
Complete the laboratory data science laboratory in your school.
Write a brief comment at the end to reveal how good/bad the situation actually is.
GRAPHIC TABLE TYPE *1 Laboratory Assessment Data Sheet Subject ----------------------------------------------- School ----------------------------------------------- Date ----------------------------------------------- No.
Items examined Remarks 1.
The school does/does not have a laboratory 2.
The Laboratory is new/old (new-less then 5 years old) 3.
The laboratory has/does not a full supply necessary instructional materials and equipment.
4.
List the major supplies and equipment in the laboratory and describe their quality.
5.
Do these supplies and equipment show signs of use or disuse.
6.
Briefly describe the problems of: a) The size of the laboratory.
b) Lighting.
c) Ventilation.
d) Accommodation e) Access to materials and equipments.
f) Safety precaution in the laboratory.
GRAPHIC TABLE TYPE II I Personal Information_ Profile.
Name of Teacher ------------------------------------------------------------ Age--------------Gender -----------Marital Status ------------------------ Educational Qualifications ------------------------------------------------- No.
of Years of Teaching experience ------------------------------------- Membership of Professional Organizations: 921.
----------------------------------- 2.----------------------------------- 3.
----------------------------------- 4.
----------------------------------- Subject taught: ---------------------------------------------------------------- II Observations made During Actual Teaching 1.
Teacher was ready for class Yes No 2.
Class was organized as soon as students are in, 3.
The topic completed was drawn systematically from the syllabus.
4.
Teacher led students in discussing topic complete.
5.
Teacher provided for and encouraged student participation in on-going discussion, 6.
Teacher used demonstration or laboratory class methods to illustrate concepts and skills desired from the given objective.
7.
Teacher provided reference materials.
8.
Tick one of the following; students were: i. well-behave ii restless.
iii .mute and subdued during class.
9.
A written assignment followed the lesson.
3.3 Format for the inspection of Art subject The main difference between the format for inspection of science subject and that of Art subject lies mainly in the special accommodation, such as laboratory, required for science.
The format below is a sample of one which can be used for the inspection of Art subject like English Language or Social Studies.
Format for Subject Inspection (Art Subjects) I.
Name of Institution ---------------------------------------------- II.
Subject Inspected.
------------------------------------------------ III.
Date of Inspection ----------------------------------------------- IV.
Type of Inspection------------------------------------------------ V. Date of Previous Inspection:------------------------------------ VI Staffing Position in the subject --------------------------------- Name Qualification Experience 93 1.
----------------- 2.
----------------- 3.
----------------- 4.
----------------- VII.
(a) Period Allocation --------------------------------------------- (b) Home Work/Assignment.......................... VIII.
Syllabus and Scheme of Work --------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------- IX.
(a) Lesson Plan 1.
Introduction 2.
Presentation 3.
Application/Students' Participation 4.
Teaching aids (usage, appropriateness etc.)
5.
Conclusion 6.
General Comments.
(b) Effectiveness of Teaching (including student’s participation in the lesson).
(c) Students' written work and practical 1.
Adequacy 2.
Frequency 3.
Suitability 4.
Supervision 5.
Correction of the Work.
X. Accommodation and Equipment where applicable.
1 Number of laboratories 2 Number of stores 3 Furniture available; adequacy 4.
Facilities available, adequacy 5 Teaching aids available, adequacy XI.
a. Textbooks for students (availability and suitability) 1.
----------------------------------------------------------------- 2.
----------------------------------------------------------------- 3.
----------------------------------------------------------------- 4.
----------------------------------------------------------------- 5.
----------------------------------------------------------------- 94XII.
School Library.
(1) Accommodation (2) Seats (3) Books (4.)
Hours of Operation (5) Staff in Library (6) Subject area (which should be constantly by subject teachers).
XIII.
Essential Records kept in the subject.
1 Mark books 2 Past tests/examination records 3 Other records XIV.
Subject Association/ Clubs 1.
-------------------------------------------- 2.
-------------------------------------------- 3.
-------------------------------------------- XV.
General/Observations XVI Recommendations XVII 1.
Name of Inspector------------------------------------------------- 2.
Qualification of Inspector ----------------------------------------- 3.
Experience .---------------------------------------------------------- In the course of Science Subject inspection, the following graphic table could be used particularly when the inspection is done in the laboratory for practical lessons.
Exercise 1.3 Look carefully at the format presented here.
What else do you wish to add to it?
3.4 Report Writing A good inspection report should have the following features: 1.
Irrespective of the type of inspection the report must be comprehensive.
2.
The report must have proper title, name of the school and date of inspection.
3.
The introduction must state the purpose of inspection.
The report must be divided into section with appropriate sub-titles.
955.
While it must be clearly understood, the report must be written in concise, simple English, free from ambiguity and jargons.
6.
The findings should be stated objectively so as to avoid dispute over the facts and figures stated.
7.
Report should not be written in condemnatory tone; rather, faults should be stated in form of recommendation.
8.
Concluding paragraphs should contain acknowledgement for the cooperation of the staff and the school head.
The name(s) and rank(s) of inspector(s) should be indicated and the report duly signed.
The inspector is expected to give a verbal or an interim report to his boss immediately, For effectiveness, the writing of the inspection report should commence instantly and should be completed within a week.
The school head and the other officers who were entitled to copies of the report should receive them within a month.
A.
Sample Report Observations on an Advisory Inspection visit to Government Girls Day Secondary School, Jara.
Date of Visit: 20th November, 2000 Reporting Inspector: Mrs Jummai Baul Name of Principal: Mrs Samira Zing History of the school: The school is a non-boarding school for girls founded in September, 1997 by the State Government to boost female education in the area.
It started with 50 students but it has steadily ground to a population of 500 students made up as follows: JS No of Stream Total 1 3 120 11 5 160 111 3 150 SS 1 2 70 The class sizes are moderate on an average of 35 students, except for JS III where the class average is 50 students.
96Grounds.
Physical Plant and Equipment The school is situated on the right side of the Zaria - Kano Experss way.
There is fear of encroachment on school land by members of the Community.
There are four blocks of classrooms with the Administrative Block on a separate block.
The classroom walls have no paints on them and so needs to be painted to make them attractive.
There is one science Laboratory in the school.
It is however very well equipped for the teaching of Biology alone.
There is a dare need for Chemistry and Physics Laboratories if the teaching of science is to be effectively done, we hereby recommend that the Ministry of Education, should see to the building and equipping these Laboratories as soon as possible.
The library is rather too small for the growing number of students in the school.
The stock of 585 books most of which are old editions is considered inadequate.
We recommend the expansion of the library and an increase in the stock of books in all subject areas as well as magazines and journals.
The playing fields need to be cleared of stones and small rocks to make them safe for students use.
Curriculum Organization The school offers all the subjects recommended by the National Policy on Education except Home Economics, Technical Drawing and Computer Application.
The school does not have teachers in these areas.
We recommend that in the nearest future, teachers and facilities and equipment should be made available for these subjects.
Syllabuses and Schemes of Work The school has no teaching syllabus nor are there any schemes of work in some of the subject areas.
It is emphasized here that the school needs to maintain these records as they outline the aims and objectives of teaching the subjects as well as the methodology and resources in achieving the objectives.
It is recommended that subject teachers should use the government approved syllabus as basis for preparing comprehensive teaching schemes, typed copies are to be prepared for each subject and kept in files, one copy being used in the department and the other kept in the principal's office.
The scheme is subsequently copied into the Diaries at the beginning of each term.
School Records 97All the essential records are kept in the school.
Some of those examined include log Book, Visitor’s Book, Class Attendance Registers, Admission Registers, Diaries, P.T.A.
Files, and Lesson Attendance Registers.
Most of these records were not well kept and up to date, and the storage facilities for the records are not adequate.
It is recommended that the principal and her two assistants should ensure that all school records are properly kept and up to date; they should monitor the teachers in keeping these records.
Staffing The school has 15 teaching staff for the 13 class with total of 500 students.
The areas of shortage are Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Home Economics and Computer Literacy.
We recommend that the teachers service Board should allocate to the school professionally qualified teachers in the subject area indicated above.
General Remarks The school surroundings are neat and the tone is of a high standard.
The administration is satisfactory staff and student attend morning assembles and are punctual.
We recommend that the principal should find ways and means of implementing the recommendations pointed out.
4.0 Conclusion Since inspection involves gathering information, a good instrument should be designed for collecting information.
If this is done, the inspector can quickly gather information by filling in the instrument, this allows for easy and quick analysis of formation collected.
5.0 Summary This unit has spelt out the guideline for school inspection.
It described the format for data gathering for general and subject inspections.
The proforma highlighted, the areas of interest through which the inspector can get information in respect of the inspection he is undertaking.
Examples of format for general and subject inspections were discussed in the unit and the main features of good report writing were stated.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Prepare a format for general inspection of your school.
Write a report on your observations inspection of your school.
98.
7.0 References NKOM, A.A. (2000) “Guidelines for General and subject Inspection" paper presentation at the workshop for school inspectors in Northern States of Nigeria, organized by the Institute of Education A,B.U.
Zaria 15 - 17 November.
Ojelabi, A.
(1981) A Guide to school Management.
Ibadan, Valuta Educational Fublishers.
Otu, D. 0.
(1998) Educational Leadership in the Primary School.
Samaru - Zaria.
S. Asekome Publishers.
UNIT 11 MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONS OF THE SCHOOL HEAD.
99 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Definitions of Management 3.2 Functions of the School Head 3.2.1 Planning 3.2.2 Organizing 3.2.3 Directing 3.2.4 Coordinating 3.2.5 Evaluating 3.3 The Process of Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The Unit is an introduction to some theoretical perspectives on management.
It examines some major management concepts and principles.
I believe that a deeper understanding of the nature of educational management will enable you to develop or improve your skills and practice as a school manager.
2.0 Objectives After reading through this unit you should be able to: i. explain the meaning of the term management in education.
ii.
discuss the contribution which management theory can make to understanding management practice .
iii.
apply the knowledge skills and attitudes in educational management for more effective and efficient planning of resources for use in your school.
Organizing and coordinating school programmes and activities, directing, controlling and evaluating of the teaching and learning processes in school.
1003.1 Definition and Principles of Management 3.1.1 Concept of Management in Education Management can mean different things to different people at different times.
The term management is derived from the verb 'to manage' which can mean to handle, to control, to make and keep submissive, to organize, to alter by manipulation and to carry out for a purpose.
Some of these meanings appear almost offensive.
For instance, do you as a school head keep your staff and students submissive?
These terms suggest to us diverse styles of management, some of which will be more acceptable and productive than others.
Another way people talk of management is to describe it as an art, a science and a process.
Management as an art is concerned with carrying out organizational functions and tasks through people.
This art involves the application of techniques in human and public relations, the delegation of an authority (assigning and sharing responsibilities), communication (including problem, solving and decision - making) and managing change.
Management as a science is concerned with establishing a philosophy, processes and practices which can be applied in a school situation.
Management as a process is a collection of activities which include such things as decision - making, problem solving and action - planning.
These processes involve the management of resources including human, material, financial and time.
These processes constitute the main functions of school managers which we shall discuss later on in this unit.
Thus, in very simple terms management is the process of utilizing human and material resources to achieve organizational goals.
Exercise.
1.1 1.
How useful do you find these views of management?
Answer Kit We hope that you are beginning to have a better understanding of the nature of management and the processes you undertake as a manager.
Before we go on to describe the functions of school management, we shall first examine the principles of management.
3.1.2 Principles of Educational Management Fourteen principles of management have been listedby Henry Fayol (1916), with regards to human activities.
They are: division of work; authority, responsibility and accountability; discipline; unity of command; unity of 101direction; centralization and decentralization; scalar chain (the chain of command in an organization); remuneration of personnel; subordination of individual interest to general interest; equity; stability of tenure of personnel; initiative spirit de corps; and span of control or order.
The principles outlined above were derived from industrial management but they are very relevant in managing education in the country today.
In current practices, there is strong evidence of the application of these principles.
Exercise 1.2 Give examples and illustrations of applications of the principles of management in your school?
Answer Kit You would have noted the principle of division of work.
The idea of specialization in all kinds of work, both management and technical, is widely practiced.
The principle of span of control is upheld in the various departments and sections or units that our schools are divided.
3.2 Functions of the School Head Basically, the administrative or management functions of the school head revolves around these five elements: planning, organizing, directing, co- coordinating and controlling or evaluating.
These will be described briefly below.
3.2.1 PLANNING: This is the first step in any administrative activity.
It involves making arrangements for the future.
It deals with thinking on how to use time, personnel and equipment in future.
Planning is a sort of time-table of activities that will be performed in future.
That future may begin the following day, following week, following month or year.
Plans are made after objectives or goals are set.
Planning is usually regarded as a search for the best method of achieving these goals.
There is short-range plan, there is also long-range plan.
What is long and what is short will depend on the situation; and apart from the time they last, there is not much difference between the two.
Both require foresight, knowledge of what is available and how to use it.
Planning should start with deciding how long planning will take.
In other words, the administrator should ask himself: "For how long is the plan going to last?"
The next question he should ask is: "what goal do I intend to achieve at the end of that period?"
The next question is: "what are the sub-goals that serve as, steps to 102achieving these goals?"
It is important that administrators should study their environments and ensure that the goals they set for themselves are in tune with the reality of the situation in which their schools operate.
3.2.2 ORGANIZING: Organizing is assigning people to different functions for effectiveness; the administrator must know the qualifications, the ability and the interests of the people with whom he works.
Effective organization implies that the right people are assigned to do the correct jobs at the appropriate times.
In the secondary school, the school head has to assign teachers as class teachers, special subject teachers, games-masters/ mistresses, supervisors of societies and clubs, and so on.
In organizing the school, the school head also makes use of the students by appointing some of them as head boy, head girl, deputy head boy/girl and games prefects.
All arrangement that set the framework in which an organization operates comes under the administrative function of organizing.
Particularly the teaching time-table is an effective means of organizing the time available to the school and matching the right teacher with the right class.
3.2.3 DIRECTING : After work has been arranged in such a way that people have assigned properly to their different posts, they need to be told what to do and how do it.
Telling, instructing or advising officers how best to perform their duties is directing.
Directing involves giving staff details on how to go about their business.
Though it may be necessary to give orders at times, directing does not mean ordering people about in a military fashion.
An effective means of communication is a necessity for directing people in the proper way, because if they do not understand what they are to do, they will be confused and can, therefore, not be expected to perform well.
Directing is not a once-for-all activity; it is an on-going one.
Officers have to be continually put on the right path.
3.2.4 COORDINATING: Coordinating refers to interrelating the various parts of the work engaged in the school organization.
It involves the harmonious working together of the different elements of the administrative activities, Co-ordination occurs when the organization's numerous activities are planned, organized, directed and controlled.
The work of each class in the school must be related or coordinated with that of others.
For instance, the scheme of work in Mathematics for form two is a continuation of the work done previously in form one, and a stepping stone to aid better understanding of the work in Mathematics in Form Three.
103Also, the materials and equipment supplied to the school must be co- coordinated with classroom instruction.
For example, a map of Nigeria showing different vegetation, will be an appropriate instructional material for Form One Geography lesson on Nigerian vegetation.
It is likely that because of the importance of co-ordination, the headmaster is made responsible for all matters pertaining to the operation of his school unit.
However, it should be noted that too much division of authority will destroy co-ordination.
The co- coordinator’s powers are based on laws or on knowledge on personal qualities and on Social acceptance.
Finally, co-ordination is the process by which actual performance of staff is guided toward common goals.
3.2.5 CONTROLLING (EVALUATING) : Control refers to the power and authority someone has to direct, order or restrain the activities of individuals and group in an organization.
Since administrators are given the responsibility for getting certain things done, they need to have the authority to control the activities through which those things are to be accomplished.
Controlling is the activity in which the performance of an individual, a unit or the entire organization is measured.
It is through periodic assessment of how well something is being done that one can determine if the work is going on according to plan and to what extent the goal is being achieved.
This aspect of controlling is known as evaluation.
No activity of controlling can be successful without previous evaluation.
Thus evaluation and controlling are closely related activities.
Not only do we have someone assigned to exercise control (evaluation) but we also have many means to carry out this function.
Some examples of these means are: the curriculum or syllabus which controls the instructional programme; rules and regulations to control behaviour; certificates and testimonials to control academic standards; salary scales, records and reports; codes of conduct; examinations; all serving as devices of control.
Controlling is the process which measure current performance and guides it toward some predetermined goals.
Control acts as a check on the manner in which delegated powers are carried out and as a means of preventing or curbing wrong actions.
This appraisal is necessary so that the administrator may know how a goal is to be reached; he will be able to recognize problems that may hinder goal attainment or slow down the pace of the work.
Such an evaluation occurs within the school organization constantly and consistently, 1043.3 The Process Of Management: The process of administration as discussed above is not linear; rather, it is circular in actual practice.
If an administrator achieves maximum effectiveness at the planning stage, he may then move on to the next stage which involves organizing.
If he continues to succeed at every step he moves on until he gets to the last stage.
He then moves on from the last step (controlling) to the first step (planning).
However, because human beings are greatly involved in the process of administration, it is hardly possible for the administrator to move from one stage to the other without problems.
Such problems may come from within or outside the institution; there may be lack of materials and equipment needed to carry out certain functions, there may be shortage of teachers to teach.
Planning Controlling Organizing (Evaluating) Co-coordinating Directing Figure 1: The Process of Management.
Source: Qtu, D.O.. (1998) Educational Leadership in the Primary School, Samaru - Zaria, S, Asekome & Co. Publishers p,22.
Specific subjects; all these and more may cause hindrance to the administrator's smooth job performance.
If a problem arises in any one stage, the administrator has to go back to review the function in the preceding stage.
For instance, if the administrator encounters problem in organizing, he goes back to reschedule his activities at the planning stage.
Planning Organizing - Problem?
105Directing - Problem?
Co-coordinating - Problem?
Controlling - Problem?
Evaluating) Figure:2: The Elements of Management.
Source: Otu, D.O.
(1998) Educational Leadership in the primary School.
Sameru - Zaria S, Asekome & Co. Publishers, p.23 Exercise 1.3 Reflect on the management functions of the school head described here„ List the strengths and weaknesses in your management practice.
Answer Kit You might have noticed that on many occasions, the plans you made for your weekly or daily activities were interrupted and disorganized by factors which were not earlier envisaged.
This situation may be quite frustrating.
But you might also discover that in evaluating your activities, you are able to save yourself and your organization some very embarrassing moments.
3.0 Conclusion The first action of a school manager is to identify the mission of the school and to set the objectives.
He will then identify different strategies to achieve the mission and goals.
Thus through planning the head aims to manage an efficient and an effective school.
In organizing, he puts in order of priority and preference on the resources which are available to him.
The school head then needs to direct implementation of the plan.
He would provide leadership by delegating duties and responsibilities to staff and by motivating them.
The directing process also involves coordinating the supply and use of resources; finally, he has to assess the results and compare them with the set objectives.
The performance of all the staff should be assessed.
The feed-back is needed in the adjustment of future plans.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt the definition of management which is said to be the process of utilizing human and material resources to achieve organizational goals.
Management was described as an art, a science and a process.
Henry Fayols (1916) principles of management were identified and 106their relevance to educational management was analyzed.
The basic functions of a school head were described as planning, organizing, directing, coordinating and controlling or evaluating.
6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment Prepare a list of activities you might engage in your school in the following area: Planning organizing, directing and evaluating (controlling).
7.0 References Federal Ministry of Education (1993) Better Schools Management: Head Teacher Education and Resource Materials Lagos.
F.M.E.
Otu, D. 0.
(1998) Educational Leadership in the Primary school.
Samaru - 2aria.
S. Asekome Co Publishers.
NIT 12 CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Components of an Effective School 3.1 What is effectiveness?
1073.2 Indicators of School Effectiveness 3.2.1 Sound Teaching and Learning 3.2.2 School Organizational Structure 3.2.3 Good Personal Relations 3.2.4 Effective Guidance and Counseling 3.2.5 Good School Ethos 3.2.6 Effective Leadership 3.2.7 Effective Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The need to be effective has become of paramount importance to schools and education authorities.
This may be partly due to the pressure for accountability brought about by governments at Federal and State levels, parents, by the poor economy which has resulted in reduced resource allocations.
At the same time there is a realization of the importance of the issue as school heads and their staff seeks ways of increasing effectiveness in the school setting as a part of the development of their job.
This unit focuses on the concept and characteristics of teaching and learning effectiveness.
It also considers the role you should play as the school head in the process of monitoring school effectiveness.
2.0 Objective By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. explain the concept of effectiveness in the school setting 2. identify the major characteristics of an effective school 3. describe when and how learning and teaching are effective in the school situation.
4. state the characteristics of effective guidance and counseling for students in schools outline the qualities of a good school head explain how school ethos contribute to school effectiveness.
3.0 Components of an Effective School 1083.1.1 What is effectiveness?
Effectiveness can be defined as the extent to which the set goals or objectives of a school programme are accomplished.
Such effectiveness can be seen in relation to the quality, quantity, equity or equality of educational instruction given in a school.
Thus the concept of effectiveness is very broad; it ranges from purpose to effort and accomplishment: In this view the school head may perhaps view effectiveness in terms of student’s performance in external examinations.
The parents may perceive the school's effectiveness in the way the students behave at home and perform at national examinations.
The society, on its part, may see the school's effectiveness in terms of the good moral behaviour of the youths.
The government may use a combination of indicators; for example, the Federal Government's Policy on Education focuses the following indicators of the school setting.
i.
Internal performance indicators ii.
Operating indicators iii.
External performance indicators iv.
Staff productivity indicators.
Some of the ways to recognize that.
the school is effective are through the following factors: i. Purposeful leadership of the staff by the school head ii.
The involvement of the heads of department iii.
The involvement of other teachers iv.
Structured lessons v. Work-centered environment vi.
Student-friendly environment vii.
Efficient and accurate record keeping ix.
Parental and community involvement in school business x.
Positive climate xi.
Consistency among teachers xii.
Productive division of labour among teachers.
It is clear that there are many ways of judging an effective school which are often overlooked by the school heads.
You may wish to reflect.
on some factors of effectiveness of your school.
Such a reflection will assist to improve your own performance.
3.2 Indicators of School Effectiveness 109We shall now take a closer look at some of the characteristics of school effectiveness.
3.2.1 Sound Teaching and Learning The quality of teaching and learning should take precedence over other factors of school effectiveness.
This is because effective teaching and learning determine the perceptions of everyone who is interested in the quality of a school.
Since effective teaching and learning start from the classroom, we shall examine how students learn effectively in a classroom situation.
Students learn effectively when they: i.
Are motivated ii.
Understand the purpose and relevance of their work iii.
Are set about tasks in an orderly way iv.
Are able to use available resources and know where and when to ask for help v. Show consideration for one another and for the teacher vi.
Rite to the challenge of working and show commitment vii.
Work cooperatively viii.
Revise and practice to improve performance ix.
Plan, choose and take responsibility for their learning x.
Undertake tasks in their own time in and out of school.
Exercise 1.1 Which of these factors may be found in your school ?
Answer kit It is an accepted fact that really effective learning requires a good teacher.
This implies that there are certain key qualities of an effective teacher, some of which are: patience, firmness, enthusiasm, calm control, tolerance, understanding, ability to communicate effectively, emotionally stable, physically stable and fairness.
In addition before a teacher can be effective, he must plan and organize his teaching well.
We shall discuss more about teacher effectiveness in unit 13.
3.2.2.
School Organization Structure The school organization structure and procedures should ensure the effective care of the students.
They will vary from one school to another but in general there is the need for effective guidance and counseling, and effective communication.
1103.2.3 Good Personal Relations The school head and his team of staff should realize that they work and deal with people all the time.
Students and their parents, officials of the ministry of education, members of the public are in constant interaction with the school.
The impressions formed about the school by these categories of people will be determined by the approach the school head relates with them.
He and his staff should try to be polite, courteous, helpful and kind to these people.
The community within which the school operates must enjoy a positive and cordial relationship with the school.
3.2.4 Effective Guidance and Counseling Services One main aspect of school effectiveness is the extent to which the school head introduces and manages a programme of guidance and counseling of the students.
This involves ensuring good relationships between teachers and students, meeting the needs of individual students and working with all the teachers to create a generally caring atmosphere.
For effective guidance and counseling, the following requirements are essential: i.
Appropriate information on students ii.
Appropriate confidentiality at all times iii.
Sound advice and re-assurance for pupils and parents at important times of transition.
iv.
Appropriate counseling sessions with the students aid parents on a regular basis v. Prompt responses in crises vi.
Continuity of procedures for a student moving through the school vii.
Effective forms of records and of record-keeping viii.
A policy in which all teachers are involved in information and review of the school policies.
3.2.5 Good school Ethos Many schools have traditions for efficiency, effectiveness and quality, which are reflected in the students' behaviours, dress, discipline or the school motto.
Parents often choose a particular school because of their belief in its ethos as reflected in the teachers attitude to students, the teachers' skills in developing relationships with students and general evidence that good relationships prosper.
Exercise 1.2 As a school head, can you suggest some other aspects of a school ethos?
111Answer Kit The following have been identified as factors associated with a good school ethos: (i) General well-being of students, (ii) teacher commitment and morale, (iii) positive attitudes of teachers to students, (iv) quality of teaching, (v) the way management supports the staff, (vi) recognition of the motivating effects of praises (vii) a sense of identity and pride in the school,(viii) sound school policies relating to curriculum, teaching styles, assessment and others.
3.2.6 Effective Leadership Leadership has been defined as the activities of a school head to cause other people to take collective action.
It is also the ability of a school head to influence others to work towards achieving a common goal.
In a school setting, a school head is involved in five main management activities.
1.
Decision-making: which involves arriving at conclusion and judgments.
2.
Communicating: which centers on creating understanding 3.
Motivating: this involves encouraging and inspiring people to take the required action.
4.
Selecting people: choosing people for positions in the school 5.
Developing people: helping people to improve their knowledge, attitudes and skills.
Effective leadership is essential for the achievement of results.
The school heads leadership strengths or weakness affect the performance of the entire school.
Exercise 1.3 As the head of your school, list some of the characteristics you think you need to develop to improve the effectiveness of your leadership.
Answer kit Your list may include the following qualities.
The effective head: i.
Adds value to the school resources ii.
is a prime mover iii.
energies staff iv.
promotes the satisfaction of subordinates' needs v. builds committed and cohesive work group.
vi.
sets an example to staff 112vii.
is a resource expert viii is a change agent ix.
is an essential link between staff and students.
3.2.7 Effective communication Effective communication is an essential instrument for the school head in managing the school and ensuring that staff are aware of the pupils' needs at the right time.
In this respect the following guidelines for ensuring effective communication are suggested 1.
Make a clear statement of policy which all staff have the opportunity to formulate and review 2.
The use of diverse and appropriate means of communication to include: a) Suggestion box, ( b) bulletin board,(c) school assembly (d)letters and memorandum (e) staff meetings (f) rules and regulations, (g) sign posts and pictorial representation, ( h) magazines(i)P.T.A (j) daily newspapers (k) face-to face communication.
3.
The school head should use simple, clear and unambiguous language when communicating with students, staff and parents.
4.0 Conclusion Monitoring and evaluating are features of what should go on in every school.
Everyone engaged in the process should, therefore, seek to improve the effectiveness of the school for the benefit of all concerned - staff, parents, the community and employers.
The various characteristics and features of effective learning and teaching and of the effective school head have been examined in this unit.
Subsequent units will explore in more detail at how monitoring and evaluation may be undertaken in specific areas of the school system.
5.0 Summary We began our discussion in this unit by defining the concept of effectiveness.
Some indicators of school effectiveness were identified.
It was noted that school effectiveness is closely tied to some major school management characteristics.
These include: Sound teaching and learning, functional school organizational structures, good personal relations and a good school ethos.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment Indicate five areas in which your school has a clear policy available in writing.
Using the format below, state whether or not you have these policies and how you monitor those policies.
113For example: Policy Monitoring Method Teachers must be in school I stand at the gate to the at least 10 minutes before school with a stop watch and assembly each day record their arrival on a form 7.0 References Afolayan, T.,A.F.
(1989 ed.)
Principalship: An Introduction to theAdministration of Post-Primary Institutions in Nigeria.. Zaria.Institute of Education, A.B.U.
Federal Ministry of Education (1993) Better Schools Managements : Head Teacher Education and Resource Materials.
Lagos F.M.E.
Ehiametalor, E.T and Aderounmu,O.W (1981) Introduction to Administration of Schools in Nigeria.
Lagos , Longman.
UNIT 13 STRATEGIES FOR MONITORING AND EVALUATING CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Curriculum Planning and supervision of instruction 3.1 The syllabus and schemes of Work 1143.2 Record of Work 3.3 Lesson Notes 3.4 School Time-Table 3.5 Class Time-Table 3.6 Individual Record Sheets 3.7 Mark Books and Report Sheets 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction There are seven main categories or classification of the school head's administrative tasks.
The activities the school head engages in monitoring and evaluating these tasks are the focus of our discussion in this unit and subsequent units.
This unit deals with the task of curriculum planning and supervision of instruction.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. explain the duties of the school head in curriculum planning, 2, describe the activities the school head engages in supervision of instructions, 3.
State the importance of preparing lesson notes to quality teaching and learning 3.0 Curriculum Planning and Supervision of Instruction This deals with providing guidelines for the make up of the syllabus, scheme of work, record of work, allocation of subject teaching time-table, checking and endorsement of lesson notes, checking and endorsement of marks books, checking and endorsement of terminal reports, moderation of examination questions and regular visit to the classes when actual presentation of lesson are carried on.
While all these are being done, the school head must ensure that the school curriculum adopted to the needs of the community and to 115ensure modifications to be made in the light of new discoveries and changes in the community.
3.1 The Syllabus and Schemes of Work In the Nigerian context, a syllabus could be described as a condensed outline or statement of the main points of a course of study springing up from the broad curriculum of the school.
The scheme of work is a book showing the plan of work to be covered by each class during the term or year.
Every professional teacher is expected to know how to keep this.
The head of the school should keep in his office copies of the entire official syllabus in every subject offered in the school.
The scheme of work which breaks up the syllabus into teaching units should also be kept by the school head in order to assist the teachers form useful and explanatory schemes.
The school head should endeavour to see that the schemes of works are clearly understood by each teacher before writing them out and before the school head finally endorses them.
The schemes of work are usually formed in advance of each term.
3.2 Record of Work This shows the teacher’s plan of work in each subject area and the actual work covered.
The weekly diary of work is a valuable record which guides, not only the teacher and the school administration but also those who may be new to the class, for example, new teachers taking over a class; inspectors of education and others.
It should not be necessary for such outsiders to depend on unreliable memory of the students to obtain information as to what has been taught.
The weekly records will normally show the stages through which the students have been taken.
This record should be as comprehensive as possible and should in no sense be vague.
Each class should have its own diary, and in it, every subject taught should be faithfully recorded week by week.
3.3 Lesson Notes These are daily notes of what the teacher intends to teach.
In writing a useful and effective lesson notes, the following guidelines should be observed: 1.
Introduction should be varied.
2 Aims must be specific and expressed in behavioural terms 3.
Appropriate instructional materials and aids to be used 4.
Previous knowledge to be related to the new topic 5.
Teacher's activities to be properly graduated 1166.
Conclusions to be varied Exercise 1.1 What are the importance of keeping these records in school?
i Syllabus and scheme of work ii Record of work diaries iii Lesson Notes Answer Kit These documents are very vital to the central activities of the school that is, teaching and learning.
Without them, each school and each teacher would teach whatever they liked.
There would be no consistency, no uniformity and no quality in what is taught to student.
In fact, the school system would be chaotic.
There would be no standards to measure the performances of students and teachers.
3.4 School Time Table It is a record which shows the distribution of school time.
This must be clearly exhibited for staff and student’s use.
3.5 Class Time Table This is prepared annually by the class teacher and exhibited in each classroom.
3.6 Individual Record Files Most schools in the country now use the Continuous Assessment Booklet for the records of students' academic achievement.
However, the school has a file in which copies of the student’s records are kept.
These are confidential and are usually kept by the school head in a cabinet in his office and are usually made available only to authorized people.
3.7 Mark Books and Report sheets These are kept by teachers to keep the parents of students informed of the students' progress.
Exercise 1.2 117Prepare a class time table for use in JS I in your school.
Answer Kit Your timetable should include in addition to the subjects (lessons) taken each day, the times for school assemblies breakperiods and others.
4.0 Conclusion The school curriculum and instruction should be adequately planned and supervised because they are the main reason for student’s existence in the school.
Concerted efforts should be made by the school head to see that up – to-date curriculum of instruction is used in the school to guarantee quality and depth of knowledge .The contents should be monitored by the school head or his authorized assistant the vice principal (academic) daily, weekly and termly.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt about planning the curriculum and supervision of instruction in school.
You have understood how the syllabus is broken down into a yearly, timely and daily activities of learning.
You have also learnt that the school and class time tables show the distribution of school time.
The next unit will centre on monitoring and evaluating students and students' services in the school.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Prepare a daily routine for a boarding secondary school.
Remember to indicate the time and activities for the period from students' rise up to light out (bed time).
7.0 References Ojelabi,A.
(1981) A Guide to school Management.
Ibadan.
Valuta Educational Publishers.
Afolayan, T. A. F. (1989) Principalship: An Introduction to the Administration of Post-Primary Institutions in Nigeria Zaria.
Institute of Education.
118UNIT 14 MONITORING AND EVALUATING STUDENTS AND STUDENTS SERVICES.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Devices for Monitoring and Evaluating Students 3.1.1 Admission register 3.1.2 Attendance register 3.1.3 Rules and Regulations 3.1.4 Punishment book 1193.1.5 Continuous Assessment File 3.1.6 Students Record File 3.2.
Techniques of monitoring students services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Students are the must single important input into the school system.
Without them, the school cannot exist; It is on them that staff, particularly teachers, work to achieve the overall educational objectives.
This unit deals with the techniques of monitoring and evaluating students and students services.
The unit objectives which follow tells us what you should learn by the end of this unit.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
Describe some monitoring and evaluation devices used for students 2.
Explain techniques of monitoring student’s services.
3.1 Devices for monitoring and Evaluating Students There are several ways of monitoring student’s attendance and performance at school and class activities.
Some of these are described here.
3.1.1 Admission Register: It is a record book which shows the number of students by gender, full names, addresses, age, class and date of admission.
It is kept by the principal.
It assists the school to write accurate confidential reports on the student who enter his school to learn.
The progress of the student should be up to date in the admission register.
When a student is promoted from one class to another, this should be entered in the admission register in the columns provided.
3.1.2 School Attendance Register 120It contains the names of all students in a class.
It is usually kept by the class teacher and it is marked twice a day - in the morning before classes begin and in the afternoon before school closes, At the end of each week the principal calls for the attendance register and initials it.
He thus has a bird's eye view of the student’s attendance to school.
At the end of every term, the class teacher makes a summary of attendance for the whole period that school opens and this summary is included in the student's continuous assessment report for the term.
Sample Table 1: School Attendance Register S/NO Name 25/3/02 26/3/02 27/3/02 28/3/02 1 ABA, Sani V V 0 V 2.
ABBAS, Bello V V V V 3.
ADAMU, Sadiq 00 V 00 00 ALHAJI, Musa V V V V Note a stroke slanting to the left ( ) shows attendance in the morning, a stroke slanting to the right (/) indices attendance .
in the afternoon.
A full day's attendance looks like (V) .A sign of (0) indicates absence.
The class teacher should be honest and sincere in keeping this record for it will help him in making valid judgments and decision in respect of the student.
It also helps to trace or in trouble and and decision in respect of the student.
It the attendance of a student who is backward or in trouble and this needs the teacher's help.
3.1.3 Rules and Regulations These are provided to each student on admission into the school.
The rules help to guide and monitor students behaviour and conduct in school.
A sample is shown below.
Breaking school rules attract punishment which range from grass cutting, sweeping a portion of the school premises, washing the school toilets to suspension or outright expulsion from school in cases of very serious offences.
But the Federal Ministry of Education has to be 121informed of the nature of offence and a report of the investigating panel/committee before a student can be expelled from the school.
SAMPLE OF SCHOOL RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNMENT GIRLS SECONDARY SCHOOL DOGON BAUCHI, P, M. B, 1022.
SABON GARI ZARIA.
RULES AND REGULATIONS All students are required to be polite, obedient, industrious and punctual.
Any act whether mentioned in the rules or not which offends good manners or common sense, will be treated as a breach of the school's rules.
Ignorance of these rules or any other will not be accepted as an excuse.
1.0 SCHOOL UNIFORM 1.1 School uniform must be worn to class with brown sandals and white socks.
1.2 Students should either plait or cut their hair, perming or braiding with attachment is strictly prohibited offenders will have their hair cut.
1.3 Lipstick, nail polish and any form of make up is not allowed including henna (lalle) nail painting.
1.4 Small earnings and a wrist watch are allowed for use in the school.
Large or enlarging earings and bangles are not allowed.
2.0 RESUMPTION/ATTENDANCE TO SCHOOL Students must resume back to school on the stipulated dates, late comers will be punished accordingly.
2.2 Students must be punctual to school and attendance to class is compulsory.
Sick students should be left at home and such cases should be reported to the school immediately.
2.3 No student is allowed to leave the school premises without permission from the school authority.
3.0 CO-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 3.1 All students must enroll in three clubs of their choice including one religious society.
3.2 No new club or society may be formed without the knowledge and approval of the principal.
3.3 Games are compulsory for all students except where exemption is on medical grounds, which must be supported by a medical report from a Government Hospital.
1224.0 RELIGIOUS ACTIVITIES 4.1 Students are to abide by the teachings of their respective religions.
4.2 All students should respect one another’s religious beliefs, places of worship and religious books.
4.3 The Ministry stipulates that students should not change their religion while in school except with the consent of their parents.
5.0 GENERAL 5.1 All married women must register with the Vice principal Administration.
5.2 The school rules are applicable to all students both married and unmarried.
5.3 Any student that gets pregnant out of wed-lock will be expelled from the school.
5.4 All school property must be treated with care.
Any damage or loss will be paid for by the individual concerned.
5.5 Morning duties and general cleaning are compulsory for all students.
C 0 N G R A T U L A T 1 0 N S. Signed (P R I N C I PAL).
3.1.4 Punishment Book This book contains the records of all punishment given to students.
The name of the students and offence, and the time the offence was committed, the type of punishment given and the person who executed should all be recorded.
The set of punishments for breaking laid down rules and regulations are intended to be corrective rather than punitive.
Strict enforcement of rules and regulations or doling out prescribed punishments from a rigid "code" is not necessarily dealing with discipline problems.
3.1.5 Continuous Assessment File This is based on a systematic approach that identifies and specifies learning out comes.
It is based on student’s classroom learning.
It enables the school system to determine what a student has gained from a series of learning experiences presented to him by his teacher.
The continuous assessment system is now in use at all the various levels of Education in Nigeria.
The recognition stems from the fact that the single - shot final examination given 123to students is inadequate to sufficiently assess all that a student has learned at the end of an academic term.
Thus, the continuous assessment, a method which evaluated the student on what he has been taught from the beginning to the end, is necessary in order to objectively and adequate appraise the level of adequately achievement of the students.
Therefore, the principal should ensure that not only are students continuously assessed, but also that assessment tests reflect the contents and objectives of units of the syllabus taught.
3.1.6 Students Record Files Each student in the school must have a file which contains useful and detail information concerning him.
The file contains confidential records about the student such as: Admission letter, birth certificate, and record of his entrance examination and interview to get into the school.
The record are kept in the principal's office and are made available only to authorized persons.
The records are usually kept in an alphabetical order.
Exercise 1.1 Identify some devices for monitoring and evaluating students in school.
Answer Kit 1, Admission register 2.
Attendance register 3.
Rules and regulations 4.
Continuous assessment record.
3.2 Techniques of Monitoring Students Services Student services available in school include: 1.
Welfare service in the area of accommodation, feeding, health and security, 2.
Guidance and counseling services to solve students academic and personal problems 3.
The curriculum - teaching and learning activities.
4.
School library services.
In order to monitor and evaluate these services staff members are delegated such duties as: i House master/mistress ii Class tutor iii Year group tutor 124 iv Games master v Guidance - Counseling master vi Food supervisor In addition, students are appointed as prefects to oversee the conduct of their colleagues in various activities.
These prefects ensure the students attendance and good behaviour to the school activities.
The prefects include: Head boy/girl, food prefects, class prefects, labour prefects, games prefects, library prefect and health prefect.
They assist the school administration in ensuring that the needs of students in these areas are fully met.
The school also has various committees consisting of teachers and other categories of staff in the school.
The committees ensure that decision making is decentralized in the school and is spread across the rank and file of the school system.
4.0 Conclusion Students are the most important input into a school system.
The methods of monitoring and evaluating their activities are contributory factors to the moral and emotional development of the student.
Their academic performance is equally dependent on the techniques used to monitor and evaluate them.
It is therefore, imperative for the principal to ensure proper use of devices available to the school.
5.0 Summary This unit has described the devices used by the school to monitor and evaluate students in the different school activities.
The role of teachers, principal and students themselves in the motoring and evaluation exercise were described.
Some of the services available for students in the school were enumerated.
6.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment What are some of the main factors of student crisis in the secondary school?
How can these be stemed?
7.0 References Ojelabi, A.
(1981) A Guide to School Management.
Valuta Educational Publishers.
I badan.
125Enaohwo, J.
0. and Eferakeya, O.A.
(1989) Educational Administration.
Ibadan.
Paperpack Publishers.
UNIT 15 MONITORING AND APPRAISAL OF SCHOOL FINANCE TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Book Keeping in school 3.1.1 Vote book 3.1.2 Vouchers 3.1.3 Local Purchase Orders (LPO.)
1263.1.4 Cash Book 3.1.5 Petty Cash 3.1.6 Cheque Book 3.1.7 Journal 3.1.8 Financial Ledgers 3.2 Security of Funds 3.3 Procedure for expending school funds 3.4 Accountability of school finance 3.5 Basic Accounting Processes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit deals with the issue of accountability of the school principal in school finance.
Management of finance is a vital task for the school head.
Most of the time, the funds made available is below his needs for the school.
It means that he has to develop skills in monitoring and accounting for what has been made available.
In this unit you will learn about book keeping, how to provide security for the funds and be able to account for these at the end.
You will also learn about some basic accounting procedures to build up your skill and knowledge in the area of school financial management.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able: 1. engage in accounts book keeping in the school 2. identify the procedure for expending school funds 3. explain accounting procedures in the management of school funds 4. display some knowledge of management and controlling of school funds.
3.1 Book - keeping in School In order to facilitate accountability and keep records and to enhance planning and overall financial performance, the school must keep clear and accurate 127information of all its financial transactions.
This is called book-keeping some of the books of accounts kept in the school include the ones described below.
3.1.1 Vote Book This is a book in which records of items and amounts of money approved to be expended per term are kept.
This book should be consulted before spending is undertaken, as it is a safeguard against over-spending in any one area.
3.1.2 Vouchers Before payments are made, vouchers have to be written.
A voucher explains the reasons and authority for the expenditure.
A school should have and keep vouchers showing the details of financial transactions in the school.
3.1.3 Local Purchase Orders (LPO) The LPO is used for identifying and authorizing local purchases voted for in the school.
This is an agreement made between the school and a supplier that the school is willing and ready to purchase the item at an agreed price.
The IPO book should always be kept under lock and key as some bad elements may use it wrongly.
3.1.4 Cash Book This is the book where all cash transactions are recorded each day.
3.1.5 Petty cash Book Money which is disbursed for official purposes is recorded in the petty cash book.
3.1.6 Cheque Book A cheque is a written order directing the bank or banker to pay money as therein stated.
One should insist on obtaining receipts for any payments made by the school.
Where official receipts are not available, it is advisable to use petty cash vouchers to serve as written statements supporting the expenditure.
3.1.7 Journal It is very important for a school head to record all financial transactions in the journal.
The journal has to be written every day.
This is the first step of the accounting cycle of the school.
See figure 1 which follows.
3.1.8 Financial Ledgers These are books where the head of the school posts the information provided in the journals.
The purpose of ledgers is for recording the financial transactions of a school as they occur.
128Figure 1: Sample of Journal Entries Receipt Amount Date Purpose Number N : k 5/5/2001 20 packets of school chalk No.
543 350.00 10 chalk board dusters No.
541.
100.00 10/5/2001 25 packets of Envelopes No.
128 3000.00 8 packets of Office Pins No, 129 400.
00 5 packets of ball pens (assorted colours) No.
731 500.00 Exercise 1.1 1.
List other books of accounts which may be kept in your school.
2.
What are their uses?
Answer Kit 1. a) Trial balance b) Financial Statements c) Balance Sheet d) Income Statement e) Black Book f) General Stores Inventory Book.
2 They are used as stated below: a) Trial balance: This is the list of all the accounts used by the school.
It is used to sum summarize the effect of all transactions on the school accounts and show how it is being used.
Trial balance help heads to know the balance of each account and whether the school's records match those of the bank.
Also, they help to check whether budgets are being adhered to.
b) Financial Statements: These are the statement made by the head to convey information on the financial position of the school at a particular time.
Often they are presented to the board of governors for discussion.
c) Balance Sheet: This is the financial statement produced at the end ofthe school year which shows the financial position of the school.
The normal practice is that the head of the school submits the balance sheet to the authority that approves the school budget.
129d) Income Statement: The income statement summarizes the extent to which profits or losses in an account are occurring.
In it, revenues and expenditure are compared in order to project the profits or losses.
It is also prepared at the end of the financial year.
e) Black Book: This is the record of the outstanding debts of the school.
f) General Stores Inventory Book: This is a book where records of equipment and tools are kept.
The purpose of this book is to enable the school administration to keep track of school property and plan for the future supply of such property whenever needed.
The items should be clearly arranged.
Provision should be made to record both acquisitions and dispositions of items kept.
The head has to ensure that no items are stolen or sold out, and that an item which should last one month does in fact do so.
In this book acquisitions and dispositions resulting from deployment in equipment are posted from books of inventories.
3.2 Security of Funds Care Must taken to ensure that monies received into the school are safely handled and expended only by authorized person as officially planned.
1.
Receiving Funds Cash or sensitive books of account must be kept under lock and key and, if possible in a strong safe to guard against fire, theft, burglary, forgery and pests.
2.
During Banking You must ensure that you carefully fill in banking forms and retain and file copies of the deposit forms.
You should also take note of the following: a) Bank Statements/Bank Reconciliation: These must be received on a monthly basis and compared with what is in the ledger and these must agree.
Any discrepancies must be reported to the bank manager immediately b) Account Balance: The bursar or school accountant should always ask for the account balance when he comes to the 130bank.
This account must be signed by the manager and the accountant and not the ledger keepers.
c) Bank Staff: The bursar should avoid getting used to one bank staff member doing everything as this encourages forgery, or complicity.
d) Stop Payments: Once the cheque is misplaced or has some leaves missing, immediate report should be made to the bank to stop payment, otherwise the money can be paid to wrong persons.
Exercise 1.2 1.
Where do you keep your money (cash) in the school?
2.
What safety precautions does your school have?
3.
What financial risks are likely to occur in your school?
Answer Kit 1.
May be you have a well secured safe or strong room.
2.
The school head office is well secured with burglary proof etc.
; the school has 24 hours security guards who keep watch over the school throughout the day and night; the wall around the school is high and strong with strong iron gates etc 3.
May be fire disaster, theft by experienced robbers etc.
3.3 Procedure for Expending School Funds This is referred to as the implementation stage of the budget or budget administration.
In practice, this is the execution of planned school programmes with proper expenditure of funds as shown in the approved budget.
The budget becomes a very important document for managing the finances of the school.
Before beginning to implement it, you need to explore its structure so that you understand its basic requirements, the opportunities and challenges it may present.
Exercise 1.3 1.
Reflect on your experience as a school principal, find out the following.
i The procedure for expending school funds in your state.
ii.
Current financial regulations on the management of school funds.
iii.
The authority which issues the regulations.
1312.3Study your findings and indicate how they assist you in performing your function or whether they create problems.
Answer Kit The findings will be personal and should assist the learner to improve his skills in the area of expending school funds.
'The procedures for expending school funds are usually as follows; 1.
Regulations The Ministry of Education issues specific instructions with regard to the spending of and accounting for funds.
For example: i.
Funds released by the Ministry of Education for one purpose should not be diverted for another purpose.
If the need for expenditure arises, contrary to the approved budget, written authority should be sought from the Federal Ministry of Education or the governing body or PTA.
ii It gives guidance on how much you can spend within the usual procedure on a particular item.
iii It compels you to obtain approved authority for spending on an item.
iv All expenditure incurred should be recorded in an acceptable manner according to the Standard Accounting Practice (S.A.P.).
2.
Procurement Procedures It is advisable to use a committee on purchasing to control expenditure.
If there are any goods or materials to be purchased for the school, this committee would advise on the proper manner to do this.
3.
Proforma Invoice A proforma invoice is issued when payment is made before goods are delivered.. 4.
Order Forms or Delivery Notes 132The purchase of goods, furniture or maintenance works should be done by order forms or delivery notes.
You must ensure that goods and services ordered are delivered before signing the delivery notes.
5.
A Cheque This is made to ensure that the order to pay is legal.
You should check if the payment claimed was effected; that goods/ services paid for were delivered; and that the transaction was properly recorded.
It is improper for you to ask the chairman of the board of governors/PTA executive committee to sign a blank cheque or for a cheque to bear only the signature of yourself and the bursar.
6.
Financial Flexibility If flexibility is possible, the total amount of money available to the school can be enlarged and better value gained.
It can be done in two ways: (i) Borrowing of funds from one vote to another: Internal borrowing is justifiable because underspent accounts can compensate for overspent accounts.
For example, maintenance of vehicles (a very expensive item) may lead to borrowing from general accounts.Internal borrowing also helps to counteract uncontrolled prices and inflation.
However, such adjustment must be done with the approval of the governing body.
(ii) Carrying Balances Forward: An increasing number of institutions carry forward unspent capitation from one year to another; and over- spending is carried forward as a deficit to be paid off next year.
There are three advantages of this practice: 1 Institutions can plan their expenditure if necessary outside the limits of one financial year, 2.
There is no risk of losing unspent fund, 3.
School spends less time on administration of funds, because there is no longer any need to balance expenditure exactly against income.
Exercise 1.5 From what you have read in this section of the unit, write answers to the following: 1.
Name the items on which a school spends money.
1332.
Give reasons why there is need for you to be flexible in financial management, 3.
Name 2 ways of effecting financial flexibility.
Answer Kit 1.
Stationery, Chalk, duster, chemicals for experiments in the laboratories, repairs of school furniture ect.. 2.
It helps school head to avoid overspending.
3 One way is by borrowing of funds from one vote to another second way is by carrying balance forward.
3.4 Accountability of School Finance Definitions Accounting: This involves checking to ensure that the order to pay is legal, that payment is effected and recorded in the general financial account covering all money spent in accordance with the budget.
Financial Information: This is not useful unless it is expressed in monetary terms like internationally acceptable currencies, such as dollars, pound sterling, yen, etc.
or local currencies, such as the naira.
Accountability: This refers to budget control.
It is the evaluation and guidance of budget administration activities through out the school's fiscal year.
Budget Control: This acts as a device for assuming accountability to prevent misappropriation, embezzlement and illegal spending of funds.
It deals with monetary records which keep account of how money is spent, and therefore help, planning for the future.
The importance of financial records Financial records are records of day-to-day financial operations in a normal situation in school administration.
These records are important because: - They are the basis for decision-making on any financial matters.
- They provide a means of tracking the growth or decline of the school's assets or liabilities.
- They form the basis for determining the value (appreciation or depreciation) of school property.
- They are guidelines to indicate the financial position of the school.
134Budgetary Records They are systematic ways of accounting for budget implementation by keeping basic records.
The following documents are essential for a school or college for the effective handling of funds: Receipt books All payment and receipts should be presented with the proper evidence.
You should have receipt books whose leaves/pages must be numbered to enable the detection of lost leaves or receipts.
Receipts should be issued at least in duplicate for money received for example, fees.
They must also be received for money paid out.
The receipt is the first evidence of cash spent or received.
The voucher This can be in book form or in loose sheet which can be filed.
It is a document detailing the purpose of any payment made, the date of the payment, the amount, the budgetary vote or item within which the expenses is being incurred and the authority that has sanctioned the payment.
Note that: 1.
The voucher has to be written and signed first before money is released, 2.
It must bear a number that can be quoted.
3.
Receipts obtained after purchases must be attached to the voucher.
4.
This document informs one as to how public money has been used.
The cash book This is a book into which information is entered on a daily basis, giving details of money received, such as fees and money paid out, such as for buying school chalk.
This book balanced daily so that cash received that day must be against cash spent on the same day.
That way, you are immediately aware of the day's collections and spending.
Cheques received or paid out all from part of the day’s income and expenditure respectively.
A log book or journal 135As financial controller you should open a log book in which all financial transactions are recorded each day.
This book can be referred to as a journal, that is a record of financial transactions done on a daily basis.
Financial ledgers For records of account to be meaningful, information from the journal should be posted in ledgers.
These account books record the gains and money spent by the school on particular days.
The record emphasises the items in the income and expenditure side and the net balance for that date.
The following are the types of ledgers operated in school and colleges: The General Ledger This is a book that contains all major items of the budget, for example, food, lighting, stationery.
Few pages are allocated to each budget item and on these pages are recorded the daily expenses made under the particular item.
An example is given in figure 2.
Note that all information in receipt books, vouchers and cash books have ended up in the ledger.
It offers a clear picture as to which items are frequently purchased.
The Fees Ledger This ledger records all information on each student's fees payment, that is date, amount, total paid to date and balance outstanding, or carried forward.
At a glance it is easy to assess the extent of fee collection, to obtain a list of fees defaulters and know accurately how much fee(money) is still outstanding.
The information has to be recorded as soon as the fees are paid in order to avoid problems caused by the loss or misplacement of receipt books or accumulation of work.
Figure 2 Example of a General Ledger Date VOUCHER FOOD EXPENSES N K 08/5/01 192/8 Beans (2 bags) 8,000 50 12/5/01 192/8 Oil (4Cooking Tins 10,600 25 07/6/01 193/50 Sugar (2 bags) 4,450 75 Credit Ledger/Black Book 136This is a book that contains the list of the school’s debtors, the amount owed to the school by each, dates when settlement was made and the outstanding amount still to be paid.
It is necessary to keep checking this book to ensure that your school has recovered what is due to it.
You ensure this by keeping the entries in the book up-to-date.
Vote Book This is a book which essentially shows how much is left of the vote for an item.
It records the total amount voted for the item as per the budget, the daily purchases made under that item and the balance left after these purchases.
It makes it easy for you to see whether you are overspending or not and is a particularly useful check on high spending.
It is, therefore, advisable that you maintain a Vote Book.
You will find an example in Figure 3.
Figure 3 Example of a Vote Book ITEM VEHICLE MAINTENANCE VOTE N100,000.OOK DATE PURCHASES AMOUNT BALANCE 07/9/2000 2 tyres N12,500 87,500 01/10/200 30 litres of Petrol 660 86,840 17/11/2000 2 new headlamps 2P500 84,340 25/11/2000 New Windscreen 10,750 73,590 The Green Book This is a book that lists all those who have been given money for purchasing, the amount given and all the details related to it.
General Stores Inventory Book Apart from Teachers' Houses, Inventory Book and a Book Stores Inventory Book, you should maintain a General Stores Inventory Book where equipments like slashers, hoes, etc.
are recorded.
The purpose of these inventory books is to enable the school administration (you) to keep track of school property and make replacements accordingly.
Exercise 1.4 1371.
Write out a payment voucher for your food supplier.
2.
Outline the procedures and the accounts books used in your school for recording: i) a payment in (e.g.
fees).
ii) a payment out.
3.
Indicate how you would use a cash book.
Answer Kit The responses will depend on what you (the learner) do in the school as a financial manager.
3.5 Basic Accounting Processes Once you know how to keep the account books properly, you can turn your attention to thinking about how to analyze the financial data now available.
To do this you should know the basic accounting processes.
These are: - Preparation of financial statements such as: income statements, balance sheets, reconciliation statements and flow of funds statements.
etc, - analysis and preparation of financial statements to arrive at hidden facts and draw corresponding conclusions, - Preparation of comprehensive financial reports, - Rendering of financial advice on decisions to be made in the light of the conclusions reached.
In practice, to be able to perform the above functions, as the accounting officer of the school, your duty is to initiate financial plans for your board of governors or PTA to adopt.
You are at the centre of the school's financial plan and therefore you need to help those with whom you work to formulate proper plans.
If that is achieved, then your job of mobilizing funds becomes relatively easy.
Remember, no parent will contribute more money to the school if the plans are not well defined.
Note that knowledge of accounting will assist you in the day to day management of the funds of the school.
It is important so that you have some insight into the financial planning and organization of your school's finances.
Trial Balance 138We first look at the Trial Balance as is an important tool in accounting and gives a list of all the accounts used by the school at the appropriate value and time.
Its main purpose is to enable you to know precisely the balance in each account at say fortnightly or weekly intervals.
This enables you to know at any point of the fiscal year which items are being deflected first, It helps you to put a brake on if you are spending too fast on one item.
The School Balance Sheet This is the most important financial document for the school.
It is a financial statement of the school at a given date.
It must reveal all the assets and liabilities of the school at a particular time, for instance, at the end of the financial Year.
Before you proceed, ensure that three of the accounting terms used in the Balance Sheet are clear.
The importance of a school's Balance Sheet lies in the revelation of all the assets and liabilities of the school at the date in question, The terms financial statement, assets and liabilities should therefore be understood in the context of the Balance Sheet to mean the following: Financial Statements These show at a glance the amount spent on various items.
They convey the financial status (blue or red) of the school at a particular time.
Assets These are the properties or belongings of the school which appear in the Balance Sheet.
They may be classified as long or short term assets, namely fixed or current assets.
Liabilities These are the debts or claims of outsiders against the belongings of the school as at the date when the Balance Sheet is drawn up.
They too can be long term or short term in nature, namely fixed or current liabilities.
You may wish to make a quarterly Balance Sheet, or an annual one depending on the practical problems of your school.
Some heads make it monthly.
Annual accounts and Balance Sheet have to be prepared and a copy sent to the MoE at the end of every financial year.
Balance Sheets should be the main financial concern of a new school head.
If you look at a school balance sheet, you should be able to see: 139- The total value of fixed assets, - The total value of current assets, - The sources of funds, - The debts to which would you give immediate attention, - Debts which require payment but not in the near future, - The total value of assets possessed by the school and how much of this is claimed by outsiders.
Note that: 1.
Changes in your financial plan will cause changes in the school Balance Sheet.
2.
Such changes should be recorded systematically in the record books already referred to.
3.
The Balance Sheet requires the proper keeping of all records account such as receipts, vouchers, inventories, ledgers, etc.
4.0 Conclusion You must be familiar with the State Financial Regulations and you should keep strictly to these regulations.
Your success as a financial manager in the school will go a long way to determine your worth, credibility and the trust reposed in you by your employers, your subordinates and the general public.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt about: • expending and accounting for school money, • the procedure for expending school funds, • the financial regulations of your Ministry of Education, • the need to exercise flexibility in the management of funds, • the importance of maintaining proper financial records, • the operation of proper and regular school balance sheets, • the need for a good financial plan., 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Explain the procedures for expending school funds.
7.0 References Federal Ministry of Education (1993).
Better Schools Management: Head Teacher Education and Resource Material Lagos.
F.M.E.
140UNIT 16 TECHNIQUES OF SCHOOL SELF-EVALUATION TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The need for school self-evaluation 3.2 Areas that may be evaluated 1413.3 Devices for evaluating the school 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor - marked assignment 7.0 References.
1.0 Introduction Principals who are socially and professionally committed usually consider a periodic self - analysis of all or parts of their schools' activities essential.
The focus of this unit is the techniques of school self-evaluation.
The need for such an evaluation is examined, the areas that may be evaluated are described and devices for evaluating the school are enumerated.
Let us take a look at the objectives below in order to see what you would learn in this unit.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. explain the rationale for a school evaluating itself 2. identify areas of the school that can be evaluated 3. describe devices used for school self – evaluation 3.1 The need for school self - evaluation There is need for a periodic self - analysis of the activities of a school.
Such an analysis has the advantages involving the entire school staff in evaluation, increasing inter-departmental understanding; bringing into focus the quality of the work of the constituent parts of the school; and highlighting the weaknesses and strengths of the school system, If properly planned and executed, analysis can lead to discoveries that are more comprehensive and thorough, and more enlightening and useful than the familiar reports which usually follow the inspections made by government inspectors.
Evaluation determines the effectiveness or otherwise school programmes and activities.
This is why principals should endeavour to improve their competence in this area.
School’s self evaluation calls for the definition of what is to be evaluated.
For example, if the library is evaluated, the evaluators might assess the effectiveness of the scope of the collection, and its size, the selection of materials, and their organization, maintenance and 142administration.
When these aspects have been identified, and defined, the basis of judgment and the kind of data to be collected must ascertained.
Data collected should involve all the staff, which can be divided into groups each assigned to investigate a particular aspect.
Self evaluation often ends with the collection of the recommendations and comments from all these groups, The final document then becomes the guide for the course of action to be taken during the next few weeks, months or even years after which another self-evaluation can be carried out.
In addition, follow up information can be obtained from ex-students of the school to seek the opinions of former students.
This can assist schools to improve on current practices.
3.2 Areas that may be evaluated Some of the areas or parts of the school that may be evaluated are: 1.
The school calendar - this is determined by the State government through its agent, the Ministry of Education if the school finds that students' performance is poor, it may decide to extend the calendar by giving students remedial instructions during the weeks or the holidays.
2.
Channels of communication within and out-side school 3.
Library 4.
Laboratories 5.
School plant, facilities, equipment and materials 6.
Staff performance and services 7.
Public and human relations 8.
The staff strength - to know they are of deficiencies 9.
Teaching-learning process - to see how well teachers have been able to pass instruction to students and, to know how much students have learned.
10.
The academic performance of students both in internal as well as external examinations 11.
The school project - to know what new buildings, equipments and materials the school has been able to add to its stock during the year.
Exercise 1.1 Can you think of any other areas of the school that can be evaluated?
Answer Kit 143P.T.A., curriculum and instruction, school-community relations, rules and regulations governing staff and students’ conduct, inspection reports.
3.3 Devices for evaluating the school The techniques and devices for evaluating the performance and effectiveness are as follow: 1.
Follow up studies and information of ex-students 2.
Survey studies 3.
Questionnaire 4.
Interview 5.
Appraisal performance instrument 6.
School records 7.
Comments on inspection report 8.
Informal and formal comments from parents and members of the school community 9.
Students academic performance/results In addition to these, the school principal can make use of the monitoring devices available and used by the school to evaluate its performance and effectiveness.
Some of the monitoring devices include: i School Calendar ii School/class attendance register for students and teachers iii Staff movement book iv Staff meeting minutes book v Internal memo vi Rules and regulation to control and govern students' behaviour and ensure discipline vii Store ledger to keep record of school materials and equipments.
viii Inventory file (containing a list of all items, materials and equipments in the school ix Store Receipt Voucher (SRV) x Store Issue Voucher (SIV) Exercise 1.2 What are some other devices to evaluate the school?
Answer Kit 1.
Cash receipts 1442.
Subject attendance register signed by teacher when he goes to teach his lesson in class 3.
Log book 4 Punishment book 5 Tests, examination etc.
(Continuous Assessment) 4.0 Conclusion School activities must be evaluated from time to time.
The evaluation could include the continuous examination of the effects produced by the ways in which teaching, learning and administrative activities are performed.
The procedural steps are: 1.
The determination of the purpose of the evaluation 2.
The definition of the areas to be evaluated 3.
The establishment of the evaluation criteria, and the collection of the data with which to measure what the evaluator wants to discover.
5.0 Summary There are several personnel/agencies that do evaluate the school on regular basis.
However, it is advisable for a school to conduct a self- evaluation on the entire system or school to enable it grows.
This unit has discussed the rationale for school self assessment, areas that can be assessed and the techniques that the school can use in such evaluation.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment Conduct a self-evaluation of the following areas of your school system: 1.
School Library 2.
School Biology Laboratory 3.
School Academic Performance 7.0 References Ehiametalor, E,T, and Aderounmu, 0.
W. (1981) Introduction to Administration of Schools in Nigeria, Lagos.
Longman.
145
