 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDU 726 COURSE TITLE: ECONOMICS METHODSEDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS COURSE GUIDE EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Course Developer Dr. E. O. Adu Teacher Education Department University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Course Writers Dr. E. O. Adu Teacher Education Department University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Mr. T. O. Ajadi School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Dr J.O Adeagbo School of Arts and Social Sciences Oyo state college of Education Oyo.
Course Co-ordinator Mr E.C Ibara School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr.I.O Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University Of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island ii EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites E-Mail: Centralinfo@Nou.Edu.Ng URL: Www.Nou.Edu.Ng National Open University Of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-687-3 All Rights Reserved Printed By …………….. For National Open University Of Nigeria iii EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS TABLE OF CONTENT PAGE Introduction …………………………………………….... 1 Course Aims ……………………………………………... 1 Course Objectives ……………………………………….. 1 - 2 Working through this Course …………………………….
2 The Course Material ……………………………………... 2 Study Units ……………………………………………….
2 - 3 Textbooks ………………………………………………... 3 Assessment ……………………………………………….
4 Tutor Marked Assignment ……………………………….
4 Summary ………………………………………………… 4 -5 Introduction The course will consist of 14 units divided into 3 modules which give the students basic knowledge of economics education.
The course spreads through areas like economics education in Nigeria secondary school, scope of economics education, methods and techniques of teaching economics.
Studying economics is like studying our daily life because in economics activities, the individual does job to earn a living and study his many wants or needs which include food, clothing, housing and so on.
For example, there are individual farmers, business people and other workers who produce goods and services to satisfy the needs of consumers.
The government strives to provide services for the welfare of the citizens in the state.
Nations trade among themselves, and many international organizations exist to promote the economic well- being of mankind.
Course Aims The aim of this course can be summarized as follows: to provide an understanding and appreciation of some economic concepts that enhance values in learners so that they can contribute meaningfully to the growth and development of the society in which they find themselves, and in the educational system in particular.
Course Objectives To achieve these aims, the course has overall objectives being synthesized from the specific objectives of each unit.
After going through this course, you should be able to: • Explain the concept economics and economics education • Identify the causes of the late coming and acceptance of economics into the secondary schools curriculum iv EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS • Discuss the trends involved in the introduction of economics in Nigerian secondary school • Describe the status of secondary school economics • Identify the importance of economics education • Discuss the practical and theoretical problems facing teaching of economics.
• Explain the approaches to the preparation of economics syllabus and enumerate the pitfalls of syllabus construction • Explain the principles guiding the preparation of lesson notes • Highlight the main features of lesson notes • Itemize the guiding principles for innovative approach • Describe the evolutions of teaching methods for economics • Compare lecture method and assignment method • Explain discussion methods • Discuss how best to use discussion method • State the important of using a resource person to teach • Discuss the various types of evaluation • Identify reason for formative evaluation • Describe scheme of work • Discuss the relationship between objective and evaluation • Identify the distinguishing qualities or characteristics of a good and effective economics teacher Working through the Course The course involves that you must have read the study units, text books and other materials prescribed.
Each unit also contain tutor marked assignment questions for which you need to put great effort in studying them in order to have personal assessment in the course.
Assignments and class exercises will be given periodically and they are very important later the final examination will be conducted after the completion of the course.
The Course Material The major components of the course are; • Course outline • Course guide • Study units • Recommended textbooks Study Units v EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS There are three modules comprising units in this course, they are as follows: Module 1 Economics Education in Nigeria Secondary School Unit 1 Concepts of economics and economics education Unit 2 Status of secondary school education Unit 3 Economics education in Nigerian secondary school.
Unit 4 Importance and problem facing economics teaching Unit 5 Preparation of economics syllabus and pitfalls of syllabus construction Module 2 Unit 1 Planning Units and Unit Planning Unit 2 Planning the course Unit 3 Evaluation and guiding principle of teaching methods Unit 4 Preparation for teaching economics Module 3 Unit 1 Economics teaching method I Unit 2 Economics teaching method II Unit 3 Student teaching practice Unit 4 Evaluation strategies in economics Unit 5 Qualities of a good and effective economics teaching and class room management .
Each unit consists of introduction, objectives, the content, conclusion, summary, tutor marked assignment, recommended text books.
Exercises are also provided to assist you in achieving the stated objectives in each unit.
Text Books There are some text books you should try and read for you own benefit and expansion of knowledge.
Some of them are listed below Adu, E.O.
(2004); An Introduction to economics education.
A basic text for tertiary institution students, Ibadan, ERSG.
Clark, M. (1973); The principles of teaching Economics.
Heineman Educational Books Nig Ltd vi EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Dada, A.
(1999); The teacher and the Curriculum Ibadan; Tegama Printer Ltd. .
Ehiametalor E.T (1985): Classroom management .Guide to Evaluation and methods.
Evans Bro Nig.
Ltd Segun Ajiboye et al (2005) Introduction to social studies.
A basic text for tertiary institution students.
Ibadan, ERSG Tunde Samuel et al (1992) Economics for senior secondary schools.
Nelson publishers Limited Assessment There are two components of assessment for this course.
The tutor marked assignment (TMA) and one end of course examination Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) TMA is the continuous assessment component of the course.
It accounts for 30% of the total course.
It is desirable if you can write a good assignment to demonstrate the knowledge you have acquired.
Make sure the assignment get to your facilitator on or before the expiration date.
Get in touch with your facilitator in case you would not be able to submit your TMA at the stipulated time.
End of Course Examination This examination concludes the assessment for the course.
It constitutes 70% of the whole course.
You will be informed of the time for the examination.
Summary This course intends to provide you with some underlying knowledge of economics education.
By the time you complete studying this course, you will be able to answer the following type of questions: 1.
Differentiate between economics and economics education 2.
What are the reasons advanced for the late coming of economics in secondary schools?
3.
Explain the factors responsible for the acceptance of economics into secondary schools curriculum vii EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 4.
Give a vivid picture of the trend and position of economics in secondary school curriculum 5.
Discuss the reasons why economics has not been given its rightful status.
6.
Discuss the theoretical problems facing the teaching of economics in secondary school 7.
How can the teaching syllabus bridge the gap between examination syllabus and the teaching method?
8.
Discuss the approaches for the preparation of syllabus.
Which one do you prefer?
9.
What are the pitfalls of economics syllabus construction?
How do you guide against these pitfalls?
10.
Explain the principles guiding the preparation of lesson notes 11.
Highlight the main features of a lesson notes 12.
Identify the guiding principles for innovative approaches 13.
Explain the contributions of the following Greeks and Philosophers to the evolution of teaching method: 14.
Plato 15.
Aristotle 16.
Socrates 17.
Vittorino de Feltre 18.
Heinrich Pestalozzi 19.
Johann Frederic Herbat 20.
Friedrich Froebel 1.
Differentiate between whole class and small group discussion method 2.
What are the merits and demerit of role-play method?
3.
What are the merits and demerit of discussion method?
4.
What are the importance of using resource person to teach economics?
5.
How can a teacher prepare for field trip/ excursion?
6.
How best can a teacher use lecture method?
7.
Identify some merits and demerits of problem solving method 8.
Differentiate between project and problems solving methods.
9.
Identify merits and demerits of projects methods 10.
What is a scheme of work 11.
Enumerate at least five merits and demerits of inquiry methods 12.
What is a lesson plan?
13.
Compare and contract the three concepts; Measurement, Assessment and Evaluation 14.
Explain the direct relationship between the objective and the teacher’s evaluation procedures.
15.
Identify reasons for formative evaluation viii EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 16.
Differentiate between formative and summative evaluation 17.
Identify the distinguish characteristics of an economics teacher Note that the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above listed questions.
You should try to apply your practical experiences to some other questions that may arise.
We wish you success in this course, in particular, we hope you will be able to appreciate economics education and the teaching techniques/methods used to impart knowledge for expansion.
ix EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Course Code EDU 726 Course Title Economics Methods Course Developer Dr. E. O. Adu Teacher Education Department University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Course Writers Dr. E. O. Adu Teacher Education Department University of Ibadan Ibadan, Oyo State Mr. T. O. Ajadi School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Dr J.O Adeagbo School of Arts and Social Sciences Oyo State College of Education Oyo Course Co-ordinator Mr E.C.
Ibara School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island Lagos Programme Leader Dr I.O.
Salawu School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA x EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-699-7 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria xi EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ................................................................................... 1 Unit 1 Concept of Economics and Economics Education ............................................................. 1-5 Unit 2 Status of secondary school economics ................ 6-10 Unit 3 Economics Education in Nigeria Secondary School .................................................................. 11-17 Unit 4 Importance and problems facing Economics Teaching .............................................................. 18-23 Unit 5 Preparation of Economics Syllabus and pitfalls of Syllabus Construction ..................................... 24-27 Module 2 ................................................................................... 28 Unit 1 Teaching Unit and Units Planning ...................... 28-34 Unit 2 Planning the Course ............................................. 35-40 Unit 3 Evolution and Guiding Principles of Teaching Methods ............................................................... 41-44 Unit 4 Preparation for teaching Economics .................... 45-49 Module 3 ................................................................................... 50 Unit 1 Economics teaching Methods I ........................... 50-57 Unit 2 Economics teaching Methods II .......................... 58-65 Unit 3 Student Teaching Practice ................................... 66-72 Unit 4 Evaluation Strategies in Economics..................... 73-78 Unit 5 Qualities of a Good and Effective Economics .....
Teacher and Classroom management .................. 79-83 xii EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS MODULE 1 Unit 1 Concept of Economics and Economics Education Unit 2 Status of secondary school economics Unit 3 Economics Education in Nigeria Secondary School Unit 4 Importance and problems facing Economics teaching Unit 5 Preparation of Economics Syllabus and pitfalls of syllabus construction UNIT 1 CONCEPT OF ECONOMICS AND ECONOMICS EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The content 3.2 Definitions of economics 3.3 Economics Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor method assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In economics activities the individual does a job to earn a living to satisfy his many wants or needs of food, clothing, housing and son on.
For example, there are individual farmers, business people and other workers who produce goods or provide services for a living.
The firm produces goods or provides services to satisfy the need of consumers.
The government strives to provide services for the welfare of the citizen in the state.
Nations trade among themselves, and many international organizations exist to promote the economic well being of mankind.
In this unit, you will study the concepts of economics and economics education etc.
2.0OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Provide various definitions for economics 1 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS • Define economics education 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Content In view of the tremendous popularity which economics enjoys among secondary schools and students in Nigeria, one would have expected that the subject would be given a recognition which is commensurate with its popularity.
Unfortunately it cannot be claimed that economics has been given its rightful place in the secondary school curriculum in the country.
At least, economics is yet to achieve in Nigeria the mark of status which it should enjoy as a result of the large number of schools that teach it and the large number of candidates that offer it in examination.
3.2 Definitions of Economics Economics has as many definitions, as there are many economists.
This is because various economists see the subject from different points of view.
Some of them are interested in Monetary Economics while some are interested in Industrial Economics; some are interested in Business Economics, Welfare Economics, International Economics, and Economics of Education etc.
They therefore define economics to reflect their interest and this is why there is no definition of economics that is all–embracing.
Economists could also be influenced by the conditions prevailing at the time of writing.
For example, an economist writing during a period of economic recession may include aspects of it in his definition of economics.
Economics is basically the study of the allocation of resources among alternative uses to satisfy human wants.
It is concerned with the choice we make in using limited resources to satisfy these wants, and it deals with production, exchange, distribution as well as consumption of goods and services and of the conduct of various other economics activities by individuals, organizations and the state.
Below are some definitions of economics given by some economists.
The earliest definitions were in terms of wealth or material welfare.
Adams Smith was regarded as the father of economist because he was the one that laid the foundation of economics as a discipline.
He defined economics as an enquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of 2 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS nations.
Smith was interested in the wealth of political economies.
His main interest was to investigate the reasons why some countries are poor or under developed or others are rich or developed.
J.S Mill defined economics as “the practical science of production and distribution of wealth” He was interested in what determines the amount of wealth prossessed by an individual or how wealth is produced and shared out among the various members of the society.
While Davenport defined economics as “the science that treats phenomenon from the start point of price.” He was interested in exchange value i.e.
anything that has money value should come with the framework of economics.
A.C Pigou concluded that economics is “the science of material welfare”.
He was interested in consumption which is an aspect of welfare economics.
His concern was how to increase the material well- being/standard of living of man through increase in total production.
Alfred Marshall, a great Vectorian economist defined economics as “the study of mankind in the everyday business of life”.
He saw economics as the study of wealth on one side and the study of man on the other side.
Professor Lionel Robbins defines economics as “the science which studies human behaviour as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses”.
Robbins definition is the most widely acceptable definition of economics.
It is analytical and is the most scientific and most embracing.
It shows that: (i) Economics is a social science because it studies human behaviour.
(ii) Human wants are unlimited (iii) There are limited resources to satisfy the unlimited human wants (iv) Scarce resources are capable of being put to the alternative uses.
The more the individuals, the more a firm or the government allocates resources to one use, the less the resources available for other uses.
The definition provided by Robbins is concerned with scarcity and choice which are fundamental problems in the daily economic activity of man.
3 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Pause and provide a definition of your own for economics by synthesizing from the above definitions 3.3 Economics Education Economics education involves the use of appropriate teaching methodology in enhancing the understanding of economics as a concept and facilitates the in-depth residual knowledge of the learners in order to make them contribute meaningfully to the growth and development of the society.
Economics education involves imparting knowledge effectively by making use of learners centered approaches to promote learner self confidence in tackling economic problems SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Differentiate between economics and economics education 4.0 CONCLUSION The main focus of this unit is to create the awareness that both economics and economics education involve activities that bring about desirable changes in learners to satisfy learners needs and aspiration of getting along with others in the society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt: (i) Various definitions of economics and that economics is a social science that involves productions, consumption and distribution of goods and services.
(ii) Economics education promotes raport between teacher and learners so as to create an in-depth knowledge and understanding of some concepts in economics.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the most acceptable definitions of economics?
2.
In a layman’s language, define economics education.
4 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O and Ayeni A.O (1998): general Economics, Ibadan; Johnson Commercial press.
Adu E.O (2004): An Introduction to Economics Education, Ibadan; ERSG.
Tunde Samuel et al (1992): Nelson Economics for Senior Secondary Schools, Ikeja; Nelson Publishers Ltd .
5 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 2 STATUS OF SECONDARY SCHOOL ECONOMICS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Economics is concerned with human behaviour such as how people earn their living and make a choice between alternatives to satisfy their wants.
It focuses on the study of firms and the government whose activities are geared to the production of goods and services for the satisfaction of human want since economics is concerned with human behaviour.
So economics is a social science, and like any science subject, the reasoning procedure in economics is methodological, its analysis is systematic, and the validity of its various theories can be tested.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to identify reasons why economics has not been given its rightful status despite its popularity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Content In view of the tremendous popularity which economics enjoys among secondary schools and students in Nigeria, one would have expected that the subject would be given a recognition which is commensurate with its popularity.
Unfortunately, it cannot be claimed that economics has been given its rightful place in the secondary school curriculum in the country.
At least, economics is yet to achieve in Nigeria the mark of status which it should enjoy as a result of the large number of schools that teach it and the large number of candidates that offer it in examination.
6 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS A number of features are responsible for the low recognition of Economics.
They are as follows: i) Ministries of Education Attitudes The Ministries of Education in Nigeria show no interest in the subject.
There was a time when they appointed subject inspectors such as inspectors of Mathematics or English Language.
A survey was undertaken to determine whether inspectors were appointed for Economics by the various state ministries of education.
It was found that only three states, Bendel, Rivers and Kwara had inspectors for economics.
However, it was not certain whether they were appointed as inspectors of economics or they were just economics graduates who were appointed as inspectors of schools.
ii) No Conferences or Workshops for Economics Teacher.
Ministries of Education in the country have not thought it necessary to organize or sponsor refresher courses or workshops or even conferences for secondary school teachers of economics.
If and when economics is sufficiently recognized as a secondary school subject, the various state ministries of education should sponsor or organize conferences, workshops and refresher courses for secondary school teachers of economics as they have done for other secondary school subjects such as Nigeria language, history and sciences.
A subject which is taught by virtually all schools and offered in the examination by about 90% of all the candidates annually, should have been of special interest not only to principals of secondary schools but also to officers of the ministries.
iii) Community of Teacher Trainers Another evidence that the growth and importance of economics in secondary schools in Nigeria has not been recognized is that the community of teacher trainers has not considered economics important enough to give any serious thought to the training of teachers of economics despite its popularity and large enrolment.
iv) Few Colleges of Education and Universities offer Economics Education Until recently, only one University’s Faculty of Education i.e the Department of Teacher Education, University of Ibadan offer courses in Economics methods to undergraduate students and post graduate diploma in education.
Two other University Department’s of Education are known to have started to offer courses in economics methods.
7 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Similarly, of the numerous colleges of education in the country, only about few are known to offer courses in the teaching of economics.
v) No Contact between Economics in Secondary School and Economics in Universities/Colleges of Education If economics which is probably the most popular subject in the secondary school curriculum had been given its rightful place, there would have been some contact between secondary school teachers of economics and teachers of economics in Universities.
In many if not most of the universities in Nigeria, the department of economics have refused to recognize secondary school economics as economics partly on the grounds that the secondary school economics syllabus stresses descriptive economics.
vi) No Association of Secondary School Teachers of Economics in Nigeria.
All secondary school subjects which are regarded as established and important have associations for example; there are associations for subjects like English language, History, Geography and Sciences.
Even the teachers of French in Nigeria are known to have only a few secondary school students yet they have an association.
The points highlighted above can be regarded as institutional/professional factors responsible for the low recognition of Economics as a subject.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2.1 Wait a minute, why do you think association is very important?
Now, the association of subject teacher normally discusses the place of their respective disciplines, they search for ways of improving methods of teaching, they help to raise the status of their various subjects and they make provision for materials especially in those areas where they are scarce.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Can you please add more to the above reasons for association of subject teacher?
8 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS vii) Few Materials on the teaching of Economics The teaching of economics in Nigeria is characterized by many inadequacies.
Nigerian Secondary school teachers of economics have few materials on the teaching of economics to work with.
For example, audio-visual aids for the teaching of economics are either not available in sufficient quantity or that what is available is usually in- appropriate.
With the exception of a few, the economics textbooks written in Nigeria are badly written, sketchy, and lacking in in-depth for economics analysis.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Discuss the reasons why economics has not been given its rightful status.
4.0 CONCLUSION If the various ministries of Education in the Country do not seem to be interested in organizing vocation or refresher courses, workshops and conferences for secondary school teachers of economics they should do it themselves.
It cannot be honestly disputed that they are essential and should be provided in view of the large number of secondary schools and students that teach and learn economics.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about the reasons why economics has not been given its rightful status despite its popularity.
These include ministries of educations’ failure to appoint inspectors, no conferences and workshops, community teacher trainer’s failure to train economics teacher, only few colleges and universities offer the course, no contact between economics in secondary schools and Universities and no association of economics teacher.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How can we solve the problems of lack of association for economics teachers?
9 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O.
(2002); Audio-Visual materials in the Teaching of Economics in Oyo state secondary schools, Ibadan.
Journal of Educational studies IJES 2[1] Obemeata, J.O.
[1991]: Effective Teaching of Economics in senior secondary school.
The West African Journal of Education 1[1], 9-13 10 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 3 ECONOMICS EDUCATION IN NIGERIAN SECONDARY SCHOOLS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The content 3.2 Late coming of Economics 3.2.1 Internal factors 3.2.2 External factors 3.3 Acceptance of Economics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION When economics was introduced into the secondary school curriculum, its popularity grew rapidly because the first few schools which offered it in West African School Certificate Examination [WASCE] had unexpectedly good results.
There was a positive relationship between the quality of results in economics and the number of candidates that offered it in subsequent years in the WASCE.
In this unit, you will learn the factors that caused the late introduction of economics, and it’s acceptance in the school system.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • State the trend and position of economics education in Nigerian secondary school.
• Identify reasons why economics was introduced late into the secondary school curriculum.
• Explain the reasons why economics is accepted as a subject to be taught at secondary school 11 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Content Economics was first taken in the West African School Certificate Examination as a school subject in Nigeria in 1967.
Since school certificate was a two year course, it may be said that economics came into the secondary school curriculum in Nigeria in 1966, much later than most other secondary school subjects.
Economics was, however, taken by private candidates in the General Certificate Examination before it became a secondary school subject.
It was recognized that economics problems were at the heart of modern society.
Ever since economics was first taken as a school subject in West African School Certificate Examination in 1967, the number of schools that teach it, and the number of candidates that take the examination have witnessed a phenomenal increase.
For example in 1967, it was 0.07% of the total number of candidates that sat for the examination, in 1969 it was increased to 12.56%, in 1970, it was 17.16% and by 1976 exactly 10years of its inceptions, the population has risen to 76.95%.
For further confirmation by more recent entries, we have that in 1985, 441,448 school candidates entered for economics while in the same year English had 373,507.
In 1996 it was 711,377 for economics, 748,239 for mathematics, and 748,984 for English language.
By this analysis it is probably understatement that English Language and Mathematics top the list of entries.
It may be said that economics is probably the most popular subject in the secondary school curriculum if the popularity of a secondary school subject may be determined by the number of schools that teach it and the number of candidates that offer it in school learning certificate examination.
It may be said that economics comes after English language and Mathematics.
Furthermore, when it is appreciated that economics became a secondary school subject in Nigeria in 1966, it may be said that the growth in its popularity as a secondary school subject in Nigeria has been monumental.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Give a vivid picture of the trend and position of economics in secondary school curriculum 12 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.2 Late Coming of Economics The late coming of economics has been traced to certain factors within and outside Nigeria i.e.
Internal and External factors 3.2.1 Internal Factors i) Few Graduates The teaching of economics as a secondary school subject was not helped by the fact that only a few graduates of economics remained for any reasonable length of time as teachers.
Graduates of economics were relatively few in the country.
ii) High Demand for Graduates of Economics to fill the large number of managerial position in commerce and industries.
Since the demand for economics graduates was higher than supply, graduates of economics had no difficulty in findings jobs in the country’s expanding industry where they were better paid..
In view of this, economics graduates were not inclined to accept offers of appointment as teachers.
iii) Lack of Courage and Enthusiasm The Graduates of economics who were in schools were usually deployed to teach subjects other than economics, such as history, geography and mathematics.
Since they did not remain for long as teachers, economics graduates in secondary schools were usually not in a strong position to influence the inclusion of economics on the list of subjects which were taught in secondary schools.
They could not convince the principals of their schools who on the whole, did not study economics.
3.2.2 External Factors i) Teachability of the Subject In Great Britain, in the 1950s, there was controversy over the teaching of economics that it was too difficult because it involved deduction and abstract reasoning.
They maintained that the nature of economics was such that it was suitable only for students who had reached a certain level of intellectual maturity.
Since the power of deduction and abstract reasoning does not normally develop significantly and substantially before the age of sixteen, it was contended that economics cannot be taught effectively to students until they attain the age of sixteen years.
13 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS ii) Educational Policy Maker Up to the mid-sixties, the bulk of those who were responsible for the formulation of Educational Policy of this country were British educationist, their decisions on educational matters were influenced by what obtained in their homes.
iii) Radicalism The vast majority of heads of Secondary School in the country up to early sixties and mid-sixties were missionaries.
They rarely studied science or social science.
Many of them were suspicious of economics which they claimed was a course of study for radicals and that it could breed communism which at that time was regarded as a great threat to stability in the colonial territories and should, therefore be kept at bay at all cost.
Such heads of secondary schools could not have been favourably disposed to the teaching of economics in secondary schools in the country.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the reasons advanced for the late coming of economics secondary schools curriculum?
3.3 Acceptance of Economics As a result of a combination of factors from within and outside Nigeria, economics gradually came to be accepted as a subject that can be taught in secondary schools from mid-sixties.
It was felt that a secondary school learner could not be said to have been adequately prepared for life in the modern society if they could not appreciate some concepts in economics like inflation, national income, population and banking to mention only a few.
Other reasons why economics came to be accepted as a secondary school subject include: i) Intellectual Development It was recognized that economics contributed immensely to the intellectual development of its recipients.
A great educational value was attached to what had been termed the economics way of thinking, a mode of considering a variety of problems that are far from being easy 14 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS to define.
It was said that only those who studied economics had all the answers to all economic problems of the country.
ii) Philosophy of Economics The underlying philosophy of economics rests on the fact that it is a subject that has relevance to everyday life.
Thus an attempt has been made in the national policy on education to integrate the theoretical foundation of the subject with their practical applications.
iii) Performance in Economics The importance of economics education to the learners of economics in particular and the whole society cannot be over emphasized.
In spite of the fact that the number of students that are offering the subject has been on the increase, performance in economics is encouraging.
iv) Sharp Rise in Economics Graduates With the creation of more universities in Nigeria, there was a corresponding increase in the number of department of economics and an increase in the number of economics students.
With an increase in the number of economics graduates, the supply of economics graduates exceeded the demand.
The situation of economics graduates was not helped by the political crisis especially the civil war of 1967-1970 which led to shrinking capacity of commerce and managerial and other positions as a result many graduates could not find jobs in industries and as such had to take up appointment as teachers in secondary schools.
v) Interest in Teaching Career Teaching now ceased to be a stepping stone for university graduates of economics.
At first many of them taught subjects other than economics.
However, in due course many of them stayed long enough as teachers to acquire influence.
Some became vice- principals and principals and were in a strong position to influence the policies of the schools where they taught.
From their position and strength, university graduates of economics now feel that they should teach their subject of specialization.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain the factors responsible for the acceptance of economics into secondary schools curriculum 15 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION Economics is more of an optional subject while English Language and Mathematics are more or less compulsory.
It would be correct to say that economics is the most popular subject in the secondary school curriculum in Nigeria.
Economics is seen as a vehicle of a strict intellectual discipline.
It involves looking at the world in a way, which is for most, if not all of us, quite new.
Economics is not a body of concrete truth but an engine for discovery of concrete truths.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about; (i) The trend and position of economics as secondary school subject.
Also (ii) The statistical data that show its popularity and enrolment rate were given.
(iii) Reasons for the late entry of economics into secondary school curricula, are divided into internal factors and external factors (iv) What led to its acceptance such as intellectual development; philosophy of economics, performance in economics, sharp rise of economics graduates and interest in teaching career, have been shown.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the internal and external factors that led to the late coming of economics into secondary school.
2.
Enumerate the reasons for the acceptance of economics into secondary schools.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O.
(2001); Modern Trends in Economics Teaching at the secondary school level.
In Samuel O. Ayodele [ed].
Teaching strategies for Nigerian secondary schools.
Power house press and publishers pp.
140-148.
Obemeata, J.O.
(1980); Pupils’ perspective of the purpose of economics education in Nigeria secondary grammar schools.
West African Journal of Education 21[2] 113-121 Adu, E.O.
(2004) An Introduction to Economics Education.
Ibadan; ERSG.
16 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Obemeata, J.O.
(1985); Examination of claims that economics is easy to pass in the WASCE, in M.A.
Mkpa, S.O.
Olaitan, V. Nwachukwu, S.O.
Ayodele [eds].
Issues in Curriculum Evaluation and Vocational Education in Nigeria.
Curriculum Organization of Nigeria.
Chapter 22.
17 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 4 IMPORTANCE AND PROBLEMS FACING ECONOMICS TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Economics 3.2 Problems Facing Teaching of Economics 3.2.1 Practical Problems facing the teaching of economics 3.2.2 Theoretical Problems Facing Economics Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The base of content for the teaching of economics can be subdivided into categories of understanding which are appropriate to achieve particular aspect of the overall objectives.
These categories are personal economics goals, the structure of economics and economic system, economic principles and tools for analyses, economic activities and institution, economic developments, problems and issues and applications of economics education [encyclopedia of education].
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • Identify the significance of economics education to any nation and to its recipients.
• Identify the practical problems facing the teaching of economics in schools • Discuss the theoretical problems facing the teaching of economics in schools.
18 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Economics According to Obemeata [1980] the significance of economics education to any nation, is very alarming.
It enables both leaders and citizens to understand basic economics concepts, principles as well as to understand, appreciate and seek to improve the economic situation for their own social good.
The understanding of economics is a pre-requisite for good citizenship.
To him the principal objective for teaching economics should be “to provide economics understanding necessary for responsible citizenship”.
Being a responsible citizen involves the ability to take rational decision on important economics issues with a good basis for doing so Furthermore, Obemeata [1991] stated that the position of economics in secondary school curriculum has been strengthened because it has been accepted that it has some civil values because of some topics as “the element and determinants of national income, the structure and activities of labour unions, the working and influence of financial institution”.
These prepared one adequately for life in modern society.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Pause and justify the above assertion in your own understanding According to Adu [2002] the study of economics serves a useful purpose in modern life.
It gives us facts and shows us what may be expected to be the outcome of certain lines of conduct; it helps us to decide which of several alternatives to choose.
It charged its recipient to make wise choice that will satisfy their needs in the presence of unlimited wants and resources.
Obemeata [1991] says economics as a subject has various values to the learners and these values according to him include: i) The Cultural Values:- Economics has some intrinsic value that makes it appealing as a school subject for example, there is a great logic in it.
It connects learners to the essentials of everyday life and it is also concern with almost tropical events such as International Monetary Fund [IMF], Structural Adjustment Programme [SAP] and so on 19 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Take a moment of rest and suggest other topics[s] in economics that is concern with tropical events and that attract cultural value ii) Intellectual Training:- Economics also contribute to intellectual training because it involves looking at issues in a way which foremost new to people.
Economics is not primarily a body of knowledge, it is a method rather than a doctrine, an apparatus of mind, a technique of thinking which helps its possessors to draw correct conclusion iii) Vocational Training:- The vocational nature of economics made it readily acceptable to students.
Economics as a subject is of direct utility in many branches of industries and commerce.
It is also an essential part of most professional examination like Banking, Accountancy, Secretariat etc.
3.2 Problems Facing Teaching of Economics 3.2.1 Practical Problems Facing the Teaching of Economics The practical problems facing the teaching of economics are as follows: (i) Obsolete Textbooks With the exception of a few, the economics textbooks written in Nigeria are badly written, sketchy and lack the in-depth content.
They are largely descriptive.
They are poorly illustrated and contain lots of inaccuracies and they are mostly produced in a hurry.
(ii) Lack of Teacher’s Commitment.
The issue of teacher commitment and effectiveness is now a perennial one in educational discourse.
The teachers today occupy a paramount position in the teaching learning situation.
It is agreed that no education can rise above the quality of its teacher.
Teachers need to be committed and dedicated to teaching profession.
Teaching requires a cultivated ability.
To be done exceptionally well, it also requires a special talent and a sense of vocation.
20 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS (iii) Students Poor Attitude and Interest The kind of attitude a child has affect his school work and learning in general because, if he has a positive attitude about the teacher and the subject, success is inevitable.
It is observed that student’s attitudes to economics determines the degree to which they pass economics and negative attitude towards the subject and teachers will definitely have adverse effect on their academic achievement in the subject.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Now pause and think about more practical problems facing the teaching of economics and then write them out.
3.2.2 Theoretical Problems Facing Economics Teaching (i) Bias and Objectivity Economics teachers find it difficult to eliminate bias and subjectivity while teaching the students.
They try to influence the decision of the students, to suit their personal interest, and this is common when teachers are teaching topics like consumer behavior, division of labor, inflation, etc.
This leads to the following: Value Judgments……Students cannot distinguish between fact and opinion, since economics is concerned mainly with means and ends, one is interested with how best one can compete unlimited wants with the limited resources.
At times it is difficult to make judgment about moral implication behind individual choice and sacrifices e.g.
Law of demand i.e.
rise in demand will lead to an increase in price, with this, it is argued that economics can be taught without bringing in subjectivity.
Logic: - This involves the teaching of economics in a way that it applies to real life situation of the learners.
The teacher has to apply economics teaching to solve the problems encountered by the learners in a convincing manner.
Preferences: - Teachers do select topics based on personal interest and how the topics appealed to them.
The choice of topic to be taught is therefore being influenced by their subjectivity.
(ii) The Difficulty of the Subject There had been controversies over the teaching of economics in secondary school.
This was based on the belief that economics is too 21 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS difficult to teach.
The argument is that, since the power of deduction and abstract reasoning do not usually develop much before the age of sixteen, economics can not be effectively taught to students before this age.
(iii) The Need for Simplification At lower level, economics should be based on selection to make it simple but care should be taken not to further create abstraction which may lead to the exclusion of some advanced theory from the syllabus if the tendency is to teach what the student would understand, what remains might not be economics e.g.
the case of Oligopoly and Monopolistic competition, an attempt to avoid this from secondary schools syllabus because it involves analysis which may be too difficult for the students therefore we concentrate on perfect competition and monopoly both of which do not exist anywhere, the real situation is the Oligopoly and Monopolistic Competition.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Pause and think of more theoretical problems facing the teaching of economics in secondary school.
4.0 CONCLUSSION Knowledge of economics helps us to know how prices are determined in the market and the operations of economics institutions such as manufacturing companies, banks etc.
We can readily find ways to solve many economic problems confronting us and thereby increase our economic well-being.
So also the practical and theoretical problems facing the teaching of economics can be reduced if not totally eliminated if the teachers are effective, and students showed interest.
Besides for teaching to be effective, the teacher needs the cooperation of parents.
There should be collaboration between the home and the school.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed about the importance of economics and the various values it has to the learners such as: [i] Cultural values [ii] Intellectual training and [iii] Vocational training.
22 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS So also, we learnt the various problems facing the teaching of economics in the secondary school.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify at least five importances or significance of economics education 2.
What are the problems facing teaching of economics in the present day?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O.
[2002] Two Problem-based learning strategies, Quantitative ability and Gender as Determinants of students academic Achievement in Economics [PhD Thesis] University of Ibadan; Ibadan.
Adu, E.O.
[2004] An Introduction to Economics Education.
Ibadan; ERSG Obemeata, J.O.
[1980]: Pupils perspective of the purpose of economics education in Nigeria Secondary grammar schools.
West African Journal of Education 21[2] 113-121.
Obemeata, J.O.
[1991]: Effective Teaching of Economic in Senior Secondary School.
West African Journal of Education 1[1].
9-13 23 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 5 PREPARATION OF ECONOMICS SYLLABUS AND PITFALLS OF SYLLABUS CONSTRUCTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Approaches for preparing Economics syllabus 3.1.1 Traditional approaches 3.1.2 Descriptive approaches 3.1.3 National income Approach 3.1.4 Development Approach 3.2 The pitfalls of Economics syllabus construction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The syllabus consists of the outline of the content to teach only.
It is not as comprehensive as the curriculum.
Whereas the curriculum consist of content, objectives, materials and methods, [learning-experiences] and evaluation.
The syllabus on the other hand consists of only the content, at best it may also include a list of references.
A quick comment here is that, teachers should avoid the urge to rush to teach or to cover the syllabus alone.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • Identify the types of syllabuses • Discuss the various approaches for preparing syllabus • Identify the pitfalls.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are two types of syllabus: they are i) Examination syllabus ii) Teaching syllabus 24 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Examination Syllabus: The examination syllabus is prepared by the examining bodies, it is usually brief and it defines only the main topics upon which students will be examined.
E.g.
WAEC syllabus, NECO syllabus, NABTEB syllabus Teaching Syllabus: It is usually more detailed and it provides the operational details of basis for the actual teaching of the course.
In teaching syllabus the topics are usually listed in the order in which they are to be taught and sometimes we may include the materials to be used for teaching each topic.
The ministry of education prepares the syllabus which is the teaching syllabus, while the examination syllabus is prepared by the examining body.
The teaching syllabus may be described as a bridge between the examination syllabus and the teaching method.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 How can the teaching syllabus bridge the gap between examination syllabus and the teaching method?
3.1 Approaches for Preparing Economics Syllabus There are four major approaches to the preparation of syllabus.
They are: 3.1.1 Traditional Approach In this approach, the syllabus starts with introductory section as we have in the senior secondary school economics syllabus.
It talks about the nature of economics either as art or science after this is micro-economics topics such as theory of firm, household, price, supply, demand etc.
after this we move on to macro-economics topics like International trade, National income etc.
3.1.2 Descriptive Approach Using this approach the syllabus is prepared in such a way that those descriptive topics are taught before other topics such as Money, Banking etc.
after this is the theory and analysis of economics.
25 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.1.3 National Income Approach The approach enables you to start with macro-economics concepts like National Income, International trade, International organization etc.
concepts as the starting point and move on to micro-economics.
3.1.4 Developmental Approach In this approach the various topics in economics are studied initially within a relatively simple concept and they are re-examining at one or more progressively sophisticated level within the same course.
i.e.
moving gradually in the syllabus to enable the student grow from one level to another.
This approach is very useful in economics at secondary school where economics is been taught for 3 years starting from SS1 to SS3 with different style.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the approaches for the preparation of syllabus, which one do you prefer?
3.2 The Pitfalls of Economics Syllabus Construction In preparing or constructing syllabus of economics adequate attention must be given to the following pitfalls.
i) No Economics Contents: There is economics syllabus that contains no economics contents.
It occurs more often in vocational courses e.g.
syllabus of economics for agricultural students, one must be very careful because it can lead to the teaching of agriculture instead of economics.
We should not pay too much attention to the practical in terms of techniques.
ii) The Over-full Syllabus: This may arise when the teacher is anxious to avoid excluding things in the syllabus i.e.
anything he thinks is relevant to him is added and therefore making the syllabus full.
One remedy for this is for the teacher to clearly define his objectives or objectives of instruction; he or she should exclude from the syllabus any irrelevant things.
iii) Wrong Level: There is the syllabus teaching at the wrong level that is the wrong level here means either too difficult or too easy we should avoid it by considering the type of students whom the syllabus is to be treated.
26 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS iv) Wrong Approach: There is some syllabus that adopts the wrong approach or wrong emphasis.
This may arise where the objectives of the course have not been clearly defined and where the students do not really appreciate the course i.e.
the background of the student for which the syllabus is intended is not put into consideration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the pitfalls of economics syllabus construction?
How do you guide against these pitfalls 4.0 CONCLUSION Teachers teaching classes for examination using the syllabus should endeavor to space their teaching, to allow for steady but progressive teaching and learning.
It would be a wonderful world if every teacher deeply understand each and every child and put their understanding into effect.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit you have leant the various types of syllabus i.e.
Teaching and Examination syllabuses.
Approaches to the preparation of syllabuses which are: Traditional, Descriptive, National Income and Developmental Approach, and Pitfalls to the Construction of syllabus 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Provide more distinctions between examination syllabus and Teaching syllabus.
2.
What are the factors to be considered before syllabus preparation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O.
(2004); An introduction to Economics Education.
Ibadan; ERSG .
Ajoboye, J.O.
(2003) Social Studies Methods II.
Ibadan Distance Learning Centre Series; University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
27 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS MODULE 2 Unit 1 Teaching Units and Unit Planning Unit 2 Planning the course Unit 3 Evolution and guiding principles of teaching methods Unit 4 Preparation for teaching Economics UNIT 1 TEACHING UNITS AND UNIT PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Planning 3.2 The Curriculum 3.3 The Syllabus 3.4 The Scheme of Work/Teaching Plan 3.4.1 Guideline for Drawing Scheme of Work/Teaching Plan 3.5 Unit Plan 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 28 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 1.0 INTRODUCTION The aim of teaching economics is to facilitate the understanding of basic concepts of economics being taught in schools.
The achievement of broad aims and objectives of teaching economics is the sole responsibility of the teacher.
The teacher’s goal therefore will be to improve his competence in teaching the subject in the classroom in order to assist the student to learn and understand the basic economic concepts.
In order to achieve this task, economics teacher not only plans, but also determines appropriate objectives for the students; devices strategies that would assist students in the achievement of the objectives, implement the strategies, and determine how effective they are in the accomplishment of the set goals.
Planning of what to teach and how to get about teaching it is paramount in the heart of every committed and competent economics teacher.
A competent teacher is one who understands the place of learning experiences in the total curriculum, carefully plans and systematically varies students learning.
He/she does this by planning his daily lessons from a pre-planned scheme of work which is a reflection of his/her understanding of the syllabus and the total curriculum organization.
From the scheme of work, units are drawn and taught according to the level of the students as well as to the syllabus and curriculum specification.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain the meaning of planning • Describe the scheme of work • Define a unit plan • State the major components of a unit plan.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Planning Planning in the teaching-learning context includes everything the teacher does prior to the actual class teaching.
It may include some or all of the following: • The objectives set out by the teacher to achieve 29 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS • The expected activities/roles to be played by different groups during the teaching process • When and how to play such roles 30 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS • Strategies to adopt in teaching outcomes The success of any unit depend largely to the level of preparedness of the teacher and the skillfulness with which he/she accomplishes it.
Planning enables economics teacher to do the following: • Prepare well in advance the topics to teach, identify the teaching materials to be used, strategies to be employed and techniques of evaluation to be adopted • Teach with confidence • Avoid rush and haphazard teaching of the lesson • Evaluate their teaching and to determine the success or failure of previous efforts put in.
This brings about innovation in teaching/learning process as the teacher employs new strategies to ensure that the goals set is achieved.
• Map out their intentions and tactics in terms of subject content, objectives, methods and procedures for evaluation.
• Effectively manage their classroom.
The total plan of instruction consists of the following components: The Curriculum, Federal or State syllabi, Scheme of Work, Unit of lesson/teaching Plan and Daily lesson notes.
3.2 The Curriculum The curriculum is the channel through which educational institutions translate societal aspirations with concrete reality.
Uche and Umoren (1998) defined curriculum as all the planned and guided learning experiences, designed by the school to achieve pre-determined educational objectives.
Curriculum is prepared by the Federal Ministry of Education to cover specific primary or secondary school subjects.
3.3 The Syllabus Syllabus is a curriculum guide used by schools for specifying which subject to be taught.
It is drawn from the larger curriculum, subject by subject.
The content of economics syllabus is drawn by joint efforts of Educationists, Curriculum Specialists, Ministry of Education Officials, Examination Bodies (e.g.
WAEC, NECO and NABTEB), University Teachers and Researchers.
31 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.4 The Scheme of Work/Teaching Plan A scheme of work/teaching plan consists of unit, topics, concepts and themes to be covered in a specific period of time.
It is drawn from the syllabus and it shows an overview of the course content for the year, a term or week by listing in sequence the units and topics to be covered.
It is from this scheme or teaching plan that the classroom teacher plans particular lesson(s) to be taught within particular period(s).
Economics scheme of work is usually prepared by a team of economics teacher with the head of economics department.
3.4.1 Guidelines for Drawing Scheme of Work/Teaching Plan The following guidelines should help the teacher in drawing the scheme of work: • Concepts from the syllabus should be arranged sequentially according to their relationship with each other, from simple to complex.
• Teacher ensures that adequate periods are assigned for teaching the concepts in each class.
• Teacher should take cognizance of interruption by public holidays, manual labour or any other special events – inter-house sports, debate/quiz etc.
• Plans and prepares the scheme of work with other teachers in the same subject area and the head of department.
• The teacher should give room for revision and examination.
• The teacher should incorporate practical session in the scheme so as to relate theory with practice.
Although, the scheme of work is the teachers personal plan to cover the syllabus, it should not be rigidly followed especially where students find the concept difficult to comprehend.
The scheme of work should be made as flexible as possible to accommodate individual differences of the students.
The teacher is expected to use his/her creative talents and past experiences in developing the scheme of work.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Pause and think if the benefit an economics teacher will enjoy if he/she plans for his lessons FORMAT OF SCHEME OF WORK 32 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS A.
(i) Name of School ................................................................... (ii) Name of Teacher ..........................
Date ................... (iii) Class .............................................. Subject ............... (iv) Unit Number and Title ......................................................... B.
(i) Topic .................................................................................... (ii) Content(s) to be covered with a specific number of weeks (a) ................................................................................... (b) ................................................................................... (c) ................................................................................... (d) ................................................................................... (iii) Link with other Subjects (Integration) (a) ................................................................................... (b) ................................................................................... (c) ................................................................................... (d) ................................................................................... C. Performance Objectives Assist students to perform activities that would enable them to: (a) .............................................................................................. (b) .............................................................................................. (c) .............................................................................................. (d) .............................................................................................. D. Equipments and Materials: list the equipment materials that would enable students to carry out the activities and achieve the stated goals.
E. Activities: Derive from the content as specified in (B to D) above within a certain number of weeks.
F. Continuous Assessment and Record Keeping (a) Revision and Test (b) Keep appropriate record against each student’s name.
The result of the continuous assessment will determine whether the teacher should proceed to a new topic or re-teach the concept.
Each student’s record is kept against his/her name for all the tests given within the term.
3.5 Unit Plan According to Uche and Umoren (1998), a unit is a part of a syllabus incorporating broad content area of interrelated topics.
A unit plan therefore is a teacher’s preparation for teaching a particular topic or a set of related topics.
It may include two or three lessons or the lessons for a 33 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS number of weeks according to the scope and sequence of the topic.
The main purpose of a unit plan is to place the daily lessons into broad perspective and at the same time, force a deeper analysis of the content to be taught (Maduabam, 1998).
FORMAT FOR WRITING A UNIT PLAN Teacher ........................................................ Class ............................. Topic ............................................................ No of lessons ................ 1.
Introduction State briefly what the unit is all about and its importance 2.
Main Ideas and Processes Outline the major content to be taught and the duration 3.
Behavioural Objectives List students’ expected outcomes i.e the specific learning they are expected to achieve.
4.
Instructional Materials Make a list of all the instructional materials to be used.
5.
Statement of Learning activities List appropriate learning activities deemed necessary for the attainment of the objectives.
A brief summary of the procedures and techniques should be highlighted.
6.
Number and title of daily lesson plan 7.
Method of Assessment Specify tests that would be included with the daily plans.
8.
Assignment This should include reinforcement and application exercises, drills etc.
9.
Suggestion for modification of the Unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION 34 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Planning is necessary for efficient delivery of curricular objectives.
In planning, the teacher prepares and equips him/her self for teaching.
He also ensures that adequate and conducive environment for learning is created for the students.
The objectives of instruction, students’ activities, and materials/strategies for instruction and evaluation procedures are all included in planning.
Planning of instruction has many components beginning from the larger curriculum (cid:146) syllabus (cid:146) Scheme of Work (cid:146) Unit of Lesson (cid:146) Daily lesson notes.
A teacher who always plans his/her work can never be caught unaware and is competent in his/her service delivery.
35 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that • the teacher is responsible for achieving the broad aims and objectives of economics teaching • teaching unit and unit plan are strategies that aid the teacher to break or organize his/her work according to duration, age and level of the student.
• In order to succeed, the teacher not only plans but also determines the objectives to be achieved, the how and means of achieving the objectives as well as the extent to which he has achieve it.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Highlights all the features of a total planning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Clark, M. (1973) The Principles of Teaching Economics.
Ibadan; Heineman Education Books Nig.
Ltd. Ehiametalor, E. T. (1985): Classroom Management.
Guide to Education and Methods.
Evans Brothers Nig.
Ltd. 36 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 2 PLANNING THE COURSE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Traditional Method 3.1.1 Lecture Method 3.1.2 Assignment Method 3.1.3 Workbook Method 3.2 The Informal Method 3.2.1 Discussion Method 3.2.2 Planned Discussion 3.2.3 Group Discussion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION For effective teaching - learning to take place at any level of our educational systems, there is need for planning of the facts to be presented by the teacher.
A good teaching planning ensures effective teaching.
As we all know any teacher that fails to plan for a course is bound to fail in the class.
Hence, there will not be meaningful learning- teaching.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain the concept course planning • Mention why daily planning of lesson note is very important • Distinguish between lesson plan and lesson notes 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Course Planning Course planning is the orderly arrangement of materials to be taught in a sequential order.
There are several steps in course planning which the teacher must bear in mind.
In Nigeria context the syllabus or curriculum is prepared for the teacher by the Ministry of Education at the lower 37 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS levels in the secondary school.
The teacher is expected to follow the syllabus as laid down by the Ministry of Education.
However, the teacher is expected to do the planning of the presentation of the materials contained in the syllabus.
In performing the planning functions, the teacher must take into consideration the following 1. the level of material to be presented 2. the age of the pupil in the class 3. the level of class for which the syllabus has been designed 4. additional material needed to help the students understanding of the subject matter; 5. approaches to be utilized for effective teaching of the syllabus 6. the major changes in the syllabus as reflected in the recommended textbooks.
3.1.1 Types of Plans There are two types of plans that are useful to a teacher (a) short term and (b) long term a.
The short term plan refers to planning for a specific topic to be taught in a lesson /lessons for a day or spaced over a number of days or one or two weeks for example the daily or weekly lesson note b.
The long term plan is a lesson plan for duration of a term or a year.
A long term plan may treat several topics to be delivered in a number of weeks or months.
For example topics spread through the scheme of work to be taught through out the term Whether the planning is short or long term, there are usually four steps to be followed by the teacher.
a.
The objectives of the lesson must be clearly stated b.
The teacher must specify the sub-unit of topics to be treated in a particular lesson or lesson and what the student should have learnt prior to this time i.e.
the background knowledge.
c. The teacher is concerned with the totality of the knowledge to be imparted in a lesson i.e.
the content d. The procedures to be followed in the presentation of materials as laid down by the teacher.
The methods to be used in teaching should also appear.
Course planning is definitely a precursor to effective teaching.
Planning is said to lay down in advance what the teacher intends teaching.
38 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Is there any relationship between course planning and lesson planning 3.1.2 Advantages of daily planning of a lesson Daily planning of a lesson helps the teacher in several ways.
a.
To select the appropriate course content to be delivered to the class.
b.
To avoid embarrassing questions from the students, which may make the teacher appear ignorant or not prepared for the topic he/she is treating.
If a teacher is not prepared for a lesson, there will be a tendency for him/her to throw back question(s) at students.
c. To select appropriate activities the student will be involved in d. To prepare appropriate teaching aids necessary to illustrate the points discussed e. To extend the level of mastery of course content In order for an economics teacher to be effective in his/her choosing career, the steps in planning must be well mastered and applied to economics topic being delivered.
3.2 Planning for a Course This involves gathering materials relevant to a body of knowledge to be presented to students in a sequential order.
A course contains several units of topics to be delivered.
3.2.1 Planning for a Lesson This deals with planning to teach a topic involving some concepts.
Here the teacher plans the lesson to reflect the age of the students, methods of presentation etc.
The way the topic would be delivered to senior secondary class three will be quite different from the way it would be presented to senior secondary class one.
3.2.2 Planning for Resource Once the teacher knows what to teach, resource planning can be done for a short term or long term period.
Planning for resource involves 39 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS planning for appropriate teaching aids to facilitate learning.
Resource materials could be in form of visual (poster), audio-visual material etc.
Distinction Between lesson Plan and lesson Notes There is much confusion between lesson plan and lesson notes.
Most students have difficulty in separating materials for the lesson plan and lesson note.
The lesson plan is a plan of activities to be carried out in a class during the course of a day, a week or a term, nothing more and nothing less.
The purpose of the plan is for the teacher to set down guiding principles for selecting the materials to be covered and resource materials to be used in covering the content of the topic.
However, the lesson notes concern essentially the materials to be delivered in a class.
The lesson notes should contain the important things the teacher wants the class to know.
The teacher is supposed to teach from his notes of lesson and not from rote.
In essence the teacher should not try to memorize the topic to be taught; else important information will be forgotten.
Lesson note should generate from the lesson plan, since they both compliment each other.
Many student teachers form the habit of teaching the student by rote in an attempt to impress the supervisor.
The result of such attempt amounts to poor teaching, loss of breath, shortened class period because the teacher has run out of steam and inability to control the class and to enhance learning.
As a result, lesson notes should serve as a guide for teaching.
The teacher should remember that preparing for a lesson is much like preparing to deliver a speech to an enlightened audience.
In order to do a good job and to impress the audience, the speaker must practice over and over again his oration.
So also must the teacher.
The aim of writing lesson notes is to give impressively, knowledge that would help the development of the students.
As a beginning teacher, you have just been assigned to teach economics at senior secondary class II in a new school.
You are expected to answer the following questions before setting out to plan for the first lesson.
(a) Is this year the first time these students are taking economics?
The beginning teacher should first of all consult the head of department about the level of economics the student have been exposed to.
The next 40 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS step is to request the principal to provide the syllabus of the materials to be taught.
(b) The second question that needs to be answered is: What facilities are available for teaching economics?
The best person to answer this question for the beginning teacher is Vice Principal (Academics).
In planning, you need to take into consideration the facilities available in the school, such as the type of classroom the type of blackboards/whiteboards i.e.
are they suitable for graphing?
Remember that effective teaching of economics is the ability to graphically represent economic principles being treated in the class.
(c) The third question is to find out what textbook are recommended for usage.
The syllabus should answer this question But as economics teacher, you need to answer questions concerning adequacy of the textbooks recommended.
4.0 CONCLUSION Course planning is a pre-requisite to effective learning-teaching, A course planning is expected to be done before the classroom teaching as this will enable the teacher to know what to do in the class, method to adopt, arrangement of concepts (i.e.
from simple to complex etc).
A proper planning will definitely brings out positive learning outcomes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed planning the course, the various types of plans, the steps to be followed by a teacher when planning, advantages of daily planning, relationship between course planning, and lesson planning as well as differences between lesson plan and lesson notes and what a beginning teacher should do when preparing to teach economics.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT You have just been appointed to teach economics in a newly established school.
List out the questions to be addressed first before planning the first lesson for the subject 41 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ehiametalor E.T (1985): Classroom management, Guide to Evaluation and methods Evans Bro Nig.
Ltd. 42 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 3 EVOLUTION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF TEACHING METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of Teaching Methods 3.2 Factors to Be Considered Before the Choice Of A Teaching Method For Economics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The history of teaching methods can be traced back to the period when Greek Philosophers used methods such as discursion method, field trip, debate forum, dialectic and intuitive, observation, sense impression and investigation to teach having taking into consideration the age of the learner, the previous knowledge, the social environment etc 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention at least 3 Greek Philosopher and the teaching methods they adopted • state factors to be taken into consideration before choosing a method for teaching economics 3.0 MAIN CONTENT In this present age, teachers have been building upon the work of great Greek Philosophers who had earlier invented various teaching methods.
Teacher of today are now in a period of professional competency with well defined educational goals.
3.1 Evolution of Teaching Methods Certain methods, procedures and techniques of introduction have obviously been utilized through the long evolution of education.
These approaches generally argued with the existing philosophy of education 43 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS and the predominant theories of learning during any given period.
There is ample evidence to suggest that many modern methods of teaching are, in fact, adaptation, of the methods that were in use in the past.
.
The following Greek and Philosophers; Friedrick Froebel, Heinrich Pestalozzi, Johnann Frederick Herbat, Socarates, Plato, Aristole and Viltrino De filter, had in one time or the other use one/more methods in the course of their teaching/learning Friedrich Froebel the originator of the Kindergarten recognized and made use of play, games, note expression, songs, language symbol, self- activity and participation in the natural environment in teaching the kindergarten pupils.
Heinrich Pestalozzi the father of elementary education however stressed the use of the immediate environment for learning through the use of observation, sense impression and investigation.
However, Johann Friederic Herbat introduced a new psychology of learning.
He identified five formal stages of instruction as: preparation, presentation, comparism, abstraction and generalization the application.
The guiding principles of Socrates, a Greek Philosopher too was “know thyself” he emphasized dialectic (question and answer) consisting of a five –step proposition with reference to an idea: question, analysis, reason, conclusion and generalization.
Plato’s approach included the use of dialetic and intuitive reasoning, Aristolte advocated learning by direct experience While Vittorino De Felt the father of secondary education, placed great attention on individual difference and practical education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the contribution of Plato, Socrates, Aristotle to teaching methods of elementary education.
Who is the father of elementary education, Who is the father of kindergarten education 3.2 Factors to Be Considered Before the Choice of a Teaching Method for Economics The following factors must be taken into consideration by economics teachers before choosing a teaching method for the subject.
1.
The age and level of intelligence of the learners- The age and level of development of the learners’ intelligence should be considered 44 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS before the choice of a method for teaching economics is made.
The method of teaching economics at SS3 class should be different from that employed to teach the SS1 students.
2.
The previous knowledge- The previous knowledge of the learners is important in the learning of a new task and this must be taken into account before the choice of teaching methods for economics.
However, the knowledge gained in the previous lesson may not necessarily be the previous knowledge of a new task.
A related idea/ experience could be considered as a previous knowledge.
3.
The size of the class- The teaching/learning of economics will be a success if the appropriate method for the size of the class is employed.
For example, there will be a meaningful teaching if discussion/demonstration method is used in a class of about one hundred students.
4.
The time of the lesson- If the lesson is to take place in the afternoon, the teacher should select a technique that require student’s participation.
But if he selects the one that makes the student sit passively, the class will not be interesting and the students will not be involved in the lesson.
5.
The technique should be suitable for the topic- Appropriate technique should be chosen for each topics and each levels.
6.
Teaching Materials- The teacher is expected to get or organize relevant teaching aid /materials for the different topics.
Relevant and appropriate teaching materials stimulates students interest in the subject.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Think of other factors apart from the one mentioned above that an economics teacher needs.
to take into consideration before choosing a method to be adopted to teach.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Greek Philosopher used methods such as group discussion, field trip and excursion, games and sports, forum debate, argumentation, rhythmic activities and learning through participations.
All along, teaching techniques have been revolving round the earlier invented techniques while the new one emerging depends on the age, intelligent quotient size of the class, the environment etc.
45 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the contribution of Greek philosopher to teaching methods.
People like Socrates, Aristotles.
Plato, Vittorian De Felto etc.
You also learnt about the various factors that needed to be considered before the choice of a method of teaching economics.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) What are the factors expected to be taking into consideration by a good economics teacher before the choice of a teaching method?
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O.
(2004); An introduction to Economics Education Ibadan; ERSG Ajiboye, J. O.
(2003): Social Studies Methods II, Ibadan Distance Learning Centre Series; University of Ibadan Ehiametalor, E. T. (1985): Classroom Management.
Guide to Education and Methods.
Evans Brothers Nig.
Ltd. 46 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 4 PREPARATION FOR TEACHING ECONOMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles Guiding the Preparation of Lesson Notes 3.2 Features of Lesson Notes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we shall discuss one of the fundamental tasks of teachers.
The task is notes of lessons preparation.
Lesson notes or notes of lesson are essentially a plan or a guide to the economics teachers.
There are certain principles that we should note when talking about lesson notes.
These shall be discussed fully in the content of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to:- • Discuss the principles guiding the preparation of lesson notes • Explain the main features in a lesson note.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles Guiding the Preparation of Lesson Notes Firstly, there is no single best way of writing lesson notes.
What do we mean here?
Essentially, what we are saying is that, inspite of the fact that, there are some permanent features that must be reflected in a lesson note, and those which a teacher must follow in preparing his lesson notes, there are many ways of doing this.
You may either follow the prose method or the tabular format, which are now popular in our schools.
The Second principle to note is that a lesson note is not the same thing as the note you give to students on the topic being taught.
A lesson note is a plan or a guide; it is not as detailed as the notes we give to students.
47 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Whereas the lesson note is sketchy and should not be too extensive, it is a detailed note of the topic you are teaching.
The lesson note is described as a guide because it provides a guide to the teacher on the lesson at hand.
As a teacher, if you fail to prepare, you must be prepared to fail.
As the kilometer stone is to a traveler, so is a lesson note to a teacher.
A teacher without notes of lesson will be a ship without direction that is rudderless, that is driven here and there.
No matter how long you have been teaching, if you do not have lesson note, you will not have a successful lesson.
The third principle to note is that whereas the scheme of work is prepared on a weekly basis, the note of lesson is prepared for each topic you teach.
From our experience as teaching practice supervisors over the years and survey of what teachers do in their schools, we have noted that teachers write their lesson notes on weekly basis.
This is wrong; lesson note should be prepared on any topic we are teaching.
Let us illustrate this with an example, for an instance if you are to teach a topic like “population” in the three arms of SS II, you will need to write a lesson note on this topic or sub-topic if need be, to teach all these arms.
The practice of writing lesson notes on weekly basis is not correct and this should be discontinued with.
3.2 Features of Lesson notes Name of School: Name of Teacher: Matriculation number [if a student-teacher]: Date: Class: Number of Students in Class: Average Age of Students: Period: Topic: Sub-topic [if necessary]: Objectives of the Lessons The objectives of the lesson are specific objectives and must be stated in a measurable terms using action verbs e.g.
Mention, list, discuss, draw, label, explain, itemize, differentiate etc.
Some call it performance objectives, behavioral objectives etc.
Whatever name these objectives are called, they are generally referred to as specific instructional objectives.
Those who called it behavioral objectives expect learners to manifest certain behaviours.
While those who call it performance 48 Highlight the main features of lesson notes EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS objectives, especially teachers of technical subjects and adult teachers expect their students to demonstrate certain skills at the end of the lesson Previous Knowledge/Entry Behaviour Learners come to a lesson with a prior knowledge.
They are not just empty barrels.
It is the responsibility of the teacher to find out and to explore what their learners already know to facilitate effective connection with the new topic.
The teacher must identify this latent, residual knowledge in the learners to link the new lesson he wants to teach to the class.
Whatever the name it is called whether previous knowledge or entry behaviour the two are correct and what is expected of a teacher is to draw out from the learners those experiences of theirs that could make them understand easily and better the lesson.
Presentation of the Lesson The lesson is usually broken down into various steps, and the content discussed under each of these steps.
You may have as many steps as the content permit however these should not be too many.
Generally a lesson follows these features: Introduction of the lesson Presentation [this is done in steps as]: Step I Step II Step III etc Evaluation At this stage the teacher evaluates the lesson.
This is to determine whether the objectives stated have been achieved or not and the extent to which the learners could demonstrate those outcomes expected of them There is therefore a strong link between the stated objectives and your evaluation.
The evaluation may be in form of a paper and pencil text, oral text or even observation of performance of certain behaviours or skills.
The objectives of the lesson will determine the type of evaluation you will adopt Summary/Conclusion of Lesson Note It is expected that the teacher summaries his lesson.
Here, the information obtained from the evaluation will be very useful.
Where students are correct this is reinforced in summary and where they were 49 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS wrong this is corrected.
At this point, the lesson may be concluded.
Some teachers however, prefer to have the conclusion of the lesson as a separate column, there is no problem with this, the required thing is for us to summarize and conclude our lessons appropriately.
Assignment/Homework Assignment or homework is important for learners at this level.
Teachers generally use three major types of homework, Preparatory homework, practice homework or a combination of both the Preparatory and the Practice homework.
Whichever mode is adopted by the teacher in any lesson, the crucial thing is for the teacher to ensure that he grade or go through the student assignment.
It is not just sufficient for the teacher to give students homework, there must be evidence to show that the teacher marks these home-works.
Advantage of Lesson Notes Well written lesson notes are valuable tools in the hand of every teacher.
It has been found that good and effective teachers are those who take time to prepare their lesson notes in writing and use them in teaching.
The following are some of the advantages of using lesson notes: i.
A good lesson note enables the teacher to carry out his/her duty effectively ii.
It enables the teacher to manage the teaching time well.
iii.
It prepares the teacher ahead of time for the materials/teaching aids needed for the class.
iv.
It allows the teacher to use appropriate teaching methods and illustrative teaching aids.
v. It helps the teacher to update his knowledge on current issues in his/her subject areas as he/she prepares for the lesson vi.
It increases the teachers confidence during the lesson.
vii.
It guides the beginning teacher and assist those who are asked to relieve a class in the absence of the class/subject teacher.
viii.
It helps the teacher to predict areas of difficulties in the students.
ix.
It enables the teacher to command more respect from the students.
x.
It assist both the supervisors and principals in evaluating the teacher’s performance.
50 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have learnt (i) Principles guiding the preparation of lesson notes (ii) The main features of lesson notes 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT As a good economics teacher, highlight all the features expected in a lesson note prepared for teaching demand and supply at SS II.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu E.O.
[2004]:- An introduction to Economics Education Ibadan;, ERSG ‘Segun Ajiboye; ‘Sola Adu & ‘Wole Amosun [2005]:- Introduction to Social Studies.
A Basic Text for Tertiary Institution Students.
Ibadan; ERSG 51 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS MODULE 3 Unit 1 Economics teaching Methods I Unit 2 Economics teaching Methods I Unit 3 Student Teaching practice Unit 4 Evaluation Strategies in Economics Unit 5 Qualities of a Good and Effective Economics Teacher and Classroom management UNIT 1 ECONOMICS TEACHING METHODS I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Traditional method 3.1.1 Lecture method 3.1.2 Assignment method 3.1.3 Workbook method 3.2 The Informal method 3.2.1 Discussion method 3.2.2 Planned Discussion 3.2.3 Group Discussion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are different methods of teaching different subjects in our school.
Methods that are appropriate and desirable for one subject in a school may not apply to another school.
For example, teaching in a school with well-equipped audio-visual learning aids and a plan for individually prescribed programmes of learning may require different teaching methods from those used in a rural school with a fixed plan of classes and programmes.
In this unit, an attempt will be made to point out some of the major techniques used by teachers in teaching economics and other related subjects (e.g.
Business Studies, Accounting e.t.c) 52 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • List the two basic teaching methods at teachers disposal • Compare lecture method and assignment method • Compare the workable question and answer method • Compare the planned discussion and group discussion • Mention the advantages and disadvantages of discussion method.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are two basic teaching methods and under each basic method are several other techniques of teaching.
The two basic methods are: (a) the traditional method, and the informal method, 3.1 The Traditional Method The traditional method is known as teacher-oriented approach and was used by the early philosophers like Socrates, Plato and Aristotle.
.This method tends to attribute everything that is worth knowing to the teacher and students can only be exposed to knowledge which he feels is necessary to the health development of the students mind.
This method comprises of lecture method, assignment method, workbook method, question and answer method 3.1.1 Lecture Method This is when a teacher lectures straight either from notes or from a prepared lecture or speech, the second combines lecture with illustration.
The lecture method is mostly used by lecturers in their teaching.
The lecturer teaches directly from prepared notes with little or no movement, and sometimes with charts or graphs.
It is a one-way flow of communication from the teacher to the student.
It is teacher centered as teacher dominated approach.
Most of the talking is done by the teacher, while the student remains a passive listeners taking down notes.
It is referred to as didactic approach or talk-chalk.
The lecture method of teaching is an economic means of transmitting factual information to a large audience though there is no guarantee that effective learning will take place.
The teacher may ask few or no question in the process.
It does not require the use of instructional materials or resource.
To this effect student are denied the opportunity of developing manipulative skill.
The lecture method is only concerned with verbal presentation of concept and ideas to the learners.
53 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Lecture method is automatic in form, it allows little or no room for active students participation, and gives little or no feedback to the teacher as to the effectiveness of his presentation.
Lecture method is widely used in Nigerian Secondary School system, but it does not result in a noticeable change in attitude held, while retention of information after lecture by students are minimal in terms of content.
Advantages of lecture method.
• It allows a teacher to deal extensively with the topic being treated.
• It is cheap to operate • It is more appropriate with adult groups because it require the ability of an audience to assimilate information as it is presented.
• It can be used to handle large class • The teacher can deliver his lecture in any type of classroom situation.
It may be in an open space, or in a hall without teaching aids eg sports pavilion.
• It can be used to introduce new topic Disadvantages of lecture Methods.
• It is not suitable for children especially in the primary and secondary schools if the topic being treated is not interesting, the student can sleep-off in the class • It does not promote meaningful leaning of economics concepts.
• Students are passive listeners i.e.
they do not participate in the teaching/learning process, so retention is difficult • The teacher may become the centre of attention because students did not participate in the class.
• It encourage memorization of information (rote leaning) without actually promoting meaningful understanding.
Suggestions for the Use of Lecture Method i.
It should be used with other methods of teaching to help the students’ participate fully and be active in the lesson.
ii.
The teacher should avoid coverage of too much topics as coverage of too many topics leads to boredom and confusion on the part of the learners.
iii.
Encourage student participation in class by asking them questions and giving them time to make comments.
iv.
At the end of each lesson, the teacher should summarize and give assignment.
54 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Pause and think of more advantages and more disadvantages of lecture method as well as to use this method.
3.1.2 Assignment Method Is the method in which teachers assigns certain sections of the text book to students as homework.
Normally the teacher would require the students to read the assigned section and provide answers to the questions that follow.
The answers provided by the students will form part of the next lesson.
The teacher will call on each student to read out their answers to the questions.
The modern concept of textbook assignment method is intended to find out the level of students understanding of concepts taught.
The purpose of the exercises is to induce students to find out more information to argument those taught in the class.
3.1.3 Workbook Method This is a method designed by authors and publishers to aid the understanding of concepts discussed in a main textbook.
The students are expected to use the principles learnt in the textbook to provide solution to problems presented in the workbook.
3.1.4 Question and Answer Method This is a method whereby teachers asks questions in the class and ask for a volunteer or a specific student to give the answers.
The answer may be in form of factual description of the contents of some section of the textbook.
This method helps the teacher to understand what the students leant.
This will assist the teacher to go from one specific question to another which may have been neglected during the class lesson.
Wilson (1978) listed some of the values of question and answer session as: 1.
Arousing and maintaining interest 2.
Focusing attention on some important matters for a lesson.
55 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3. keeping the pupils alert 4.
Guiding the development of a lesson when used for the reinforcement of some ideas, principles or facts.
5.
Measuring what pupils know and understand 6.
Leading pupils to make observations and draw inferences SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE As an Economics teacher which of the traditional method of teaching will you preferred and why.
3.2 The Informal Method This method is known as student oriented or student centered approach.
Here, the student is regarded as ultimate benefactor of knowledge, because it requires their direct participation.
One of the informal methods is discussion method which may be either planned discussion or group discussion.
3.2.1 Discussion Method Discussion can be seen as talking over something from various points of view.
It usually involves a group of people in a classroom setting.
Discussion is an interactive process involving the teacher and the student or among the student themselves.
In this case, a problem or topic for the lesson is presented for discussion while the teacher helps to direct the student views towards this objection of the lesson.
Discussion method is different from lecture method, while lecture method is a one-way flow of communication from the teacher to the student.
Discussion method involves new triple flow of communication from and with the members of the class.
Discussion method encourages student’s active participation in the class.
Students generate varieties of ideas, which will lead to the solution of the problem while the teacher moderate.
For a successful implementation of discussion method, every student should have background knowledge of what is to be discussed; otherwise, it will become a waste of time which may lead to lack of interest in the student.
In other words, using discussion method to teach a topic, the students have no knowledge what will make the class count production.
Discussion method promotes meaningful teaching leaning of economics.
3.2.2 Planned Discussion  56 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS This method is like the assignment method where students are assigned topics to read and provide solutions to some given tasks.
The report is discussed in the classroom and such reports required the participation of all students in the class and the teachers carefully plan on the handling of the discussion.
The teacher must handle the class discussion democratically.
3.2.1 Group Discussion Group discussion can be planned by the teacher in order to get the students to interact with each other or to work together to achieve certain goals.
This can be done in two ways: we have the whole class discussion or small group discussion.
In the whole class discussion, the teachers arrange the class either in a circle, semi-circle or square with him/her at the centre and all the students facing him/her.
This is usually done so that the teacher from his/her vantage position in the centre can see and encourage all class members to participate actively in the discussion.
On the other hand, the small group discussion requires the teacher breaking the class into small groups of ten students per group.
The purpose being to ensure that issues or topics are effectively discussed, each group is normally made to choose a leader.
The leader directs the course of the discussion while the recorder jots down all point discussed.
The teacher is expected to find a helping hand to student’s discussions.
At the end of the discussion, group leaders or recorders give their summaries for the class.
Advantages of Discussion method • It enables the teacher to have better knowledge of his student abilities and attitudes • Students are given opportunities to express their own view on issues.
It afford them opportunity to be corrected when they make mistakes • It can lead to development of leadership qualities.
• It enhances individual thinking and brain storming • It develops in students self control • It helps to develop self reliance, tolerance, respect for other people’s opinion and leadership skills.
• Discussion method aids in problem solving.
Disadvantages of Discussion Method 57 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS • Discussion are uninteresting when topic are unfamiliar • It takes a considerable length of time because each student will be given opportunity to contribute to the discussion.
• It does not favor students with low language ability and the introverts SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Differentiate further between Whole class and Group discussion.
Suqqestion for Effective Use of Discussion Method • Topic for discussion should centre around those in which student have requisite background knowledge.
• The teacher should avoid a situation whereby a student or few students take over the class discussion • The teacher should encourage student effort by giving positive reinforcement in form of praise for a good intellectual contribution, while also rejecting irrelevant comment and questions.
4.0 CONCLUSION Unfortunately, in Nigeria, over 90% information received by the students are from their teachers.
With these methods, a large amount of topics/sub-topics can be covered in a large class size in a single period.
Effective learning goes on when many senses are involved.
Since our classes are made up of mixed ability groups a single method cannot meet the different needs of the students.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the traditional and informal teaching method of teaching with their peculiar features, advantages and their disadvantages 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Which of the two basic teaching methods is more effective in terms of student’s achievement?
58 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O (2004) An introduction to Economics Education, Ibadan; ERSG.
Ann S.D (1974) Methods of Basic Business and Economics Education.
Dallas, South-Western publishing Co.’ Segun Ajiboye et al (2005): Introduction to social studies, Ibadan; ERSG Wilson FM.
(1978): Questions and Questioning.
The teacher at work W.A Bodd Oxford University Press 59 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 2 ECONOMICS TEACHING METHODS II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 The content 3.1 Roy play Method 3.2 Resource persons Method 3.3 Field Trip/Excursion Method 3.4 Problem solving Method 3.5 Project Method 3.6 Inquiring Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As we have said in the proceeding unit that there are different teaching methods available for an economics teachers depending on the facilities available in the school, the location of the school and the student themselves.
All the methods demonstrated imputed certain skills for desirable changes in learners.
It should be noted that there is no good or bad methods since a teacher can make use of different methods or combination of methods to teach a particular topic.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss some methods of teaching that promote desirable and positive attitude in students such as, Role playing, Resource person and field trip/Excursion, problem solving project and inquiry methods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Role Play Method Role-playing is an activity presented during a lesson to show a specific issues or situation for study and discussion.
In role-playing, there is usually no prepared script to be memorized, it does not involve elaborate preparation and there may be no rehearsals.
60 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Planning a role-playing involves selection of a problem or issue of interest and students simply act the roles intended to portray by the play.
Students are allowed to select the roles they would like to play.
Roles must not be forced on any students.
It is important to discuss the role- play after presentation.
Asking relevant questions in order to highlight the key learning characters.
Role-playing is useful for development of positive attitudes towards social issues and modifying the behaviours of learners.
It also helped to develop student’s vocabulary and the skill of expressions.
The main disadvantage of role-playing is stigmatization of students who play negative roles.
3.2 Resource Persons Method One invaluable method of teaching economics is the use of resource persons.
They can be drawn from individuals within the community who have good knowledge or adequate information on particular topics either as professional or through practical experience.
The resource person is expected to explain certain topics to the students as an expert with specialized knowledge in that aspect.
This motivates and enriches students of economics and other related subjects in Schools.
Examples of resource persons in the teaching of economics are artisans, economists, banker, tax collectors, e.t.c.
Advantage of Using a Resource Person i) This method of teaching is fascinating to children who are usually exerted to see professionals like bankers, experts in international trades, artisans coming to speak to them on economics concepts.
ii) This also motivates and sustains the interest of the students in the subject iii) It exposes students to broad knowledge of subject matter when experts on certain fields give them first hand information which the teacher might not have included in his own teaching.
iv) Information from resource persons are usually more current and authentic than those contained in textbooks.
Disadvantage of Using a Resource Person i) The time may not be sufficient for the resource person to exhaust the information he has for the students.
The time allocated to him may encroach on another lesson and create problems.
61 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS ii) Sometimes, getting an appropriate resource person can be difficult iii) The resource persons may also disappoint the school by not turning up iv) The teacher puts in so much to get the resource person to agree to come v) The resource person might not have the requisite pedagogical skills for handling enthusiastic children and this could mess him/ her up.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the importance of using resource person to teach economics?
3.3 Field Trip/Excursion Method Field trip is any learning activity carried out by a group of learners outside the classroom under a close supervision of the teacher.
It involves taking students outside the classroom setting to have first hand experience of what happens in our environment or real life situation.
Field trip/excursion provides outdoors experiences and observations from which the students learn.
It could cover a few hours and could last as long as a couple of weeks.
Field trip could take the form of a mere walk from the school to public places of interest such as the kings’ place, railway station, airport and post-office all within the neighborhood.
Experiences acquired during field trip are usually long lasting and cannot be easily forgotten by the students.
In preparing for a field trip, the purpose must be clearly stated; permission must be obtained from the school authority, parents and the place of visit.
If a trip will last more than one day, adequate preparation must be made for accommodation, feeding and other facilities.
It is also essential to take along a first aid box.
The teacher must carefully supervise the student during the trip.
The assistance of a guide is also needed.
After the trip students should discuss and report their findings.
Field trip/excursion provides opportunities for direct observations and develops the skill for keen observation in the students.
However, it is time consuming; it could be expensive and disruptive especially when the field trip lasts several days.
62 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Advantage of Field Trip.
• Field trip provides the student with the opportunity of having first hand knowledge of happening in our environment.
• It helps to generate and sustain student interest in the subject.
• It aids retention of information since the experiences are long lasting • It can help the student to develop interest in certain professions.
Disadvantages of Field Trip • It may be a waste of time and resource if not well planned • It is externally difficult to carry out especially when it requires long distance • Accident may occur in the course of field trip.
• It results in extra financial expenses on the part of the school parents and even the students Discipline among students may be eroded if care is not taking Suggestions for the Effective use of Field Trip • The economics teacher should first discuss the idea of a field trip with the school management • He/she should write the Chief Executive/Managing Director, if it involves organization/industries for permission to visit.
• He /she should discuss with the students the aim of the trip, their involvement and what they need for the trip.
• The student should be informed about the guiding rules of the place, dangers, what to look out for and how to report their observation.
• The teacher should carry along first aid box in case any of the students sustain minor accidents.
• The teacher should make accurate transport arrangement and lodgment in case the trip will last more than one day.
• After the trip, examine the student on the specimens and information collected from the trip.
This has to be in connection with the report of the trip in order to facilitate relation of the experience from the trip.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Pause and think of how a teacher can prepare fore a field trip.
63 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.4 Problem Solving Method It is quite similar to the project method but while project method demands a practical accomplishment in a real situation, the problem solving method emphasizes a mental conclusion.
Problem solving is very relevant in economics teaching because it helps the development of reasoning power.
Advantage of Problem Solving Method.
• It conforms to life because life itself is problem solving.
• It arouses interest which aid the educational process • It trains students in the art of good judgment formation.
• It fosters student’s creativity • It motivates students to learn by providing them opportunity to satisfy the need to talk and interact with their peers.
Disadvantage of problem solving method • Student of low intelligence quotients may find it difficult to contribute effectively • Materials and resources needed for problem solving are not often available to the students.
• It is time consuming method • Students are often too immature to really recognize problems of social significance • Students might develop some psychological problems especially that the world they live in is full of nothing but problem.
3.5 Project Method A project can be said to be anything accomplished under student motivation.
Projects are organized activities in which students are allowed to investigate or research on their own.
It can be used for individualized instruction as it can be used on a group of students.
For example, five students, ten students or the whole class can be asked to execute a project.
The project method is characterized by students planning physical activities resulting in physical creation while the teacher guide.
Project includes such things as construction, displays, murals, charts, exhibitions, reviews, making models and others.
The project method can be seen as the technique which engages students in a task centered learning activity with a concrete result or end product.
The use of project method for teaching/learning can be in the form of: 64 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Preparing wall charts Preparing project booklets Carrying out special enquiries and Making models.
Under the project method, everything has to be done by the students while the teacher simply inspires and guide them.
Advantage of Project Method • The project method covers all levels of the psychomotor domains i.e.
cognitive, affective and psychomotor.
• Students can be involved in planning the project, thus increasing interest and motivation • The student can develop their own initiative because emphasis is on “doing” • Emphasis is placed upon doing by the student • It develops in student’s responsibility and initiative • The students develop greater understanding of how to learn.
• It helps the student to have an in-depth study of the topic under investigation • It afford opportunities for developing leadership qualities Disadvantage of Project Method • It requires a great deal of time • It may be expensive • It disrupts the time-table • It is too difficult to evaluate • It requires the maintenance of students’ interest over a long period.
• It is beneficial to students who have the potentials to independent study.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE i) Differentiate between project and problems solving methods.
ii) Identify advantages and disadvantages of project method.
Suggestions for Effective use of project method.
• Provide students with all the necessary guide that will help them carry out the project effectively.
65 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS • Spread the project over a long period of time to enable them have an in-depth study of the topic.
• Ensure that the purpose of the project fits properly into the instructional sequence.
• Ensure that there is objectivity in making and scoring of the project by developing a marking procedure.
3.2 Inquiry Method This is a relevant method of teaching economics in our school.
Although, it is derived from the scientific method of investigation.
It is however different from other methods such as project or problem solving method.
The inquiry method enables the students to examine ideas, events and problems, which are of a social or environmental in nature in the community.
The process does not allow the teacher to provide the answers to the problems but directs and gives minimum guidance to the students.
The questions to be raised in solving the problems and solutions of the problems are entirely those of the students.
Advantage of Inquiry Method • It can be used with individual students and groups • It develops the skills of observation, exploration and questioning in students • It aids the understanding concepts, processes or relationships.
• It motivates the students to learn the subject if use properly • It encourages participation, cooperation and tolerance among the students SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Now, in two or more sentence discuss the similarities between problem solving project and inquiry methods Disadvantage of Inquiry Methods 66 • • • • •  It could be expensive because it involves going on a trip It is time consuming If the problem is too difficult it can result in a loss of interest A lot of responsibility is It needed proper planning entrusted on the students EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate at Least five advantages and disadvantages of Inquiry Methods 4.0 CONCLUSION In a nutshell, the above methods motivate the students to learn as they are actively involved in the teaching and learning processes and the results obtained gives students a satisfying sense of achievement.
Teaching should excite a youngster’s natural curiosity that is why a wise mother will ask her child “what question did he/she ask today” and not what did you do today”.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss some methods of teaching economics that facilitate skills acquisition and also identifying their advantage and disadvantage.
The methods among others include problem-solving; project and inquiry methods.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the characteristics or features of project method?
2.
Identify major hindrances in the use of problem solving method in Economics 3.
Enumerate the process of inquiry method 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O.
[2004]: An Introduction to Economics Education.
Ibadan; ERSG ‘Segun Ajiboye; ‘Sola Adu; and ‘Wale Amosun [2005]: Introduction to Social Studies.
Ibadan; ERSG .
67 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 3 STUDENT TEACHING PRACTICES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Teaching practice 3.2 Preparation to teach 3.3 Example of economic lesson not 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teaching practice was designed to help student teachers otherwise known as teachers-in-training to develop their teaching abilities and classroom management.
Teaching practice is also intended to expose the student teachers to situations as they exist in the school system, to help them develop a cooperative attitude, and to enable them put into practice what they have learned in theory.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Highlight the areas where student teachers are assessed.
• Produce a comprehensive lesson note for class use.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teaching Practice Teaching practice is developed to fulfill a period of apprenticeship required by the training institution.
To fulfill the professional requirement of teaching, the teacher in-training is expected to serve a period of apprenticeship in a school system under the supervision of the school head and supervisor from the training institutions for a number of weeks, months or a year depending on the laid down rules.
This is similar to medical student housemanship In Nigeria Colleges of Education and Universities where teachers are trained students teaching practice is for six (6) weeks each during the second and third years.
During this exercise the student teacher will be 68 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS supervised and be graded, if the student passed in the two exercises and other prescribed courses, such student becomes a qualified teacher after graduation but if otherwise he is to repeat the exercise and pass it before he can be a qualified teacher.
The student-teacher supervisor evaluates him in three major areas.
The areas are: Personal Qualities The dressing habit of a teacher will encourage the student to dress neat or otherwise, some of these students are exposed to the teacher and they are likely to emulate them.
He/she should be able to demonstrate confidence that he/she knows what he/she is doing and compose himself/herself very well.
The student teacher must show enthusiasm about the subject critics from both his/her supervisor and colleagues and must be friendly /approachable to the students.
The Lesson Evaluation of student teacher effectiveness is incomplete without critical appraisal of the lesson.
The quality of the lesson note is assessed.
The student should ensure that the lesson notes are perfectly written.
The student teacher pays special attention to the aims and objectives of the lessons he/she is going to teach.
It should be stated in behavioral/measurable forms; it should reflect the student’s level of knowledge and be students centered.
The presentation of facts should be based on recommended books for the subject.
The presentation of facts in the lesson should be in logical sequence i.e.
from simple to complex.
During the lesson, the supervisor pay attention to the depth of knowledge of the student teacher in the area he specializes in, and the ability to express himself/herself in correct English and control his voice in the class.
The rate at which he writes on the blackboard legibly and effective use of teaching aids is also assessed.
The Class Activities This is another crucial area in which student-teachers are assessed.
The supervisor considers the level of student participation in class activities i.e.
the level of student involvement in classroom instruction, the level of interaction between the student-teacher and the students must be cordial, the classroom activities must be distributed to individuals to avoid chorus answer.
As it is usual to give out notes to the students, the supervisor will judge the amount and quality of writing done, out-of- class assignments that would require some reading and writing will equally be assessed.
69 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.2 Preparing To Teach Before getting to the classroom, the teacher must have decided on what to teach and how to teach it.
It is important to sketch the sequence of events like introducing the course and how to motivate the students to participate actively in the teaching/learning process.
Planning to teach What to teach should guide the teacher in preparation for the materials to use for his/her teachings.
The teacher must take into consideration.
(a) The lesson topic (b) Method or approach to be used (c) Resources to be used Introduction Every subject teacher must devote time to prepare the introductory part of his/her lessons.
The teacher must introduce the entire subject before detailed discussion is done as each topic is taught later.
The teacher’s first contact/meeting with the class is an important task for which the teacher should devote some time.
The meeting is crucial to the development of curiosity and the urge to know more.
The impression created by the students during this first meeting will sink deep and arouse the students’ interest positively or negatively.
Behavioral Objectives This serves as principles leading to some desire result.
It is also useful to the extent that it specifies what the learner must be able to perform when he is demonstrating his mastery of the objectives.
The teacher should describe clearly and explicitly what the learner would be able to do at the end of the lesson.
Words denoting action used are; at the end of the lesson, the student should be able to: list, identify, differentiate, define, demonstrate, mention, explain, compare etc.
The Development of the Lesson The new learning will develop from meaningful introduction based on student’s previous experience and knowledge.
The development of a lesson must proceed in a sequence of logical steps which must be clearly stated in the lesson.
70 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS For every step written down by the teacher in the development of the lesson, there must be a proposed way of teaching it.
Students should not be given too many facts within a limited time.
Assessment At every stage in the process of teaching the teacher must evaluate the understanding of the lesson by the students.
As a result, the teacher must ask questions and students must be allowed to provide answers Summary In order to ensure perfect conclusion of the teaching, it is advisable for the teacher to give a summary of what has been done during the lesson and stressed important points.
Lesson should have a clear cut goals and the development must be planned in such a way that it leads to a logical end.
Assignment Right from the first day in class, assignments should be given from recommended textbooks.
During the next class, the teacher must spend some time to discuss the assignment.
Students assignments must be graded as this will motivate them to do other given assignments.
3.4 Example of Economics Lesson Note 1.
Name of School:- Ajibode Grammar School, Ibadan.
2.
Name of Teacher: Sarumi, A.G. 3.
Date: 28-08-2006 4.
Class: SS 2 A 5.
No.
on Roll: 42 6.
Average Age of Students: 15years 7.
Period: 5th, Duration: 45minutes 8: Topic: Industrialization 9: Sub-Topic: Meaning and Factors that Encourage Industrialization 10.
Reference: Udu, A. and Agu, F.S.
[1996] New System Economics: A Senior Secondary Course.
Onitsa.
Africana Publishers.
11.
Instructional Material: A Chart Showing the Picture of Textile Industry 71 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 12.
Previous Knowledge: Students are acquainted with various types of industries 13.
Objectives: By the end of the lesson, students should be able to: i) Define Industry ii) Explain Industrialization with examples of industrialized countries iii) List factors that can encourage industrialization (iv) Differentiate between an industry and industrializatrion 14.
Presentation: Step I: Teacher introduces the lesson by asking the students the following questions: i.
What is industry?
ii.
List types of industry Teacher assists the students to define industry as: “the manufacturing unit that is involved in the transformation or processing of material inputs into new product”.
i.
A group of firms producing similar products even though the products of each firm may be differentiated.
ii.
Industrialization could also mean a group of firms producing different parts of a final commodity.
Step II: Teacher asks the students to define industrialization.
The teacher assists the student to define industrialization as: A concept used to explain an economy characterized by a relatively large manufacturing sector and a highly developed technology, both of which are applied to the development of other sectors of the economy Step III: Teacher asks the students to identify industrialized countries.
Teacher moderates and list industrialized countries as: i. Britain ii.
Russia iii.
United State of America iv.
Japan v. 72 Germany etc.
EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Step IV: Teacher asks the students to list factors that can encourage industrialization.
Teacher moderates and lists those factors as: i.
Level of savings and investment ii.
Human resources iii.
Population of the area iv.
Markets availability v. Availability of raw materials vi.
Transportation facilities vii.
Research and Inventions viii.
Level of productivity ix.
Foreign exchange etc.
Step IV: Teacher writes the summary note on the chalk board for students to copy in their exercise books.
15.
Evaluation: At the end of the lesson, teacher asks the students the following questions orally a) What is industry?
b) What is industrialization?
c) List 10 examples of industrialized countries d) List factors that can encourage industrialization.
e) Differentiate between Industry and Industrialization 16.
Summary and Conclusion: Teacher summarized and concluded the lesson by re-examining the topic so as to carry the slow learners along.
17.
Assignment: Teacher asks the students to list 10 advantages of industrialization in their notebooks and submit them for marking before the next class/lesson 4.0 CONCLUSION A good student-teacher teaching economics is expected to have collected information about the class to teach before sketching the sequence of other classroom events.
It is also expected that he/she should pay special attention to the introductory aspect of the topics to be treated in all lessons.
He/She should also prepare lesson notes which will serve as guide in the course of the teaching.
The behavioral objectives in the lesson note should be stated in measurable term.
5.0 SUMMARY 73 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS In this unit, we have discussed how a student teacher should plan to teach, the importance of the first contact/meeting with the students by the student-teacher was stressed, ways of stating the behavioral objectives, the way of developing a good lesson and a specimen of a lesson note to teach economics.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Select any topic from SSII economics syllabus and prepare comprehensive lesson note to cover a period of eighty minutes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu E.O (2004) An Introduction to Economics Education, Ibadan;; ERSG Segun Ajiboye; Sola Adu and Wole Amosun (2005): Introduction to Social Studies.
A Basic text for tertiary Institutions Students Ibadan; ERSG Ehiametator E. T. (1985):Classroom management: Guide to Evaluation and methods.
Evans Bro Nig.
Ltd. 74 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 4 EVALUATION STRATEGIES IN ECONOMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Evaluation 3.2 Purpose of an Essay Test 3.3 Types of Evaluation 3.3.1 Formative Evaluation 3.3.2 Summative Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every school system has stipulated objectives and ways for achieving them.
The general objective of an educational system is to develop the individual student as a natural resource of the society.
Educational dimensions are reflected in the syllabus designed for each educational level in the system.
These broad dimensions will be meaningless if there are no ways of evaluating the students knowledge of the syllabus.
In this unit, you will learn the meaning of evaluation, the types of evaluation and tests.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define evaluation • Distinguished between Classroom, General and External Evaluation • List the various types of Evaluation • Distinguished between objectives, subjective, essay and standardize tests.
75 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Evaluation Evaluation is a continuous process in teaching-learning process.
It is the science of providing information for decision–making, the process of delineating, obtaining and providing useful information for judging decision alternatives.
This definition emphasis that the objectives of evaluation are making decision but it is not an end in itself, but a means to effective instruction.
Tuckman (1975) defines evaluation as a process wherein parts, processes, or outcomes of a programme are examined to see whether they are satisfactory, particularly with reference to the programme’s stated objectives, our own expectations, or our own standard of excellence.
Thorndike and Hagen (1977) asserted that the purpose of evaluation is to determine the level of achievement and to forecast future success in a subject.
From the above definitions, it can be seen that educational evaluation is not only a process of gathering information it is also a process of making decision as well.
When we evaluate we actually pass judgment and that this judgment is usually passed on the process we have used to effect a change.
For example, if a teacher says “I think that method I am using is good” then we would be making a statement of ‘Evaluation’.
Levels of Evaluation There are three levels of Evaluation (i) Class room Evaluation (ii) General School Evaluation (iii) External Evaluation (i) Classroom Evaluation- This is a situation where the classroom teacher continuously evaluate the students from the topics he has treated with the students.
It may be in form of quizzes, short essays or homework.
This is done to monitor the student performance from one stage of development to another.
(ii) General Evaluation- This is the end of term/year examination.
This evaluation is common to all the classes in the school and is carried out by all schools under a particular system.
This comes up at the end of the term/year to round up academic/school activities for the term/year 76 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS (iii) External Evaluation- This type of evaluation is conducted by bodies outside a particular school building in Nigeria, final Primary School Leaving Certificate Examination conducted by various states ministries of education, the junior Secondary School Final Examination conducted by National Examinations Council and the Senior Secondary School Certificate Examination conducted by NECO and WAEC are all external evaluations.
At these levels students are evaluated against what they have been taught and to determine how well they have mastered the content of the subject.
In these examinations, the overall intelligence of the students are evaluated in various subjects.
The examinations conducted by various examination bodies are terminal examination at various stages of education.
Types of Evaluation Instrument There are several types of evaluation instruments used in an educational system which are also used in economics.
These include: i. Subjective test ii.
Objective test iii.
Standardize test iv.
Essay test i. Subjective Test This type of test is based on the evaluator’s personal limitations resulting in biases of judgment and preferences.
In a subjective test the evaluator might base his judgment on irrelevant factors that do not take into consideration the special talent of a student.
For example,, if a teacher decides to pass student in an examination because he is aware of the circumstances surrounding the student inability to perform well the teacher is biased in his judgment in passing the student.
ii.
Objective Test The nature of objective tests requires that the evaluator eliminates personal preference biases and other irrational motives.
Objective evaluation is based on established criteria.
These criteria should specify that in order for a student to be awarded some marks he must have answered correctly the problems given in the test.
77 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS In an objective test, students are required to select one correct answer to a particular question; the purpose of this type of test is to determine student’s level of understanding, their ability to associate information with relevant facts and ability to recall information.
Objective test refers to multiple choices, true-false and matching tests.
iii.
Standardized Test This type of test is designed by experts/ expert in a field to measure certain variables relevant to mental age.
Level of academic maturity and ability or intelligence.
Standardize test can also be an achievement test because the tests have been found to be measuring the learning ability of student.
In Nigeria, the following examination bodies are responsible for standardized testing; WAEC, NECO, JAMB, NTI, Ministries of Education iv.
Essay Test Essay test is the most complicated evaluation instrument at the disposal of the teacher.
It is good for creativity and divergent minds.
It brings out the students ability to express himself.
But grading is subjective.
3.2 Purpose of an Essay Test a.
The ability of the student to apply information through abstraction of concrete situations- This means the student should be able to apply the knowledge acquired in the classroom to solve problems of concrete nature.
For examples if you are the country’s Economic Adviser, what will you recommend to be done to have surplus budgets?
b.
The ability to Analyze- In analytic essay, it involves the breakdown of material into component parts.
This type of essay is more difficult than the first one; the ability to analyze involves the ability of the student to breakdown the situations before coming up with intelligent and meaningful solution.
For example as an economic adviser, you should be able to analyze why the country has been having balance of payment problem and suggest meaningful ways out.
c. Ability to synthesize- This enable the teacher to examine the ability of the student to synthesize information.
Bloom (1956) refers to this as “putting together of elements to form a whole”.
78 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS In this type of test, the student should be allowed to add new information which he has learned and present his essay in the best way he can.
The question of memorizing what is taught should be discouraged.
d. Ability to Evaluate- This essay format involves the evaluation of material presented.
The objectives are to examine the students on his ability to evaluate critically a poem or body of concrete or abstract knowledge.
3.3 Types of Evaluation There are two major types of evaluation-formative and summative evaluation.
3.3.1 Formative Evaluation.
This is done during the course of executing a programme or during the classroom teaching.
As the programme progresses, the evaluator will find out the following: (a) Whether the learners are progressing (b) Whether the aims and objectives are adequate for the group of learners concerned (c) Whether the learning experiences are capable of leading to the achievement of set goals (d) Whether the content is suitable for acquiring the desired knowledge.
At this stage, tests are conducted based on what the teacher have treated, observations, are made based on the qualities being inculcated.
Results of such test and observation are recorded and analyzed for purpose of discovering areas of weakness in the learners or the programme and making the necessary corrections or modifications which might involve changing teaching approaches, re-organizing the content, re-examining the objectives or providing different kinds of learning experiences.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify reasons for formative evaluation 3.3.2 Summative Evaluation This type of evaluation is carried out at the end of course or programme in order to assess the worth of the products of the programme.
This evaluation is based on the overall performance of learners in the whole 79 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS programme.
It is expected to cover all aspect of learning and most items of content.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Different between formative and summative evaluation 4.0 CONCLUSION It is important that tests are constructed to text not only native intelligence of Nigerian school pupils but also acquired knowledge of the society and concepts.
Since standardized tests provide the opportunity of comparing the achievement of school children from one level to the other and between one school system and another, teachers will be made accountable for what they teach.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about the meaning of evaluation types of evaluation, purpose of an essay test, as well as types of evaluation.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and explain the levels of evaluation that can be used by an economics teacher.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu E.O (2004) An introduction to economics education, Ibadan; ERSG Ajiboye J.O (2003) Social studies methods II Ibadan Distance learning centre series, University of Ibadan Nigeria.
Bloom B.K (1956): Taronomy of Educational Objectives.
A handbook: Cognitive Domain New York: David Mackay Company Dada A.
(1999) The teacher and the curriculum Ibadan; Tejama printer Ltd 80 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS UNIT 5 QUALITIES OF A GOOD AND EFFECTIVE ECONOMICS TEACHER AND CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Qualities of an Effective Teacher 3.2 The Process of Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The common inference from the much-quoted statement, that the teacher is a sort of failure in the world of action, greatly comforts anti- intellectual.
But almost to a man successful, men of action [all of whom think they would be teachers if they turned aside to it.]
have proved failures as teachers.
We shall examine those distinguishing characteristics of a good economics teacher.
Like any other professional activity, teaching requires a cultivated ability.
To be done exceptionally well, it also requires a special talent and a sense of vocation 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to explain the distinguishing characteristics of a good economics teacher.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Qualities of an Effective Teacher The subject of teacher effectiveness is now a perennial one in educational discourse.
The teachers today occupy a paramount position in the teaching learning situation.
It is an agreed position now that no education can rise above the quality of its teachers.
It will therefore worth the while to examine those qualities of an effective economics teacher.
These are: 81 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Knowledge of the content There was this big controversy about which one is more important, is it knowledge of what to teach, or how to teach it?
Some educators contend that knowledge of what to teach is more important than knowing how to teach it, while others feel that knowing how to teach is more important than knowledge of what to teach.
An effective or good economics teacher must have a sound knowledge of what to teach i.e.
good knowledge of the content and also how to teach it.
Knowledge/Skill in Teaching Methods Coupled with a good knowledge of the content, is the pedagogical skills.
A good teacher is he/she who is able to impart knowledge into his/her students.
Many of us will remember that our subject teacher in secondary school; how bad he was.
Many of these ‘bad’ teachers ordinarily possessed a good knowledge of the content; however, they were not able to impart same into their learners.
Teachers are expected to master the teaching methods and strategies to enable them facilitate effective interaction between their learners and the content.
The Teacher as an Inspiration Because instruction is an inter-personal affair, different teaching styles work on different students.
An abrasive performer might drive his more timid students into their shells.
According to Ajiboye [2003] one learns more from a good scholar in a rage than from a score of lucid and laborious drudges.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify the distinguish characteristics of economics teachers Class Management Management or Administration involves the utilization of available resources in the accomplishment of the stated objective of an organization.
(Knezevich 1975) said management exists in an organisation to make resources productive in order that the organisation may achieve its goals.
The school principal is a leader because of his administrative responsibilities in the school.
He is mostly responsible for coordinating the various activities of the school towards the achievement of goals establishment for his school.
82 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS An economics teacher is equally an administrator, functioning at a level different from that of a principal, vice-principal head of department.
He is a classroom manager, because in performing his routine responsibilities he engages in the process of administration.
The process of administration involves: Planning, organizing, staffing, directing, leading and controlling.
3.2 The Process of Administration Planning In the planning process, an economics teacher engages in planning for long term activities as contained in the subject syllabus and scheme of work.
He also engages in short term activities as contained in the lesson note and look for ways in which the policies and objectives of instruction will be accomplished he also plans for appropriate teaching resources to help him in the delivery of the lesson.
Organizing In organizing of instruction, an economics teacher should structure his materials according to the hierarchy in which the materials are to be presented.
The teacher must consider establishment of specific goals for all the classes, and the identification of the activities that will lead to the accomplishment of the goals established.
A well organized instruction enhances the teacher’s efficiency because he has planned in advance what needs to be and how to do it (as in the lesson plan) Directing Economics teacher is mainly concerned with directing activities in his class in such a way as to enhance the achievement of the goals he has formulated for the class.
He also direct the students through motivation by directing the students in learning and doing the class assignments.
Leading He is expected to lead his class of students towards achieving both the goals of instruction and those of the school system.
The authorities employing the teacher believe he has the trait that would make him class leader.
He should lay good examples and be well disciplined.
He should be ready to render assistance to students at all times.
Staffing 83 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS Many people have argued that economics teachers cannot be considered as performing staffing functions in the school.
Staffing is the location, selection, and recruitment of capable personnel to do what is needed to be done in a school in terms of instruction and other supporting activities.
Economics teacher is responsible for designing an educational instrument for the selection and recruitment of students, and staff as the case may be.
Controlling Economics teacher control the behavior of students in his class.
He controls them to learn and understand concepts and how to apply the concepts to everyday activities.
He maintains discipline in the classroom as a means of inducing good behaviour and ensuring maximum learning achievement in the classroom.
Task management When educators talk about classroom management, one of the first things that come to mind is maintenance of discipline, many years ago, the Nigerian educators had thought that descriptive behaviours of student in the classroom was unknown phenomenon to the Nigerian Educational system.
It was regarded as American or European education syndrome.
The reasoning behind this was that the Nigerian child was so well brought up; It was assumed that he could not defy the authority of the elder statesman, the teacher.
But recent occurrences in the primary, secondary and even institution of higher learning have eroded this confidence.
Today, the teacher finds himself in a class filled with students who are disposed to violence, not only to their fellow students, but also to the teacher himself, In cities, students violence has reached alarming stage that school authorities have started to control the students by requesting for the services of policemen to control the students.
In an attempt to control student’s violence, careful management of the classroom is important, the use of class suspension and due process, rules and teachers consistency, equality of opportunity in the classroom and human rights of the students are emphasized.
4.0 CONCLUSION A first class teacher seeks to ignite in his students an enthusiasm for his subject by example and leadership.
What make that first-class or effective teacher has always been a matter of debate between 84 EDU 726 ECONOMICS METHODS educational liberals and conservatives, and ability to use the available resources to achieve educational goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have been able to examine some distinguishing characteristics of economics teacher such as, knowledge of the content, skill in teaching methods and the teacher as an inspiration, as well as the role of economics teacher in classroom management.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the role of economics teacher in management of a school to achieve the stated educational goals with the limited resources available?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adu, E.O.
[2004]: An introduction to Economics Education; A basic Text for Tertiary Institutions Students Ibadan: ERSG.
Ajiboye, J.O.
[2003]: Social studies methods II Ibadan Distance Learning Centre Series.
Ibadan University of Ibadan Clark, M. [1973]: The principles of Teaching Economics.
Heinemann Educational Books.
EhiametalorE.T(1985):b Classroom Management: Guide to education and methods.
Evan Brothers Nig Ltd. 85
