 EDA 721: HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) Out D. O. A.B.U.
Zaria Unit Writer Dr. (Mrs.) Out D. O. A.B.U.
Zaria Programme Leader Dr. Salawu I. O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Course Coordinator Ajadi T. O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIAEDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION MODULE 1 Unit 1 The Nature of Human Resource Management Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Nature of Human Resource Management 3.1 Definition of Human Resource Management 3.2 Definition of Human Resource 3.3 The Issues in Human Resource Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This course is related to the nature and scope of Human Resource Management.
This unit focuses specifically on the nature of human resource management.
The unit is a guide to the field of human resource management.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the Unit objectives below: 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Describe the nature of human resource management  Identify what human resources are  Define management 3.0 The Nature of Human Resource Management NOUN 2EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 3.1 Definition of Human Resource The term ‘human resource management’ (HRM) has been subjected to considerable debate.
The concept is shrouded in managerial hype and its underlying philosophy and character is highly controversial because it lacks precise formulation and agreement as to it’s significance.
Nonetheless, definition of the subject matter is given according to Bratton and Gold (1999:11) as: “That part of the management process that specializes in the management of people in work organizations.
HRM emphasizes that employees are critical to achieving sustainable competitive advantage, that human resources practices need to be integrated with the corporate strategy, and that human resource specialists help organizational controllers to meet both efficiency and equity objectives.” Naturally, the definition of human resource management would be incomplete without further explaining what the terms ‘human resources’ and ‘management’ are.
First and foremost, people in work organizations, endowed with a range of abilities, talents and attitudes, influence productivity, quality and profitability.
People set overall strategies and goals, design work systems, produce goods and services, monitor quality, allocate financial resources, and market the products and services.
Individuals, therefore, become ‘human resources’ by virtue of the roles they assume in the work organization.
Employment roles are defined and described in a manner designed to maximize particular employees’ contributions to achieving organizational objectives.
In theory, the management of people is no different from the management of other resources of organizations.
In practice, what makes it different is the nature of the resource, people.
One set of perspective views the human being as potentially a creative and complex resource whole behaviour is influenced by many diverse factors originating from either the individual or the surrounding environment.
Organizational behaviour theorists, for example, suggest that the behavior and performance of the ‘human resource’ is a function of at least four variables: ability, motivation role perception and situational contingencies.
Another set of perspectives emphasizes the problematic nature of employment relations: (Watson, 1986).
The human resources differ from other resources the employer uses, partly because individuals are endowed with varying levels of ability (including aptitudes, skills and knowledge), with personality traits, gender, role perception and differences in experience, and partly as a result of differences in motivation and commitment.
In other words, employees differ from other resources NOUN 3EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION because of their ability to evaluate and to question management’s actions and their commitment and co-operation always has to be won.
In addition, employees have the capacity to form groups and trade unions to defend or further their economic interest.
Human resource is often referred to as personnel, staff or workers.
3.2 Definition of Management The term ‘management’ may be applied to either a social group or a process.
The term ‘management’, when applied to a process, conjures up in the mind a variety of images of managerial work.
Management may be seen as a science or as an art.
The image of management as a science is based on the view that experts have accumulated a distinct body of knowledge about management which, if studied and applied, can enhance organizational effectiveness.
This view assumed that people can be trained to be effective managers.
Classical management theorists set out to develop a ‘science of management’, in which management is defined in terms of planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating and controlling’.
In this classical conception, management is regarded as primarily concerned with internal affairs.
Another set of perceptives on the role of management emphasizes that an organization is a purposive miniature society and, as such, power and politics are pervasive in all work organizations.
By power it means the capacity of an individual to influence others who are in a state of dependence.
Organizational politics refers to those activities that are not required as part of a manager’s formal role, but which influence, or attempts to influence, the distribution of resources for the purpose of promoting personal objectives.
Politics in organization is simply a fact of life.
Those who fail to acknowledge political behaviour ignore the reality that organizations are political systems.
An alternative image of managerial activity is to view management as art.
This implies that managerial ability and success depends upon traits such as intelligence, charisma, decisiveness, enthusiasm, integrity, dominance and self-confidence.
The practical implications of this view are quite different from the ‘management as science’ approach.
If management is equated with specific traits associated with successful styles of leadership, it would provide a basis for selecting the ‘right’ individual for managerial positions in the organization.
Managerial skills can be developed but cannot be acquired by attending ‘business schools’.
In other words, if management is an art, managers are born.
The science-versus-art discourse is not an arid academic debate, given public and private expenditure on management education and training.
The theme of control in organizations provides yet another view of the role of management.
From this perspective, managerial control is the central focus NOUN 4EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION of management activity.
According to this approach, managers seek to control the labour process by deskilling workers using scientific management techniques and new technology.
In searching for the meaning of management, Watson’s (1994) ethnographic study focuses attention on how managers shape both themselves and their subordinates through communicating values to be shared throughout the organization.
He argues that management is inherently a social and moral activity; a human social craft.
It requires the ability to interpret the thoughts and wants of others – be these employees, customers, competitors or whatever – and the facility to shape meanings; values and human commitments.
Perhaps the most sensible way to approach the debate of what management is, is by recognizing that management is indeed both an art and a science and that, at the same time, it is involved in both political behaviour and control.
3.3 The issues in Human Resource Management Every educational system at every level depends heavily on teachers for the execution of its programmes.
Maintaining and improving educational standards is only possible through teachers.
The teacher, therefore, is the most indispensable entity in the school.
He is the greatest aid to learning.
Thus as far as possible, he should be thoroughly trained and supported in his work.
Human resource management deals with the establishment of procedures for the employment and payment of workers or staff.
It is the arrangement of conditions which make possible greater self direction by staff in the performance of their duties.
It is, therefore, an important function in the general context of all administrative responsibility of managing staff.
However, in Nigeria, the Ministries of Education, Civil (Public) Service Commission are very much involved in a number of policies affecting teachers.
Areas of such involvement, for example, include recruitment, staff development, transfers and promotions, staff evaluation, dismissal and general discipline, salaries and pensions.
Thus, the life of the school teacher is affected by the activities of officials in the Ministries of Education or their agencies.
Consequently, the interaction of the two becomes essential if teaching is to become effective.
It should also be remembered that the major premise of staff or human resource management in schools is that the end results of the educative process will be determined by the effectiveness of the school teachers.
In dealing with staff or human resource management in schools, we are essentially concerned with three major issues namely: assessing, the need for NOUN 5EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION staff, satisfying the need for staff and, maintaining and improving staff services.
These will be discussed in later units.
Exercise 1.1 Define the term human resource management.
Answer Kit Human resource refers to the personnel, staff or workers in an organization.
Management means the methods by which the leader utilizes material and human resources to achieve predetermined organizational goals.
Thus, human resource management is the process that deals with utilizing people to perform duties and function in an organization.
4.0 Conclusion Human resource management has been defined as the methods of integrating and maintaining workers in an organization so that the organization can achieve the purposes and meet the goals for which it was established.
It is the coordination of the activities and efforts of the workers in an organization so that organizational goals are achieved.
In other words human resource management is the process of motivating workers in the organization so as to obtain maximum output from them.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have been introduced to the concepts of ‘human resource’ and ‘management’.
You have seen that human resource management and personnel administration (management) refer to the same thing.
Let us now turn our attention to unit 2 where we shall treat the functions and activities of human resource management.
6.0 References Bratton, John and God, Jeffrey (1999) Human Resource Management - Theory and Practice.
- London, Macmillan Press Ltd. Watson, T. (1986) Management, Organisation and Employment Strategy.
London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Musaazi, J.C.S.
(1982)The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration .
London, Macmillan Press Ltd. NOUN 6EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Describe the nature of human resource management.
Unit 2 NOUN 7EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Functions and Activities of Human Resource Management Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Functions of Human Resource Management 3.1 Staffing 3.2 Reward 3.3 Employee Development 3.4 Employee Maintenance 3.5 Employee Relations 3.6 Activities of Human Resource Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This unit is related to the nature and scope of human resource management.
The unit focuses mainly on the functions and activities of Human resource management.
The unit guides you to the actual functions and activities entailed in Human resource management.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain the functions of human resource management  Describe the activities of human resource management 3.0 Functions of Human Resource Management NOUN 8EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Human resource management is a body of knowledge and a set of practices that define the nature of work and regulate the employment relationship.
HRM covers the following five functional areas: 3.1 Staffing Which deals with obtaining people with appropriate skills, abilities, knowledge and experience to fill jobs in the work organization.
Pertinent practices are human resource planning, job analysis, recruitment and selection.
3.2 Rewards Involves the design and administration of reward systems.
Practices include job evaluation, performance appraisal, and benefits.
3.3 Employee Development Is analyzing training requirement to ensure that employees possess the knowledge and skills to perform satisfactorily in their jobs or to advance in the organization.
Performance appraisal can identify employee key skills and ‘competence’.
3.4 Employee Maintenance Is the administration and monitoring of workplace safety, health and welfare policies to retain a competent workforce and comply with statutory standards and regulations.
3.5 Employee Relations Under this heading may be a range of employee involvement/participation schemes in union or non-union workplaces.
In a union environment, it also includes negotiations between management and union representatives over decisions affecting the employment contract.
Exercise 1.1 What other functions can you include?
NOUN 9EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Answer Kit Procurement, development (training), integration, compensation, placement, selection.
3.6 Activities of Human Resource Management The activities Human Resource Managers undertake vary from one workplace to another and might be affected by such factors as the size and structure of the organization (for example, single or multi-establishment organization), the presence or not of trade unions, and senior management’s philosophy and employment strategy.
Larger workplaces are more likely to employ at least one HRM or personnel specialist.
Large organizations might divide HRM activities among several managers; one specialist for recruitment and selection, one for employee training and development and another for negotiating and administrating the collective agreement.
Changes in job design will impact on selection, rewards and training activities.
An organization that changes its manufacturing strategy by introducing ‘cellular’ or ‘self-managed’ teams will have different recruitment and selection priorities to a company that uses traditional assembly line production employing unskilled operators.
Significant changes in job design will also require formal training and learning.
In addition, if the organization chooses to combine tasks and instill greater employee autonomy, an alternative reward system may have to be designed to encourage employee cooperation and commitment.
These sets of human resource activities are designed to match individuals to organizational tasks, to motivate the workforce, and to deal with conflicts and tensions at work.
HRM practices, therefore, aim to achieve two sets of objectives; improve employee performance and enhance organizational effectiveness.
To appreciate the full significance of these HRM practices, it is important to recognize that HRM functions within the organization at two levels (Watson, 1986).
At the first level, HRM activities are concerned with recruiting, motivating and developing competent employee.
Hence, selection procedures are designed to supply the organization with employees with knowledge, abilities, and skills pertinent to their role within the organization.
HRM activities them motivate the workforce by providing employees with satisfactory pay, benefits and working conditions.
HRM professionals also develop individuals to ensure that they possess the knowledge and skills necessary to be effective employees.
NOUN 10EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Many academic observers of work organizations recognized that conflict between individual employees, within teams or between management and employees is inevitable and can enhance, rather than decrease, performance (Carsten De Dreu and Van De VIiert, 1997).
Stephen Robbins (1991) and organizational theorist, distinguishes between functional and dysfunctional conflict.
The former supports the goals of the work group and improves its performance.
Richard Hyman (1989), an industrial relations theorist, identifies two types of workplace conflict; organized and unorganized.
When a group of employees engage in planned action (for example, a strike) to change the source of discontent, it is referred to as organized conflict.
When employees respond to discontent or a repressive situation by individual absenteeism or individual acts of sabotage, it is referred to as unorganized conflict.
It is estimated that managers spend more than 20 per cent of every working day in some form of conflict –management activity.
This brings us to the second level: HRM has responsibility for conflict management.
HRM specialists are involved in a range of interventionist activities designed to alter the level and form of conflict that inevitably arises in work organizations.
Ensuring that conflict does not hinder organizational performance is a central HRM role.
Exercise 1.2 What specific human resource management activities do you engage in your school.?
Answer Kit When teachers are sent to the school by the Ministry of Education you may assign them to the right classes and to their specialized subjects.
You may also assign them other duties and responsibilities in the school taking note of their interests, age, gender, ability and aptitudes.
Such duties are: year group tutor, house-master/mistress; games master/mistress etc.
4.0 Conclusion Human Resource management functions and activities are at the heart of the organization.
Getting the right people to do the right job and in the right places will go a long way to ensure the overall achievement of the goals of the organization.
Therefore, the functions must be well performed.
5.0 Summary NOUN 11EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION In this unit you have learnt that the functions of human resource management include staffing or procurement, rewards (compensation), employee development (training and retraining), placement, employee maintenance, selection and employee relations.
In the next unit, we shall examine some models of human resource management and discuss their implications for effective management of staff in a school organization.
6.0 References Ryman R. (1989) Strikes 4 th Edition - London, Macmillan Press Ltd. Robbins, S. (1991) Organisational Behavour London, Prentice-Hall De Drue, C. and Van De Vliert, E. (1997) Using Conflict in Organizations C.A.
Soge.
Thousand Oaks.
7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment The teachers in your State have been on strike for the past 3 months complaining, among other things, about the poor reward (compensation) system and staff development (retraining) scheme.
Prepare a plan of action to be presented to the State Commissioner for Education to rectify the situation.
Unit 3 NOUN 12EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Models of Human Resource Management Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM 3.1 The Harvard Model of HRM 3.2 The Warwick Model of HRM 3.3 The Storey Model of HRM 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction This Unit is related to various models of human resource management.
It focuses specifically on Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM, the Harvard Model of HRM, the Warwick Model of HRM and the Storey Model of HRM.
The unit guides you through model application to increase organizational effectiveness.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Apply each model to improve on your skill in managing your staff in the school organization.
 Explain the strengths and weaknesses of each model.
3.0 The Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM The early HRM model developed by Fombrun et.
al.
(1984) emphasizes the interrelatedness and the coherence of human resource management activities.
The human resource management cycle in their model consists of four key constituent components selection, appraisal, development and rewards (Figure 1).
These four human resource activities aim to increase organizational performance.
The weakness of the Fombrun, et.
al.
model is NOUN 13EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION its apparent prescriptive nature with its focus on four key HRM practices.
It also ignores different stakeholder interests, situational factors and the notion of management’s strategic choice.
The strength of the model, however, is that it expresses the coherence of internal HRM policies and practices to the organization’s external business strategy.
The HRM cycle is also a simple model that serves as a pedagogical framework for explaining the nature and significance of key HRM practices and the interactions among the factors making up the complex fields of human resource management.
Human resource development Appraisal Selection Performance Rewards Figure 1: The Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna model of HRM 3.1 The Harvard Model of HRM The analytical framework of the ‘Harvard model’ consists of six basic components.
1.
Situational factors 2.
Stakeholders interests 3.
Human Resource Management policy choice 4.
HRM outcome 5.
Long-term consequences 6.
A feedback loop through which the outputs flow.
The Harvard model for HRM is shown in Figure 2.
Stakeholder Interests NOUN 14EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Shareholders Management Employee groups Government Community HRM Policy HR Outcomes Long term Unions Choices Commitment Consequences Employee influence Competence Individual well Human Resource Congruence being Flow Cost effectiveness Organisational Situational factors Reward Systems effectiveness Workforce Work Systems Societal well being characteristics Business strategy and conditions Management Philosophy Labor market Unions Task Technology Laws and societal values Figure 2 The Harvard Mode of HRM.
The situational factors influence management’s choice of HRM strategy.
This normative model incorporates workforce characteristics, management philosophy, labour market, regulations, societal values and patterns of unionization, and suggests a merging of both ‘product market’ and ‘socio- cultural logics’.
Analytically, both HRM scholars and practitioners will be more comfortable with contextual variables included in the model because it conforms to the reality of what they know: ‘the employment relationship entails a blending of business and societal expectations’ (Boxall, 1992 : 72).
The stakeholder interests recognize the importance of ‘trade-offs’, either explicitly, between the interests of owners and those of employees and their organizations, the unions.
Although the model is still vulnerable to the charge of ‘unitarism’.
It is a much more pluralist frame of reference than that found in later models.
Human resource management policy choices emphasize that management’s decisions and actions in HRM can be appreciated fully if it is recognized that NOUN 15EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION they result from an interaction between constraints and choices.
The model depicts management as a real actor, capable of making at least some degree of unique contribution within environmental and organizational parameters and or influencing those parameters itself over time.
The human resource outcomes are high employee commitment to organizational goals and high individual performance leading to cost effective products or services.
The underlying assumption here is that employees have talents that are rarely fully utilized at work, and they show a desire to experience through work.
Thus the HRM model takes the view that organizations should be designed on the basis of the assumptions inherent to McGregor’s Theory Y.
The long term consequences distinguish between three levels: individual, organizational and societal.
At the individual employee level the long-term outputs comprise the psychological rewards workers receive in exchange for efforts.
At the organizational level increased effectiveness ensures the survival of the organization.
In turn, at the societal level, as a result of fully utilizing people at work, some of society’s goals (for example, employment and growth) are obtained.
A strength of the Harvard model is the classification of inputs and outcomes at both organizational and societal level, creating the basis for a critique of comparative HRM (Boxall, 1992).
A weakness of the model is the absence of a coherent theoretical basis for measuring the relationship between HRM inputs, outcomes and performance.
The sixth component of the Harvard model is the feedback loop.
As we have discussed, the situational factors influence HRM policy and choices.
Conversely, however, long-term outputs can influence the situational factors, stakeholder interests and HRM policies.
The feedback loop in Figure 2 reflects this two-way relationship.
There is no doubting the attractiveness of the Harvard model.
It clearly provides a useful analytical basis for the study of HRM.
The model also contains elements that are analytical (that is, situational factors, stakeholders, strategic choice levels) and prescriptive (that is, notions of commitment, competence and so on) (Boxall; 1992).
Socio-economic Technical Political-legal Competitive NOUN 16EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Inner Content Culture Structure Politics/leadership Task-technology Business Outputs Business Strategy Content HRM Context Objectives Role Product market Definition Strategy and tactics Organization HR Outputs HRM content HR Flows Work Systems Reward systems Employee relations Figure 3: The Warwick Model of HRM Exercise 1.1 What is the significance of a model to HRM?
Answer Kit It serves as a guide to practice.
It assists to set the framework upon which the principles of HRM could be applied for better results.
3.2 The Warwick Model of HRM This model emanates from the Centre for Corporate Strategy and Change at the University of Warwick and with two particular researchers, Hendry and Pettigrew (1990).
The Warwick model draws heavily from the Harvard framework to extend the analysis of HRM and has five elements: NOUN 17EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.
Outer context 2.
Inner Context 3. Business strategy content 4.
HRM Context 5.
HRM content (Figure 3).
The model takes congnisance of HRM business strategy and HRM practices, the external and internal context in which these activities take place, and the process by which such change takes place, including interactions between changes in both context and content.
The strength of the model is that it identifies and classifies important environmental influence on HRM.
Hendry and Pettigrew’s research focused on mapping the context, identifying an inner (organizational) context and an external (wider environment) context and exploring how HRM adapted to changes in context.
3.3 The Storey Model of HRM The ‘Storey Model’ is derived from the speculative accounts of what the HRM paradigm might consist of and from the literature on the ‘standard modems’.
The model demonstrates the difference between what Storey termed the ‘personnel and industrials’ and the HRM paradigm.
His model also has four parts: 1.
Beliefs and assumptions 2.
Strategic aspects 3.
Line management 4.
Key levers (see Figure 4) Figure 4 The Storey model of HRM PIR and HRM the differences Dimension Personnel and IR HRM NOUN 18EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Beliefs and assumptions Contract Careful delineation of Aim to go beyond contract written contracts Rules Importance of devising clear ‘can do’ outlook; impatience rules/mutuality with ‘rules’ Guide to management action Procedures/consistency ‘Business control need/flexibility/commitment Behaviour referent Norms/custom and practice Values/mission Managerial task vis a vis Monitoring Nurturing labour Nature of relations Pluralist Unitarist Conflict Institutionalised De-emphasised Stadardisation High (for example ‘parity an Low (for example ‘parity’ issue) not seen as relevant) Strategic aspects Key relations Labour –management Business-customer Initiatives Piecemeal Integrated Corporate Plan Marginal to Central to Speed of decision Slow Fast Line Management Management role Transactional Transformational leadership Key managers Personnel/IR specialists General/business/line managers Prized management skills Negotiation Facilitation Key levers foci of attention for Personnel procedures Wide ranging cultural Interventions structural and personnel strategies Selection Separate marginal task Integrated, key task Pay Job evaluation; multiple Performance-related; few if fixed grades any grades Conditions Separately negotiated Harmonization Labour-management Collective bargaining Towards individual contracts contracts Thrust of relations with Regularised through Marginalised (with stewards facilities and training exceptions of some bargaining for change Communication Restricted flow/indirect models Job design Division of labour Increased flow/direct Conflict handling Reach temporary truces Teamwork Training and development Controlled access to courses Manage climate and culture Learning companies According to the stereotypes depicted in Figure 4, HRM attempts to increase trust and employee commitment and aims to go ‘beyond the contract’.
The strategic aspects of Storey’s model shows HRM central to corporate planning.
The third component, line management, gives HRM specialists a ‘transformational leadership’ role in the organization.
Evidence from core NOUN 19EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION companies suggest that general managers and line managers have emerged in almost all cases as the key players on HRM issues.
The key levers are shown on the lower portion of Storey’s model and are issues and technique strongly featured, explicitly or implicitly, in discussion of HRM.
Storey found considerable unevenness in the adoption of these key levers (performance- related pay, harmonization of conditions and the learning company).
This model, argue Hendry and Pettigrew, provides better descriptions of structures and strategy-making in complex organizations and or frameworks for understanding them (which) are an essential underpinning for analyzing HRM.
While the implication is that those organizations achieving an alignment between the external and internal contexts will experience superior performance; this in actual fact is the main weakness of the model.
Exercise 1.2 What are the basic principles of the Storey Model of HRM as shown inFigure 4?
Answer Kit The Storey Model of HRM has 4 parts namely (1) beliefs and assumptions (2)strategic aspects (3) line management and (4) key levers.
The model is built on the following principles.
1.
Increase the trust and commitment of employee 2.
Corporate planning 3.
Transformational leadership role of the head 4.
Harmonization of conditions, performance must be related to pay.
4.0 Conclusion The model described in this unit have strengths which the school head can effectively draw upon to achieve the goals of the organization.
The weaknesses of the model, however, can be avoided by the school head in order to succeed.
5.0 Summary This unit has focused on four main models of human resource management which the school head can apply to achieve maximum success with his staff.
The models are: NOUN 20EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION (1) The Fombrun, Tichy and Devanna Model of HRM (2) The Harvard Model of HRM (3) The Warwick Model of HRM and (4) The Storey Model of HRM The main principles of each model were described; the strengths and weaknesses of each were also highlighted for caution in the application by the school head.
6.0 References Boxall, P. (1992) “Strategic Human Resource Management: beginning of a new theoretical sophistication?” Human Resource Management Journal 2 (3): 60-79 Fombrun, C, Tichy, N.M. and Devanna, M.A.
(eds) (1984).
Strategic Human Resource Management.
New York.
Wiley Hendry, C. Pettigrew, A.
(1990) “Human Resource Management.
An Agenda for 1990s” International Journal of Human Resource Management.
1(1): 17-44 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Pick any 2 models.
Describe the main features of each and outline the main strengths.
What are their implications for effective performance by staff in the school system.
Unit 4 NOUN 21EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Recruitment and Selection Processes Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Recruitment Process 3.1 Short Listing 3.2 Preliminary Interview 3.3 Employment Interview 3.3.1 Principles of Interviewing 3.3.2 Preparation 3.3.3 Setting 3.3.4 Conduct of the Interview 3.3.5 Close 3.3.6 Evaluation 3.4 Selection 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction This Unit focuses mainly on aspects which includes, recruitment and selection processes.
The unit guides you to how organizations recruit personnel to fill vacant posts and sources of personnel or skills needed for filling them.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Outline the steps organizations take in recruitment exercise.
 State the components of employment interview.
 State the methods of staff selection after the interview is conducted.
NOUN 22EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 3.0 The Recruitment Process Preliminarily, the recruitment process begins with consideration of the number and types of vacant posts needed to be filled, and the sources of personnel or skills needed for filling them.
The source could be internal or external, or both, as earlier indicated.
For internal sources, postings or transfers or promotion can thus be effected.
In the case of external sources, there may be the need to start with advertisement of a kind as the first step.
The advertisement itself should contain adequate information about job content, qualifications and experience, compensations and other conditions of service, as earlier indicated.
3.1 Short Listing After many applications must have been received, it may not be possible to invite every applicant to an interview, due to time and financial constraints.
The employment agency should, therefore, short-list those to be interviewed by preliminary screening and selection base on the information available in the applications.
But the problem is that some applications may not provide adequate information about the types of personnel required, depending on the format and the nature of application forms and letters respectively.
Besides, a short-listing exercise may tend to lay emphasis on one or two qualities such as educational qualification and experience at the expense of other vital ones like physical posture and emotional stability and temperament which are fundamental in management processes and successes.
It is for these reasons that preliminary interview may be considered as superior to short-listing.
3.2 Preliminary Interview Preliminary interview can be conducted either after a short-listing exercise, or in place of short-listing exercise.
Preliminary interview is superior to short- listing in various ways.
In the first place, preliminary interviews enable the employers or their recruitment officers to see the applicants personally so that both physical and emotional disposition of applicant can be assessed.
It also enables recruiting officers to evaluate the validity of information contained in the application forms or letters given by the applicants.
This can be done by comparing the preliminary interview with what obtains in the application forms.
It is also important in the sense that it enables applicants to know more about the jobs they have applied for.
This, however, has two- sided effects.
Some applicants may develop more interest in the jobs while others may get discouraged when they get to know most of the things about NOUN 23EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION the job, especially when the advertisement was not detailed or comprehensive enough.
At any rate, factual information could be obtained by means of an application blank.
Questions asked in the application blank, however, should not be embarrassing and difficult to interprete..
But the degree of reliability of the use of the application blank is still questionable from many quarters.
In a study of III blanks completed by applicants for the job of nurse’s aide, systematic checking with previous employers produced some marked discrepancies; one fourth disagreed on “reasons for leaving prior position, while over half of the applicants overstated both salaries received and duration of previous employment”, as reported in Flippo (1980).
It was also discovered that fifteen per cent had never worked for employers they indicated on the blank.
This speaks for the unreliable nature or adverse effects of application blanks.
The following passage also points towards this direction: On hopefully rare occasions, newspapers carry stories of the highly successful medical doctor who from medical school, the reasonably effective professional who does not have the degrees claimed, and the properly credentialed and classroom effective professor who held three full-time college jobs simultaneously within a one hundred miles radius (Flippo, 1980:35) The above quotation tends to support the criticisms against application blanks.
It also suggests that despite the commendation of the system from certain quarters, there are still many loophole for manouvres.
A conclusive remark on all forms of interviews, and, particularly, the use of application blanks, is that success and reliability all depend on the degree of honesty and reliability of the applicants.
But, perhaps most of these loopholes can be taken care of during the employment or final interview stage.
3.3 Employment Interview After short-listing or preliminary interviews, the next stage is the final or employment interview.
At the short-listing or preliminary interview stage, almost all the unqualified or the undesirable must have been eliminated, yet, the recruiting officers sill have a number of candidates unproportionally larger than the actual number required for employment.
The next stage, therefore, is to conduct an employment interview.
The employment interview is the final stage of selection for placement, and almost the most difficult stage in the selection processes.
It is difficult in the sense that almost all the candidates that reach this stage must have been NOUN 24EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION possessing the necessary requirements in skills and experience, and the recruitment officers are expected to chose only the MOST suitable candidates out of these, using interviewing techniques.
The interview could be structured or unstructured, what Edwin Flippo describes as “guided” and “unguided” interviews.
In the guided interview, a list of questions is prepared based on an analysis of job specification.
This is more suitable for untrained interviewers.
With experienced and well qualified interviewers, however, the unguided interview is often used.
The unguided interview, as the concept implies, is not planned or structured.
It enable the interviewer to obtain more information, including salient one, about the interviewee, since the latter does most of the talking and reveals more about himself.
Whatever method of interviewing is chosen, the interviewer should observe certain principles of interviewing.
3.3.1 Principles of Interviewing A good interviewing requires certain basic principles or a sort of guide or framework on which to base the assessment of candidates.
The seven point plan developed by the National Institute of Industrial Psychology (NIIP) UK, was considered to be the first major framework universally applied in interviewing, and remained popular until the emergence of Mungo Frazer’s Five Point Plan also known as he “Pentagonal Peg”, as discussed in Ubeku (1975).
Using this framework, interviewers are expected to observe the following principles of interviewing: 1.
First impression and physical make-up; 2.
Qualifications and expectations; 3.
Brains and abilities 4.
Motivation and 5.
Adjustment These principles differ somehow from those five presented by Edwin Flippo (1980) which include: 1.
Preparation 2.
Setting 3.
Conduct of the interview 4.
Close and NOUN 25EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 5.
Evaluation The analysis here, however, attempts to cover the loopholes created by the two sets of principles, although the emphasis is on the latter set of principles of interviewing as presented by Flippo.
3.3.2 Preparation All forms of interview require careful planning or preparation.
Interviewers must first of all determine the basic objectives of the interviews, and the methods of accomplishing these major objectives.
The interviewers must have some basic knowledge about the interviewee before the commencement of this final interview.
This implies that the interviewer must be conversant with the information already obtained in the preliminary interviews by referring to the application blanks or other sources of information.
This enables the interviewer to determine what to expect and how to obtain what is expected from the interviewee.
This important stage in the interviewing processes, unfortunately eludes Ubeku who goes straight to start with what he calls “first impression and physical make-up”, which in fact, is largely “setting” the second stage in Flippo’s analysis.
3.3.3 Setting Although Flippo himself admits that this stage is not entirely a separate one from the first, he does not resist the temptation to treat it separately from any other stage of principle.
The interviewer is expected to observe the principle of setting which is of two major types: physical and mental settings.
Unlike the one-sided approach in Ubeku, the physical setting is a two dimensional approach.
The first consideration in this principle is that, the interviewer must make the interview hall or physical environment attractive, and as much as possible, matching with the types of jobs or vacancies to be filled.
An untidy and inconvenient physical environment may put off prospective candidates, especially at chief executive level, while an attractive physical setting may mean more attraction to the job and the organization as a whole.
The other perspective of physical setting comes in at the commencement of the interview.
It begins with the entry of the candidates into the interview room when his physical appearance gives the first impression about himself.
A candidates shabby appearance may put off interviewers completely, while a smart-looking gentleman may just be considered to be the right man for the job as soon as he enters the interview room.
NOUN 26EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 3.3.4 Conduct of the Interview This is the real “action” stage at which the interviewer obtains the desired information and supplies some facts that the interviewee may wish to know.
The interviewer is expected to create a rapport or relationship between him and the interviewee.
The former should create a good atmosphere which enables the interviewee to relax or feel free.
In this case a sort of introductory piece or conversation on current affairs or general matter may serve as a useful tool.
It also forms part of the interview process, because, apart from enabling the interviewee to feel free, the interviewer is able to determine the former’s reactions to certain issues that may appear to be not of immediate concern to him.
The interviewer then moves straight to the interview contents.
The questions should be straight and easy to understand.
Sensitive questions should be avoided.
The questions should be framed in such a way that the interviewee does most of the talking while the interviewer listens attentively.
The interviewer jots down important points or issues raised by the interviewee in the course of their conversation.
3.3.5 Close The “close” stage is important in the sense that the interviewee needs to be given some indications that the interview is coming to an end.
This should be followed by some sort of indication of future action in a sort of positive future action.
The candidates should be told when to know about the outcome of their interview.
3.3.6 Evaluation The evaluation of an interview follows almost immediately after the interviewee leaves the interview room while the details are still fresh in the minds of the interviewers.
The jotted down points should be examined in a broader perspective.
Both the physical and mental disposition of the interviewee are considered along with skills, experience, and the ability for clear expression.
NOUN 27EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 3.4 Selection The final selection is done after the evaluation.
The best thing is to make the final selection immediately after the evaluation stage.
Some organizations, especially large ones, may chose to take the results of the interview programme for further scrutiny by a committee for selection and placement.
This is the usual practice with the public services where certain political considerations like the popular but controversial “Federal Character” in Nigeria may have to come into play, particularly with the Federal Civil Service or National Corporations.
At any rate, the candidates should be selected and placed according to the number of vacancies existing in the various section of the organization, and in accordance with their qualifications, and experiences.
Exercise 1.1 Differentiate between Preliminary Interview and employment interview.
Answer Kit Your answer should have bearing with the importance of each interview.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have learnt a number of important issues related to recruitment and selection processes in organization to fill the existing vacant posts.
It is very important to go through the processes discussed so as to get the best of staff into your organization.
5.0 Summary What you have learnt in this unit concerns the processes – recruitment and selection – by which organizations get the best hands to manage posts that are vacant through internal or external means.
These functions are performed by the Ministry of Education through the Civil (Public/Teaching) Service Commission.
6.0 References Flippo, E.B.
(1980) Personnel Management London.
Mcgraw-Hill Ubeku, A.K.
(1975) Personnel Management in Nigeria Lagos.
Longman NOUN 28EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Discuss the recruitment and selection processes of staff into secondary schools in your state.
Enumerate flaws in the procedure and make suggestions to remedy these flaws.
MODULE 2 Unit 5 Induction of Personnel NOUN 29EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Induction of Personnel 3.1 Nature and Scope of the Induction Programme 3.1.1 Nature of the Induction Programme 3.1.2 Scope of the Induction Programme 3.2 Objectives of the Induction Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction This unit is related to the induction of personnel and it focuses mainly on aspects which include meaning of induction, nature and scope of the induction process and objectives of the induction process.
The unit guides you through the significance of induction process towards arriving at productive personnel.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define what induction of personnel is  Explain the nature and scope of the induction process  Enumerate the objectives of staff induction 3.0 Induction of Personnel Induction (orientation or socialization) may be defined as a systematic organizational effort to minimize problems confronting new personnel so that they can contribute maximally to the work of the school while realizing personal and position satisfaction.
A school system can recruit and select personnel, but until these individuals become fully adjusted to the work to be performed, the environment in which it is performed, and the colleagues with whom it is performed, they cannot be expected to give their best effort to attainment of the goals of the institution.
NOUN 30EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Initiation of an effective induction process is one way that the organization can contribute to personnel assimilation, as well as to the personal development, security, and need satisfaction of each member of the organization.
Probably at no other time during the employment cycle does the newly appointed staff member need more consideration, guidance, and understanding than he does between the day of his appointment and the time when he becomes a self motivated, self-directed, fully effective member of the enterprise.
One of the emotional needs of every employed individual is an organization environment which he can find a reasonable degree of in security and satisfaction.
The beginning school employee is no exception.
He is apprehensive of many things – the community, his co-workers, his ability to succeed.
He is probably uninformed about school objectives, specific duties and responsibilities, school and community traditions and taboos, and the personal and position standards to which he is expected to adhere.
Voluntary resignations in school systems are known to occur during the probationary period.
One of the causes to which this problem can be attributed is the absence of well-planned induction practices.
The variety of adjustments new staff members need to make before they are totally assimilated into the organization is extensive, and they are important enough to warrant administrative efforts to assist them through well-planned induction programmes.
It is clear, for example, that the number of first-year teachers who leave the profession is higher that it ought to be, and that the loss is higher than the profession ought to sustain.
It is also true that personnel turnover represents an economic loss to the school system.
The investment in recruiting, selecting, inducting and supervising new personnel is dissipate when they leave the system voluntarily.
One of the aims of the induction process is to minimize this drain on the school system’s financial and human resources.
To say that school systems have not been or are not now concerned with the problems of the inductee would be misstatement, many excellent programmes are in operation.
However, it is probably fair to say that for some school systems, the approaches to induction have not been developed through systematic planning.
It is to planning, organizing, directing and controlling the induction process that consideration is directed in this unit.
NOUN 31EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION These include an analysis of the range of induction problems, as well as the design of an induction process aimed at their solution.
The terms induction, placement, and orientation often used synonymously in the literature dealing with personnel administration, it means the process by which newly appointed personnel are assisted in meeting their need for security, belonging, status, information and direction in both the position and organizational environment.
The process is conceived as beginning in the recruitment stage and ending when the inductee has made the necessary personal, position, organizational and social adaptations that enable him to function fully and effectively as a member of the school staff.
It involves more than plans for making new personnel fees at ease in an unfamiliar environment.
The induction process in its broadest sense, is an extension of the recruitment and selection processes (in which administrative efforts are designed to match the person and the position).
A corollary objective of the induction process is to enable the person to achieve position satisfaction.
In addition, the process should help to utilize fully the satisfactions and abilities of the person for attaining the goals of the educational programme.
3.1 Nature and Scope of the Induction Programme 3.1.1 Nature of Induction Programme Induction involves more than just making the new staff feel at home in a strange or unfamiliar environment.
The induction programme must be designed in such a manner that it enables the staff to achieve job satisfaction and also to make use of his abilities to achieve the goals of the school.
Induction of staff is one of the major tasks that school heads should concern themselves with.
After staff have been recruited and assigned to schools, it is still essential that those in leadership positions formally introduce them to the system so that adjustment problems confronting the new staff can be solved.
The new staff for instance will be anxious to know how the school system operates.
If he is quite unfamiliar with the whole atmosphere, he becomes insecure and apprehensive of many things.
Unless he is adequately informed of the ways things are done in the new system he would mostly fumble and stumble.
Generally, a lot of time and money can be invested in the recruitment and selection processes, and this investment can be dissipated and possibly lost if the new personnel are not given the chance to contribute NOUN 32EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION maximally to the work of the school through lack of induction and orientation.
Usually, the first days at school are the most difficult for new teachers.
There are so many things that the teacher does not know about the community around the school, the school itself, the students, fellow teachers, teaching materials and work procedures generally.
The school head and the established teachers in the school very often are settled into their routine and tend to forget the difficulties of adjustment experienced by new teachers in their work.
Many of the mistakes and embarrassing situations in which the new teacher finds himself can be avoided through a proper orientation programme.
3.1.2 Scope of the Induction Programme On his arrival at the school, the new teacher should be received by the school head or his deputy, who has to provide him with information about the school.
This is usually contained in the school hand-book, which should set out all the school’s policies and procedures.
The information required by the new teacher can be broken down into more specific detail.
First, he needs to know the terms and conditions of employment; his teaching load; the health services in the school; working hours; extra duties; and in-service training requirements.
Secondly, he should be given information about the community in which the school is situated.
For instance, he should know the geography of the areas; he should know about transport facilities; the customs and taboos which affect teachers; religious organizations (churches and mosques), the people and their organization, and the attitude of the community toward the school.
Thirdly, the new teacher must be educated about the school he has come to serve.
He must, for example, know about its facilities (library, play grounds, sports and equipments) teaching materials and aids and its general aims, values, practices and operating procedures.
The rules and regulations should also be explained to the new staff.
He should be told about the general academic performance of the students.
Fourthly, the new staff member needs to know his fellow teachers – their professional interests, the clubs to which they belong, their social and recreational activities, and their school responsibilities.
The new teacher should be introduced to students and the non-teaching staff such as the school accountant, the clerks and the kitchen staff.
He should be NOUN 33EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION well informed about the students’ services, the school time table, programmes of study and students’ government activities.
If possible, it is advisable as part of the orientation plan for new teachers that such staff should be in school at least one week prior to the opening of the school for a new school year or term.
During this time, books and teaching materials should be issued to teachers.
They should also use this time to get to know the geography of the school.
The school head plays a very vital role in acquainting the new staff with their work and the school’s procedures.
The school head however, cannot possibly provide all the answers that are needed, so the teaching staff as a whole should be involved in carrying out the orientation programme.
For the programme to be successful, the Ministry of Education and school heads must fully appreciate its value.
We should remember that the orientation or induction programme does not simply mean introducing the new teacher to the students in the assembly hall.
Nor does it mean the school head or his deputy taking the new teacher around the classrooms.
It must be a well organized and planned programme which, if carried out will assist in the immediate adjustment of the new teacher to his environment.
It would reduce the sense of uncertainty and frustration normally experienced by new staff in their new places of work.
You should note that human maladjustment can be expensive and detrimental to organizational effectiveness and expectations.
The type of environment in which the new staff finds himself and the first impression he has in his early days would go a long way to influence this behaviour and morale within the system.
Exercise 1.1 What are 3 main merits of staff induction programme?.
Answer Kit 1.
To assist new staff in getting familiar to his new environment.
2.
To enable staff get as much information about the school as possible 3.
To enable the staff adjust with little or no problems to his new job and duties.. 3.2 Objectives of the Induction Process NOUN 34EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.
Information The process should enable every newly appointed staff member, from caretaker to chief executive, to be fully informed about the community, about duties, relationships and responsibilities of the position, about characteristics of the school system (purposes, policies, procedures, personnel, customs, history); and about the building unit to which the inductee will be assigned.
One of the major expectations of induction is that newly appointed personnel will be furnished with whatever information is necessary to facilitate their adjustment.
2.
Need Satisfaction Induction should result in a feeling on the part of the new appointee that he is an integral part of the school and the community it serves.
The process should facilitate identification of the individual with the organization.
The needs of new personnel for belonging, for security and for recognition should be anticipated.
3.
Position Compatibility Effective performance of individuals is a long term consequence of induction.
Hence, efforts should continue throughout the probationary period in order to determine the extent to which the man and the position are compatible, and to determine whether the school system should accept the individual as a permanent member of the school staff.
4.
Assistance The induction process should provide technical assistance to new personnel.
Whether to help in understanding goals or in developing attitudes and skills, there should be plans to eliminate the possibility of individual failure or maladjustment because of the absence of supervision during the adjustment period.
5.
Assistance The induction process should be able to utilize fully all system resources, both human and material, in helping the inductee to reach a satisfactory level of performance.
6.
Development NOUN 35EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Position satisfaction and growth in ability of new personnel to be self- directing are legitimate and practical ends of induction.
The induction process should contribute to position satisfaction and to increasing the ability of the inductee to perform at a level of efficiency which lessens the need for supervision.
7 Acceptance Organizational receptivity to new personnel is another end toward which efforts of induction should be directed.
Providing information about the inductee to his colleagues (his assignment, status, and title, for example) is one means of allaying the fear, suspicion, aversion, and insecurity members may have about newcomers.
8 Assimilation Acceptance of the school system by the inductee should also result from the induction process.
A positive attitude toward the system, its purposes, policies, procedures, and personnel is a condition which the organization seeks to nurture during the induction period.
A carefully planned induction process should minimize difficulties individuals have in meeting the expectations of the organization.
9.
Adjustment Expeditious individual adjustment to the working environment is a condition every system should expect to realize for its personnel.
The sooner the new employee can adapt his habits, attitudes, feelings and knowledge to the work which he is employed, the sooner he and the school system will benefit.
Human maladjustment is expensive, detrimental to the satisfaction of individual and organizational expectations, and harmful to the socializing and personalizing processes that take place between the individual and the system.
10.
Orientation Orientation of new members to the school system is needed, with or without an induction program.
The risk of having the inductee receive information solely from colleagues is one the system cannot afford to take.
The views of colleagues about the system vary greatly.
The individual staff member with a grievance may present a picture of the system that is not in keeping with reality, one which may create negative impressions and harmful misconceptions.
Therefore, an appropriate organization goal is the proper NOUN 36EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION orientation of a new system member.
It is in the best interest of the organization to provide the newcomer with firsthand facts, with credible information about system conditions, and with other knowledge that may be required to effect his integration with the organization.
11.
Retention The interests of the system regarding the newcomer extend beyond the immediate activities involved in the induction process.
For every newly employed individual, a positive attitude toward the system should be developed, one that will endure throughout a career period.
This is an ultimate system objective.
Other organization interest should be in having the individual remain in the system and to become an effective operator in the position to which he is assigned; to work independently; to engage in self development; and to exceed role expectations through innovative and spontaneous behaviour.
These are long term system objectives for which the foundations can be laid during the induction process.
12.
Security Knowledge about the induction process indicates that: 1.
Turnover tends to occur primarily during the early period of employment; 2.
Membership turnover often engenders hostility and resistance within the system, particularly if a replacement in a position authority represents the force of change; 3.
Change within a social system generally tends to be viewed unfavourably, particularly where membership change affects the stability and relationships within a group; 4.
Haphazard induction procedures can precipitate anxiety, discouragement, disillusionment, or defensive behaviour; 5.
Security, belonging, esteem and information problems of new personnel can be minimized during the induction period; and 6.
Frustrations develop when newly employed personnel discover inconsistencies between the realities of organizational life and their expectations and values at the time of employment.
NOUN 37EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION The objectives of the induction process, then need to be focused upon minimizing the difficulties that a change in membership poses, for both the existing personnel and for the individuals about to enter the system.
13.
Continuity An important aim in the induction process is to provide information that was not fully covered during the recruitment and selection processes.
The individual recruiter, for example, may not have been capable of explaining to the recruit all of the ramifications involved in a given position assignment.
The administrator to whom a newcomer is assigned will need to do whatever remains to be doe in order for the latter to make a full adjustment to system life.
In the sum, the induction period, which begins with recruitment and ends when the inductee becomes a permanent member of the school staff, offers numerous opportunities for the system to realize its aims.
This is done by creating for the new personnel conditions and processes conducive to their voluntary co-operation in the organization’s quest to secure better educational opportunities for its clients.
Exercise 1.2 Outline 5 objectives of induction programme.
Answer Kit 1.
Adjusted to the System 2.
Accepted by others 3.
Assimilated into the system 4.
Support in getting materials in achieving a satisfactory level of performance 5.
Oriented into the system.
4.0 Conclusion NOUN 38EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION It is essential that even when school heads appear too busy to introduce new staff to their system, they should delegate this responsibility to their immediate subordinates or to a senior staff member who have been long in the system and who also have a deep insight into the problems and modus operandi of the system.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learnt about the definitions of induction of personnel, its nature, scope and objectives.
By implication, what you have studied must have shown you that induction is important to enhance staff settling down to do their work.
New staff should not be allowed to begin on a trial and error basis for a lot of harm might have been done on some of his mistakes.
6.0 References Castetter, W.B.
(1976) The Personnel function in Educational Administration.
New York, Macmillan.
7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Prepare an induction programme for newly employed teachers for your school.
Unit 6 Reward System in Organizations Table of Contents NOUN 39EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Reward Systems 3.1 Wage and Salary Administration 3.2 Aspects of Wage and Salary Administration 3.3 How to Determine the Over-all Wage and Salary Level 3.4 Job Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction This unit is related to Human Resource Management and it focuses specifically on reward systems, wages and salary administration, aspects of wage and salary administration, how to determine the over-all wage and salary level and job evaluation.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define reward system  Explain how salary and wages are administered  Identify the features of salary and wage administration  Describe the means of determining over-all salary and wage level.
 Explain the meaning of job evaluation.
3.0 Reward System Having the right people in the right jobs at the right time is only one part of management’s responsibility to develop and maintain effective personnel policies.
Employees and managers and the organization in which they work are also vitally interested in the conditions of employment.
These affect every working hour.
NOUN 40EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Nobody is surprised to find that employees expect payment for the services they render.
The problem arises when the organization has to determine how much money each employee is to receive for the work he or she performs.
Each organization must make a number of interrelated decisions concerning the relative magnitude of its wages and salaries (as compared with those in other organizations) and the relative rates for different jobs within the organization.
The cost of employee compensation is not limited exclusively to wages and salaries.
Another source of employee remuneration and one that is continuously increasing in importance is “Benefit programs: Rewards for Loyalty”.
Popularly known as “fringe benefits”, these programmes are now an established component of nearly every organization’s personnel programme.
Their administration involves much more than mere agreement to pay for vacations and insurance.
In fact, some of the most perplexing questions in personnel arise in this area.
How successfully management answers these questions determine whether or not the benefit programmes serve as an incentive for increasing productivity.
Employees receive income from the organization for work performed, but how much work constitutes a “fair day’s work” or the effort that management can reasonably expect?
Work measurement techniques can be employed, but these do not provide precise, incontrovertible results.
If equitable standards can be set, however, incentive plans can be designed to provide financial rewards commensurate with employee performance.
Exercise 1.1 What is reward system?
Answer Kit It is the system of compensation given to worker for a job done.
It should be commensurate to the amount and quality of word done.
3.1 Wage and Salary Administration People want more from their jobs than just a wage or salary yet this is a basic need.
Even teachers and ministers, who may willingly accept less take home NOUN 41EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION pay for more on-the-job satisfaction, regard relative pay as highly important.
A Professor may be unconcerned about the fact that he earns less than a bricklayer, but still he may become enraged if Professor X across the hall, with six publications less than his, gets a salary increase while he does not.
Pay provides more than a means of satisfying physical needs; it provides recognition and a sense of accomplishment.
Obviously, people object to being underpaid, but experimental evidence suggests that they also feel upset when they are underpaid.
Alleged wage and salary inequities are among the most dangerous sources of friction and low morale in an organization.
Without a sound policy of wage administration, wages are often determined on the basis of “personalized” arbitrary decisions without regard for the over- all wage structure.
For the sake of brevity, we will talk of “wage administration” rather than “wage and salary administration” since roughly the same problems are involved.
Wage administration is a systematic procedure for establishing a sound compensation structure.
By reducing inequalities between employees’ earnings, a good wage-administration programme raised individual morale and reduces intergroup friction.
It also sets wages high enough to permit the company to recruit satisfactory employees (but not so high as to cause unnecessary expenses), motivates people to work for pay increases and promotions, reduces union and employee grievances, and enables management to exercise centralized control over the largest single item of cost; wage and salaries.
But, as we shall see, some of these objectives are in conflict.
3.2 Aspect of Wage and Salary Administration There are four closely related aspects of wage administration; wage and salary surveys, job evaluation, merit rating, and incentives.
Wage and salary surveys are designed to determine the general pay level in the community and industry, thus giving a company a base for setting its own rates.
Job evaluation establishes the relationships between wages on various jobs within the organization together, wage surveys and job evaluation set the “base” or minimum rates for each job.
Instead of setting one rate for each job, many institutions establish a series of rates or steps.
A new employee normally starts at the base rate for the job; then, as he gains proficiency and seniority, he advances through merit rating to higher steps.
Merit rating on one job should not be confused with promotion from one job to another.
Establishments with incentive plans pay the base rate only for a “normal” amount of production, as determined by time study.
If a worker produces NOUN 42EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION more than normal, he receives an extra incentive bonus.
Similarly, salaried personnel may qualify for bonus earnings of one kind or another.
The personnel department is normally responsible for the administration of the wage and salary programme and often has a special division that concentrates on this function.
Top management, however, has a continuing responsibility to review wage and salary policies, and every level of management may become involved in merit rating and in introducing a new job evaluation programme.
3.3 How to Determine the Over all Wage and Salary Level Determining the over-all wage and salary policy – whether to pay wages and salaries that are high, average or below average as compared with standards elsewhere is one of management’s most difficult decisions.
What factors must management take into account in making this decision?
Consider the following: 1 The organization wage policy is related to its recruitment and selection policy, for high wages attract more job applicants and permit management to chose employees from a wider reservoir of talents.
Moreover, they help maintain morale and make employees more reluctant to quit their jobs.
High wages in themselves do not guarantee motivation for high productivity unless the employee somehow perceives that harder work will in fact be rewarded by higher pay.
(But a sound merit rating and promotional policy may provide such motivation).
2.
Employment conditions in the area naturally affect wage policy.
When there is a great deal of unemployment, a well organized non-unionized establishment may be able to hire all the men it needs at little more than the legal minimum wage.
When the labour market is tight, an employer may have to pay more than the going rate if he is to recruit qualified new employees.
3.
If an organization is anxious to gain a reputation in the community as a good employer and a good citizen as are many public utilities, it may decide to pay high wages to ensure good public relations.
Small institutions not in the public spotlight are not under compulsion to follow suit.
4.
Unionized organizations may be forced to pay high wages as a result of union pressure.
Non-unionized organizations may pay equally high wages to keep the union out.
Yet if wages are too high other employers may object that the organization or company is “unstabilizing the market” and may exert subtle pressures to bring the company into line.
NOUN 43EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 5.
An institution’s profitability sets limits on its wage policy.
The organization that is losing money cannot afford to pay more than the minimum; the company that is known to be profitable is expected by the community and its employees to pay liberally.
6.
Wage policies may be influenced by other factors too.
Organizations known for their stability of employment need not pay wages as high as those in which layoffs are frequent.
Substantial fringe benefits may also reduce the need for high wages.
And pay levels in unionized companies are inevitably affected by collective bargaining agreements providing for wage increases based on changes in productivity or the cost of living.
Once the institutions has decided on its over-all wage policy, the next question it must answer is this: what are other organizations paying on comparable jobs?
This information is useful in determining whether the company is meeting community standards and also in bargaining with the union.
After the wage-survey figures have been gathered, great caution must be exercised in interpreting them, particularly is, as it often happens, there is not central tendency or clear “going rate”.
The survey itself, however, does provide a series of bench-marks against which the company can compare its present wage and salary rates and decide whether adjustments are necessary to make them consistent with its over-all wage policy.
Surveys are meaningful chiefly in regard to “key” jobs which are common to many organizations.
Wage for jobs which are unique to a given organization cannot be set by wage surveys alone.
The institution should keep its rates under constant review if the workers are unionized; of course, management will have little chance to forget this need.
New wage surveys should be made periodically to determine whether the organization’s rates are getting out of line.
Adjustments may also be dictated by changes in the cost of living or in organization’s profitability or productivity.
Once the over-all wage level has been set, the company can turn to a consideration of individual rates.
Here job evaluation is widely used.
Exercise 1.2 What factors should be considered in determining wage and salary levels of workers in the school system?
NOUN 44EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Answer Kit You may wish to consider their qualification and skills required for the work; the previous experience; work hours; the amount of work they perform etc.
3.4 Job Evaluation This is the determination of the worth of a job to an organization.
It is usually a combination of comparison of internal job levels and analysis of the external job market.
Strictly speaking, job evaluation is a method of determining the relationship between wage rates, rather than the rates themselves.
In practice it is hard to consider these two questions separately.
In theory, for instance, the completion of a job evaluation program need not lead to any increase in the total wage bill.
Some people will get increases, others decreases.
In practice, however, some increase in the wage bill is necessary if the programme is to be accepted by the employee; normally no one gets his wage cut.
Furthermore, if the rates that are finally set for any job are out of line with prevailing rates for that job in the community, the job evaluation programme may have to be adjusted.
Job Evaluation is a systematic way of applying judgment, but it does not eliminate the need for exercising judgment.
It is not an automatic process, for it is administered by people and is subject to all human frailties.
There are many methods of job evaluation, some of which are quite simple, but many of which are extremely complicated.
In essence, however, all forms of job evaluation are designed to enable management to determine how much one job should pay relative to others.
Most organizations use one variation or another of the point system of job evaluation, though the factor- comparison, ranking, and job-classification methods are also quite common.
Exercise 1.3 What is job evaluation?
Answer Kit Job evaluation is concerned with the determination of the worth or value of a job to an organization.
NOUN 45EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 4.0 Conclusion It is very important that management and employers of labour take the issue of reward systems very serious.
Staff performance would increase substantially if they are adequately compensated according to the quantity and quality of work done.
Merely lumping workers together as is done in this country will not augur well for national development.
Workers should be categorized according to qualification, skills required for the jobs and the number of hours of tasks performed should form the basis for rewarding staff in the country.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about reward systems, wage and salary administration, aspects of wage and salary administration, determinations of wage and salary level and job evaluation.
The next units treats staff development (retraining) 6.0 References Novit, M.S.
(1979) Essentials of Personnel Management London Prentice Hall Inc. Publishers Management Development in Public Enterprises.
Sharma, A.K.
(1979) Delta Ajanta Publications 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Examine the current conditions of service of secondary school teachers in Nigeria.
How can we improve current conditions to improve staff performance.
Unit 7 Staff Development NOUN 46EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Staff Development in Organization 3.1 Meaning of Staff Development 3.2 Types of Staff Development (Training) 3.3 Training Process 3.4 Evaluation of Training 3.5 Advantages of Training 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction The unit focuses on the meaning and significance of staff development.
The unit guides you through the important role staff development plays in the progress of an organization.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the Unit Objective below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Differentiate between staff training and staff development.
 Explain the role of staff development to the progress of an organization.
 Describe types of staff development, which can be used for staff in school situation.
3.0 Staff Development in Organization 3.1 Meaning of Staff Development NOUN 47EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION The terms training and development have different meanings but are used synonymously by some writers.
However, the two terms are different on two fold counts.
One, they are either different on the basis of the subject matter involved or the level of the participants drawn from the organization, while training usually implies specific, factual, and narrow-range content, development refers to a focus on general decision making and human relations skills.
In both staff training and staff development the aim is to improve the skills and performance of the subordinates.
From the above distinctions, therefore, staff development is itself a training process and best viewed in two dimensions.
The first being an in-service training programme where individuals in an organization are given opportunities to further their education to enable them prepare for future positions.
The second type of training is aimed to prepare individuals to be able to handle new job assignments.
This is concurred in Sharma (1979:23) when he noted that staff development is aimed at the following points:  To improve the current level of performance of incumbents in their present jobs; and  To equip men with potentials for higher level responsibilities.
The former represents the immediate pre-occupation or objective of staff development concerned with considerations currently relevant; whereas the latter involves long range considerations and planning.
Thus, staff development can simply be defined as activities provided for the middle and upper management in and outside an organization.
A narrow view to the meaning of staff development was given in Campbell, et-al (1970:234) when they state that “Staff Development is a teaching activity planned and initiated by an organization”.
While Harris (1980) views staff development as that aspect in administration, which implies the training of an individual in organization to enhance his performance, Ngu (1989:25) views it as the process of behavioural modification or moulding of workers in order to integrate organizational needs with their characteristics.
This view is in consonance with the view expressed in Novit (1979) when he noted that staff development is the training of personnel in an organization towards motivating them to become competent and work hard in achieving the goals of an organization.
Thus, from the above definitions it becomes clear that staff development connotes the organization’s efforts in its programme to provide the need- based training and education to its workers to enable them become competent in handling their present or future assigned tasks.
However, the scope of staff NOUN 48EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION development scheme in terms of its coverage varies from one organization to another.
The variations in coverage may arise due to the resources an organization may decide to earmark for the purpose within its reach.
According to Sharma (1979:22) the broadest scheme is made up of all the members of the management at the top level down to the lower level.
This is concurred in Humble (1969:25) when he noted that staff development is re- appraisal of the staff resources to achieve the desired objectives of an organization.
It covers both managers and labour force.
He went further to give the objectives of staff development as follows:  The preparation of management succession plans;  Recruitment objectives for specific type of managerial and technical skills;  Training plans;  The introduction of specific forms of incentive and wage payments; and  The setting of limits to labour staff turnover.
Staff development is a basic factor in building and maintenance of the organizational effectiveness.
According to Ngu (1990:26) staff development is so important that it is not only imperative but continuous.
No organization can dispense with it as a programme and as a process.
This means, however, that no matter the cost, organizations have to train their workers at least to enable them handle the assigned jobs.
This is concurred and elaborated in Roscoe and Freak (1976:292) when they noted that: Organization has to give the minimum training to its employees to make them at least become acquainted with the objectives, policies, rules, standards, and procedures peculiar to the organization and the particular job.
At the other extreme, staff development can include a long programme of education and planned experience, leading to key positions.
Some organizations have development programmes for supervisors and executives, enabling them to handle their jobs better and preparing them for greater responsibilities.
To meet the challenges of change, organizations must ensure that sufficient training and programmes for development of workers are put in place.
NOUN 49EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION According to Longenecker (1977:232) an organization’s greatest asset is its people and so it makes sense to ensure that every employee is trained for the job he is doing and developed to take on future responsibilities within his scope of competence.
This view is in consonance with view of Sharma (1979:96) when he noted that when the aim is to broaden the experience of an individual, it becomes necessary to offer him opportunities to develop familiarity with different and/or longer range of the organizational operations.
The views of Longenecker and Sharma were streamlined and moderated to suit the interests of employees, by Miner (1968:57) when he noted that although the development effort must have something to do with the organizational goals, the particular goals under consideration need not be restricted to narrow economic aims.
Personal development for personal development’s sake may indeed be a conscious objectives of the organization.
However, it is imperative to note that although an organization can provide opportunities for staff development, it cannot actually develop employees.
They need to accomplish development themselves.
That is they need to assume some responsibilities for their own progress.
In any organization personnel division is responsible for planning and coordinating training activities.
The division can conduct training activities for employees.
The division can conduct training activities for employees even outside their regular work assignment.
This is accepted by Longenecker (1977:1770) when he noted that personnel development often organizes training conference to impart knowledge or to improve skills of participants.
This, he went further to say, is conducted when the ecmployees have the training needs, where for instance, certain basic ideas are imparted to the participants to develop their careers and help in enhancing the progress of the organization.
This view is in line with the view of Hurst (1970:174) when he expressed that: Personnel management deals with an extensive programme, ranging from the placement, induction and training of new personnel to the provision of courses for management.
The effort is directed to the development of careers and progress within the organization by utilizing the educational resources and facilities available to each stage.
Exercise 1.1 Explain what is meant by staff development NOUN 50EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Answer Kit Your response may include the following: one of the most important factors that contributes to the success of any organization is the quality and strength of its staff.
Staff development is a process of behavioural modification or moulding of workers in order to integrate organizational needs with their characteristics.
It is a process of training staff to improve their skills for better performance.
3.2 Types of Staff Development (Training) Training policy can be defined as a written statement on organizational plans or programmes to develop the skills of the workers.
Training needs or objectives are usually derived from the current manpower situation in an organization, state or country.
The existing manpower situation determines the training objectives.
To be able to identify training needs will entail a comprehensive manpower survey, which will expose the type of skills of personnel that need to be trained or developed.
The types of training that can be readily available for an educational organization will include: 1.
In-service Course for Teachers One most important concern and duty of the school head is the professional development of its staff through in-service training.
Whenever possible and necessary, the staff should be given opportunities to attend relevant useful courses, which will update their knowledge in their subject areas and help some teachers and even the school heads upgrade their qualifications and thereby improve their conditions of service and prospects of advancement in the service.
Apart from the benefit to the individual members of staff who participate in in-service courses, other members of staff could benefit as well through discussion and implementation of some of the ideas and techniques gained in the course.
Thus, all the staff members would be grounded in their knowledge and techniques of current development and problems in their respective area of discipline.
The school therefore, stands to benefit from a well planned and coordinated staff training programme as it would contribute to qualitative improvement in education.
2.
Staff Seminar Sometimes seminars on selected topics for staff members can be organized as part of school programmes, such seminar can contribute to staff professional development.
There may be the very knowledgeable and experienced teachers among his staff, or in the community who may be willing to lead discussions on such topics which are organized not only as a means of NOUN 51EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION promoting staff professional growth but also as a way of improving staff relations.
1.
Induction Courses These are conducted to introduce the newly employed personnel to their new jobs, since most of them are not likely to possess previous experience.
It is designed to bring the knowledge and skills of the new employees to a satisfactory level.
2.
On-the-Job-Training This is similar to the induction course just concluded above.
The major objectives of the two types of training are similar in the sense that they entail acquiring new skills to be able to handle new jobs.
Induction course is basically meant for new employers.
However on the job training can be extended to include old employees, if a new skill is introduced in the organization.
3.
Off-the-Job-Training This is the type of training that can be conducted outside the working environment.
It is usually conducted in classrooms where trainees are given theoretical knowledge on how to handle a particular operation.
The only practical aspect of this type of training is the use of films or charts or diagrams for illustrations.
4.
On-and-Off-the-Job Training It combines classrooms instructions with practical instruction in the working environment.
This has almost the same major objective with “Industrial Attachment” programmes for technicians or teaching practice for teacher trainees.
5.
Vestibule Training It is similar to “On-the-Job Training”.
Here the trainees are given instructions using the types of machines or materials they will operate in the working environment.
In most cases, similar model machines are used for vestibule training.
It is very costly and has the advantage of not interrupting the flow of work in operating departments.
Example of such is the Business Apprentice Training Centre (BATC) being in operation in Kaduna State and a few other States in Nigeria.
6.
Refresher Courses It is used mainly to update knowledge and skills or externally or both.
It is very useful and necessary with innovations through changes of ideas.
It serves as a motivating factor where the employee feels satisfied for being given the opportunity for learning.
NOUN 52EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 7.
Conference Training This is sometimes conducted through conference or workshops.
This is not highly formalized since the trainees are treated as participants and not just passive recipients.
The theme chosen for conferences must be relevant to the organization’s objectives.
8.
Role Playing This is another training device that can be used in organizations; it can be used for executive development.
The participants assume the roles or positions they are expected to occupy after the training and their performance are simultaneously evaluated and corrected where necessary by the training instructors.
9.
Sensitivity Training It is used for development of awareness to behavioural pattern of oneself and one’s colleagues.
It is used to encourage mutual understanding among working group.
It is highly recommended for leadership training and executive development.
10.Supplementary Training Lastly, since many organizations may utilize quite a good number of the training methods discussed above it may still be inevitable for them to seek supplementary training methods from independent institutions.
Public or private organizations used the supplementary training method by sponsoring their employees in different institutions of learning.
3.3 Training Processes Before the training process commences, the training objectives must have been identified, the participants of trainees selected, qualified instructors also selected, and the train facilities adequately provided.
The training method to be used by instructors will depend largely on the training content and the extent of both physical and mental maturity of the trainees.
Throughout the training process, the instructors should help to create exciting illustrations.
Training by periods or hours should not be unnecessarily too long.
Instructors should not do the talking or demonstration all alone.
Training lessons must be prepared ahead of time.
Both preparation and presentation of the lesson must be based on the level, qualifications, skills or experience of the trainees.
3.4 Evaluation of Training NOUN 53EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION This is to enable the employers to determine the effects of training on both the trainees (employees) and the organization.
The following are the criteria for a training programme.
 Participants’ Reactions or Changes in the Trainees’ Reaction: this is determined during the training period.
The feelings and responses of the trainees to the training programme are examined.
They may find their instructor’s unqualified.
They may find the training session boring to mention but a few reactions.
The trainees’ reactions can be measured by completing a well designed questionnaire or evaluation form.
 Changes in the Trainee’s Knowledge: The objectives of training programme is to increase the participants knowledge or skill on specific area.
For example, if a training programme is designed to enhance an employee knowledge of specific office procedures.
It is pertinent to expect that the employee concerned will know more about the procedures by the end of the training programme.
 Changes in the Trainee’s Attitude: Changes in the attitude of participants takes place because training itself is a change agent.
This can be measured by comparing the trainee’s previous sense of duty with the after-training or present one.
His duty and his relationships with his superior and subordinate officers will change.
 Change in Job Performance: This is shown through effective changes in job performance by the employees.
This can be measured by the trainee’s ability to handle more challenging jobs very effectively.
 Organizational performance or result: Training and development are means to attain organizational goals or desired results.
The above four points for training evaluation are inadequate unless the organizational objectives are full accomplished.
Therefore, it is important in applying organizational performance standards and results as the ultimate criteria for evaluating training programme.
3.5 Advantages of Training 1.
These courses enable employee to improve on their jobs.
2.
Through training and staff development programmes, staff are better able to handle machinery and equipment thus reducing damages to the minimum.
NOUN 54EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 3.
There is satisfaction associated with a sense of achievement, and knowledge that staff are developing their inherent capabilities at work.
4.
It enables staff to increase their value to the organization and thus prepare themselves for promotion.
5.
It enables staff to learn and adapt themselves to new major job content and work relationships.
Exercise 1.2 • Have you ever attended any staff training programme since you were employed as a teacher?
• Which ones have you attended?
• In what ways have such training programme benefited you and the school organization?
4.0 Conclusion Staff development and training are geared towards improvement on skills and performance.
Both involve moulding the workers characteristics towards better performance.
They should be an in-built, integral part of the school system if teachers would perform their jobs well and get full satisfaction from their work.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learned the meaning of staff development (training).
Different approaches to staff development were full examined.
The process of training and how to evaluate training were highlighted and the main advantages of training for both the staff and the organization were described.
The next unit treats transfer of staff in an organization.
6.0 References Campbell, J. P., Dunnete, M. D., Managerial Behaviour Lawler, E. B. and Aveick, K. (1990) Performance and Effectiveness.
New York, McGraw-Hill.
Harris, B. M. (1990).
Improving Staff Performance Through In-Service Education.
London Allyn and Bacon Inc. NOUN 55EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Longnecker, J. G. (1977).
Essentials of Management – A Behavioural Approach.
Ohio, Charles E. Merril Publishing Company Miner, J.
B.
91968).
The Managerial Motivation of School Administrators.
University Council for Educational Administration, Quarterly, Winner.
Novit, M. S. (1979).
Essentials of Personnel Management.
London, Prentice Hall Inc. Publishers.
Ngu, S. V. (1990).
An Introduction of Personnel Management in Nigeria.
Zaria.
Faculty of Administration.
A.B.U.
Sharma, A. K. (1979).
Management Development in Public Enterprises.
Detta Ajanta Publication.
Humble, J. W. (1968).
Improving Management Performance – A Dynamic Approach to Management by Objectives.
London, Brit Management Publications Ltd. 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Discuss the uses and value of any four training programmes to the development and overall goal achievement of your school organization.
Unit 8 Transfer and Promotion of Staff in School Organization Table of Contents NOUN 56EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Transfer in School Organization 3.1 Meaning and Scope of Transfer 3.2 Conditions for Transfer 3.3 Reasons Why Transfers Are Made 3.4 Meaning of promotion 3.5 Conditions for Promotion of Staff 3.6 Principles of Merit Performance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This Unit is related to various models of human resource management.
The unit focuses mainly on transfer and promotion in organizations.
The organization in the event of conflict prevalence.
Let us see what you will learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define the terms transfer and promotion.
 Describe the conditions when transfer is necessary.
 Explain the process of promotion in the school system.
3.0 Transfer in School Organization 3.1 Meaning and Scope of Transfer By transfer it simply means a system in an organization through which vacant positions or posts are filled through an internal source.
Through this system a staff can be conveniently transferred to take over an existing post.
However, transfer is for the good or bad of the affected staff.
This means that in the NOUN 57EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION process of transfer a staff is either promoted or demoted.
An organization can transfer its members from one unit to the other with the aim of rewarding that individual.
But sometimes an individual is transferred within an organization to serve as a punishment for his wrong doing.
When taken to a place where he is redundant it may suffice him to put in his resignation.
Nonetheless, transfer in whatever dimension is meant to bring positive changes to the organization.
In the Nigerian secondary education system, it is common to hear of the case of teachers’ transfer from the school to the other, because of extreme dimension of conflict in the school.
Take for instance, a teacher in a girls’ school who cannot control his emotions needs to be transferred to a boys’ school lest his bad behaviour is copied by other teachers.
According to Ngu (1990:6) transfer is an internal source within which an organization fills vacant position, and through this system an office is conveniently transferred from one unit to the other to boost the productivity of the organization.
Certain organizations see transfer of their employees from one unit to the other as a means of expanding their job experience, which serves as another form of training.
This is concurred in Longenecker (1977:176) when she noted that one method of expanding direct job experience is to broaden that experience through a system of rotation.
Such a job rotation plan seeks to maximize experience by shifting staff periodically from one job to another.
She went further to say that individuals selected for such programmes are moved at the end of a stipulated period say one year, and the position they hold at any given time are viewed as training position.
3.2 Conditions for Transfer Certain transfers are meant to control conflicts in an organization.
If, for instance, two individuals working in a particular unit of an organization always fight over a small thing, it means they do not fit to stay together, then transfer is inevitable.
By this, it means permanent physical separation of warring persons.
They are moved from each other to make them not have direct contact.
This is confirmed in Blake and Mouton (1971:124) when they noted that by means of organization policy, arrangements are worked out to provide an assignment in another location to the person who seems to be the focus for a problem.
Blake and Mouton went further to propose more solutions to the problem of conflict through transfer when they noted that organization needs to redraw the organization chart, where the function of one of the contending NOUN 58EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION parties is transferred, in terms of its reporting line so that the two individuals in conflict no longer have a common boss.
When this is done the two conflicting groups do not have base to maintain close interpersonal relationship.
With transfer of function it is possible to establish new arrangement where the two officers report from different levels, which becomes an automatic means of separating them.
With this the problem of people who were in conflicts before is now solved.
In any organization informal grouping such as cliques should not be allowed to develop.
Where it develops chances are that it becomes an impediment to the attainment of organizational goals.
This is because it is common to observe some members of an organization pursuing the activities of their informal group at the expense of their primary assignment.
In view of the adverse effect the emergence of informal group has in the organization, Frean (1977:177) maintains that, leaders should not allow old cliques to stay in an organization.
Where they exist it becomes necessary that members are disbanded through separation or transfer so that people’s energies are directed towards organization’s objectives and not clique’s interest.
This is concurred in Roy (1977:329) when he noted that managers in formal organizations must be aware that transfer becomes necessary in a situation where members consider personal issues more important than the tasks of the organization.
Conflict is natural in any organization.
However, its persistent occurrence means that there is something wrong with the system.
What needs to be done given this kind of situation is to overhaul the organization, here transfer of certain members from one unit to the other becomes necessary.
Even then care has to be taken to ensure that only right people are transferred.
This is because the morale of certain people in their places of work is killed when they are transferred at a time they do not expect, especially if the transfer is to their disadvantage.
In school organization constant transfer of teachers and principals is not good for the system because it affects them psychologically, which by implication means learning is affected.
This is in agreement with Robinson’s view (1976:70) when he noted that constant transfers of heads of schools and different members of their staff do not enhance the motivation of teachers who are not allowed to remain long enough in one school to see the climax of the fruits of their labours.
It is not only as a result of conflicts that staff are transferred in educational organizations.
Most organizations utilize transfers as a system of filling existing vacancies.
Through this system a very senior teacher with a sound knowledge of school system can be conveniently transferred from his NOUN 59EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION position as a classroom teacher/head of department to become the school’s vice principal.
The transfer of teachers and their heads take place regularly and should be seen as normal.
The transfer could be motivated by the teacher himself, the head of the school and the students as well.
Whoever is responsible for transfer in an establishment should consider the following points: 1.
It is necessary to stipulate a minimum period of service a teacher could render before a transfer can be contemplated.
In this way the school head has opportunity of evaluating the performance of the teachers so as to determine his effectiveness and productivity since being posted to the school.
Sudden interruptions in the teaching programme can be avoided if teachers have to serve for a reasonable period of time before being transferred to another school.
2.
There should be established procedures for processing transfer requests.
The teacher must understand the purpose of his transfer; this will help him to adjust to his new piece of work.
This is especially important if a teacher is transferred because of his unsatisfactory work or behaviour.
3.3 Reasons Why Transfers Are Made 1.
The Ministry of Education may initiate the transfer as a disciplinary action following a behaviour problem or because of weakening personal relationship among teachers, changes in the organization of instruction, promotion, or the need to maintain well balanced staff in every school.
2.
Transfers can be requested by teachers themselves because of desire to work in a new school, personal friction in the present place or work, a desire to work near home, a desire for advancement in status or interms of promotion.
Exercise 1.1  What do you understand by transfer?
 Give one main reason for transfer of staff in your school.
Answer Kit • Transfer means a process (system) through which vacant posts or positions are filled through an internal source.
NOUN 60EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION • Transfer may be initiated by the Ministry of Education, the school head or the teacher himself because of: i) Weakening personal relationship among teachers; ii) Changes in the organization of instruction; and iii) Promotion.
3.4 Meaning of Promotion Promotion is a positive way of rewarding people for their efforts and services.
Normally promotion means increased responsibilities, more prestige or status, and increased pay.
Promotion helps to boost staff morale and motivates staff to work harder, thereby increasing productivity and efficiency.
On the other hand, lack of promotion can lead to lower staff morale, resulting in frustration, resignation and premature retirement from the job.
3.5 Conditions for Promotion Promotion is another system through which an organization can easily fill a vacancy internally.
Through this system servicing officers who have demonstrated some professional skills of high standard may be given preferential treatment in filling vacant posts for which they are qualified.
In some States of the Federation, before teachers are promoted they must attend an interview.
It is the result of such interview that will determine whether the staff should be promoted or not.
The civil service examination is often conducted; the result of the examination is one of the conditions that determines the fate of such staff for promotion.
At both the Federal and State levels, promotion is based on confirmation of staff appointment which is usually effected after two to three years of continued satisfactory performance by the staff if such a staff is on a tenure appointment.
The confirmation of appointment grants the staff a pension able appointment status in the organization.
It is after this confirmation of appointment that staff are promoted after three years of active unbroken service.
Promotion is based on competence, qualifications and or seniority both for teaching and non-teaching staff.
In the country, staff are provided with evaluation form of which the grade accorded will also be a criteria for promotion.
For example, a State may have the following factors as criteria to be considered in the promotion of its teachers: NOUN 61EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION  Qualification  Seniority (determined by the date of appointment)  Competence; and  Productivity In some cases, staff are told how promotions are decided and how they can prepare themselves for advancement in the school hierarchy.
Those senior teachers who have not been promoted should be told reasons for this.
We like to caution here that the promotion exercise should not be turned into a secret issue.
3.6 Principles of Merit Performance When promoting teachers the following points should be taken into consideration: 1.
Teaching effectiveness, which involves lesson preparation, mastery of subjects, communication skills, student-teacher relationships and personal qualities.
In assessing teaching effectiveness, the difficulty of the subject and the facilities available should be considered.
2.
Participation and effectiveness in co-curricular and out-of-class activities and responsibilities.
3.
Attitude to work and general impression.
4.
Academic qualifications and teaching experience 5.
Present salary and date of last promotion 6.
Judgment and qualities of leadership 7.
Creativity including ability to organize people and projects 8.
Responsibility and work load of the position in question.
Finally, the staff in-charge should ensure that recommendation or confidential reports of staff is really confidential.
He should get the work typed while he is present and keep all the copies secure in the cabinet.
It is important in the interest of your staff and the institution to prepare all the reports relating to promotion at the appropriate time.
NOUN 62EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Exercise 1.2 • What is promotion?
• What factors would you consider in recommending a staff for promotion in your school?
Answer Kit • Promotion means the positive means of rewarding staff for their efforts and services • Factors of promotion include: i) Qualifications ii) Competence iii) Experience iv) Seniority v) Productivity vi) Date of last promotion vii) Length of service in the establishment 4.0 Conclusion Transfer is the movement of staff from one school to another.
It can be initiated by the Ministry of Education, the school head or the staff himself.
Promotion is the positive means of rewarding staff for their efforts and services.
It is a good idea for educational establishment to have sound policies in respect of staff transfer and promotion to ensure that justice and fairness prevail in dealing with staff.
5.0 Summary The unit you have just studied treated the issues of transfer and promotion in educational organizations.
The terms were defined, the conditions and reasons for both were described.
The criteria for promotion were also highlighted.
6.0 References NOUN 63EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Frean, D. (1977).
The Board and Management Development.
London, Thomson Litho Ltd. Longenecker, J. G. (1977).
Essentials for Management – a Behavioural Approach.
Ohio, Charles E. Merril Publishing Company Ngu, S. V. (1990).
An Introduction to Personnel Management in Nigeria.
Zaria, Faculty of Administration, ABU.
Robinson, A.
(1976).
“Teacher Motivation: Influencing Factors”.
Nigeria Educatin Forum.
2(2).
Kaduna.
Baraka Press for Institute of Education, A.B.U, Zaria.
7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment  Examine some of the problems encountered in the transfer and promotion of teachers in schools in your state.
 How can these problems be reduced?
MODULE 3 Unit 9 Keeping Personnel Records in School Organization NOUN 64EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Keeping Staff Records in School Organization 3.1 Types of Staff Records 3.1.1 Staff Record Book 3.1.2 Staff Movement Book 3.1.3 Staff Attendance Register Book 3.1.4 Personal File 3.1.5 Confidential File 3.1.6 Class Attendance Register 3.1.7 Staff Absenteeism Book 3.1.8 Staff Academic Evaluation Record 3.2 Purposes of Keeping Staff Records 3.3 Classification of Staff Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This unit treats the issue of keeping personnel records in school organization under which areas such as types of staff records and classification of staff records, are examined.
The unit gives an insight into various uses of records and how they are kept in school organization.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain what staff records are  Describe the uses of various types of staff records  Evaluate the classification of staff record.
3.0 Keeping Personnel Records in School Organization NOUN 65EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION For purpose of administration, information about staff members is usually centrally maintained and it describes the background and qualifications of prospective and current staff members, their current assignments and their conditions of employment.
Such records are used to select new staff members, to determine the step at which each staff member is placed on the salary schedule, to assign a staff member to an area in which he is certified, to evaluate a staff member’s education and experience for promotion and placement on tenure, and to select personnel for new assignments.
Portions of an employee’s records may be maintained in the local school unit as the basis for scheduling him into various types of activities.
Reports about individual staff members, usually, are forwarded periodically to the school system’s central office in order to compute salaries and benefits.\ The State Education Agency uses reports to ascertain if a staff member is performing any assignment for which he is certified, such reports also may permit the State Agency to update the staff member’s retirement status.
The qualifications of staff members are considered the prime factor in his initial selection on appointment, in his advancement and in his being scheduled for specific activity.
Categories of significant qualifications include detailed information about educational background, credentials, in-service education, organizational memberships and prior school and non-school employment.
Central personnel records frequently include the following: terms of contract and assignment information, date of entrance into employments, payment status, nature of appointment (probationary or tenure), time status (full time or part time), contractual dates and status (for example annual contract, two years contract, continuing contract), period of time annually employed, assignment location, years employed in current assignment and in school system and salary information.
It is pertinent however, to mention and discuss the various types of staff records kept both at the school level and the Ministry of Education and the Zonal Office levels.
3.1 Types of Staff Records The survey of the types of staff records kept in the school is quite interesting and revealing.
You will find that quite a large number and different types of staff records are kept by schools and Ministry of Education or Education NOUN 66EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Zonal Office in respect of the school staff.
Staff records kept include those described below.
3.1.1 Staff Record Book This book contains a list of the staff of the school with their registration (personnel) numbers, qualifications and experience and it is usually kept by the school administrator.
A record of when the staff joins and leaves the school with dates and reasons for leaving are also recorded.
It also contains the staff file number, the bank with which the staff operates, the rank of the staff and the teaching subject.
This record helps the school head in planning for staff needs and school’s teaching programme.
3.1.2 Staff Movement Book This record tells about the movement of the staff within and outside the school compound.
It contains the column for name of the staff, date, destination, purpose of movement, time of departure, and arrival as well as the signature of staff in respect of his authorized movement from the school.
For more details, a format of the staff movement book is shown below: Time Time of S/N Date Name Rank Destination Purpose of Signature Departure Arrival 1.
2.
3.1.3 Staff Attendance Register Book The daily attendance register shows whether the staff are in the school or not and also indicate whether they are late or punctual.
Staff are made to write their names, time of arrival and signature in the daily attendance register.
Shown below is a sample of the daily attendance register.
S/N Date Name Time of Arrival Signature 1.
2.
3.1.4 Personal File NOUN 67EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Personal file which is otherwise known as the open file contains staff documents such as credentials, academic qualifications or certificates, letter of appointment, letter of posting, marriage certificate, certificate of birth or declaration of age, NYSC certificate (if any), letter of promotion, letter of in- service training.
It also contains all application for request for either annual leave, casual leave, or maternity leave and all requests made by the staff, the school or Ministry of Education in general.
Correspondence from the Ministry or any official correspondence in respect of the staff are also kept in the file for example, a letter of query or warning.
3.1.5 Confidential File It contains staff confidential matters.
It is generally kept by the Ministry of Education either at the State or the Federal level; but the case is different with private schools such as Ahmadu Bello University Demonstration Secondary School, Zaria, where, such a file is being kept by the school head but is made highly confidential and secret.
This file contains things like the staff annual performance appraisal (evaluation) form, staff disciplinary cases and others.
This could form bases for staff assessment in relation to promotion and any other official appointment.
3.1.6 Class Attendance Register This is kept in order to have teacher or staff record of attendance to their classes.
This is however, important in order to check staff excesses or negligence of duty.
The class captain usually completes the form and returns to the principal at the end of the day.
Shown below is a format of the class attendance register.
Day Name Signature Assignment and Lesson Subject Topic of Time of Given Date Teacher Teacher 3.1.7 Staff Absenteeism Book NOUN 68EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION The book is used for recording staff movement in the class, reasons for not being in class is recorded with warning, or rebuke given to staff who fall victims of such offence.
The date and time such teachers were counseled on this issue and the advice given to staff are recorded their by the vice principal.
However, acute cases are reported to the principal for necessary action, and where need be a query is usually issue to such ‘offenders’.
The essence of keeping this record is for supervision purpose, controlling staff excesses, and to record those who are late for classes or deliberately refuse to attend.
The most senior member of staff is delegated to keep this record of absenteeism.
3.1.8 Staff Academic Evaluation Record This register contains the names of staff who submit their record of work at the appropriate time and their continuous assessment results as expected by the school administration.
This is however, used for evaluation purposes.
3.2 Purposes of Keeping Staff Records The general purpose of keeping staff records are however highlighted below.
 To keep an orderly account of progress; by writing and preserving various papers, documents, memorandum of different types of transactions on staff, the progress report of staff are recorded, and this could serve as basis for promotion and evaluation of performance.
 To prepare statement of true conditions and conduct can be known through up-to-date records.
This could be very useful in future, if such staff is to be nominated for an important post or for any type of recommendation required from the school on such staff even if he has left the school.
 Records help to make comparison about staff performance and conduct between one period of time and another.
Such comparison can be described as the analytical functions of records.
 Detect errors and wastes: Errors and wastes can be known only with the help of proper records management.
3.3 Classification of Staff Record NOUN 69EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Classification of system affects the speed, accuracy, economy, flexibility and transfer to reserve storage of various papers and documents.
Classification, according to Arore (1980:142-146) grouped or classified on the basis of common characteristics.
Before filing takes place, it is necessary to choose the right type of classification.
The various classification methods used in our school system are as follows:  Numerical: Folder or records is given a number and the files are placed in strict numerical order.
 Alphabetical: Based on the occurrence of the letters in alphabets.
 Geographical: Based on the geographical origin of a document.
 Subject: A method in which all documents relating to a subject are brought together in one file, even though they may have come from different sources and from many different people.
 Chronological: Various records under this method are arranged in strict date order.
Exercise 1.1  Did we omit any staff records which you keep in your school?
If we did, kindly add them to the list in this unit.
 Why is record keeping important in your school administration?
Answer Kit Records keeping is important because it enables us get accurate information very easily on a staff so that we can make the right decisions about them for the progress of the school.
4.0 Conclusion Your records are most useful if they are kept in an organized way so that the information you need and get is immediately visible to you.
Records should also be kept up-to-date so that you will be behaving in an efficient way and get to know your staff in a very thorough manner.
By this alone will you assist yourself in managing and developing the school for the benefit of the learners and staff alike.
NOUN 70EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 5.0 Summary This unit has been concerned with the basic staff records needed to assist in the smooth functioning of a school.
Whatever the State or Federal Ministry of Education requirements in terms of staff records, we like to stress here that it is absolutely important that school heads maintain a record of their staff members, for the keeping of efficient staff records is an important tool in the hands of the school heads.
6.0 References Federal Ministry of Education (1993).
Better Schools Management: Head Teacher Education and Resources Materials.
Lagos.
F.M.E.
7.0 Tutors Marked Assignment Design a sample of staff records to be kept in teacher’s file which gives all the necessary facts and information about the teacher from the day he started work in your school.
Unit 10 Morale, Motivation and Performance in the School Organization Table of Contents NOUN 71EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Morale, Motivation and Performance in the School Organization 3.1 Morale of Teachers and the Teaching Profession 3.2 Boosting the Morale of Staff 3.3 Staff Morale and Motivation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This unit is related to Human Resources Management.
It focuses specifically on issues of morale, motivation and performance in School Organization, morale of teachers and the teaching profession, boosting morale, staff morale and motivation.
The unit gives you an insight into the significant role motivation and morale play in the progress of an organization.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define the concepts of morale and motivation.
 Explain the influence of motivation on staff performance.
 Describe how staff morale can be boosted by the school head.
3.0 Morale, Motivation and Performance in School Organization Government and organization may build and equip all schools with the best science and technical equipment, provide all the basic educational materials, renovate and rehabilitate all old schools; provide library and other necessary facilities as well as the best qualified staff, yet the problem confronting educational administration would be half solved.
Teachers who are the bedrock of any educational system need to be treated fairly well in terms of prompt settlement of their entitlements and enjoyment of other benefits enjoyed by other public servants.
So until the human needs of the teachers NOUN 72EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION are satisfied the desire of the government, parents and society for an improved educational system will be a hopeless dream and at best a nightmare; and investment in education will not be very beneficial to society in the final analysis.
3.1 Morale of Teachers and the Teaching Profession Morale is the emotional reaction of a person to his job.
Some elements of morale are courage, zeal, discipline, enthusiasm and willingness to endure hardship (Out, 1998:79).
Morale also refers to the condition of a group where there are clear and fixed group goals that are felt to be important and integrated with individual goals.
In addition, morale also refers to confidence in the means of goal attainment, in the leaders, subordinates, and finally in one’s self.
Morale can be low or high.
Morale is not concrete.
It cannot be seen or isolated.
However, it is possible to determine the quality of morale by careful observation of the way people act.
A positive relationship can be found between low morale and a high rate of absenteeism and indolence in an organization.
Loafing, taking excessive time away from the work at hand and constant bickering are signs of dissatisfaction with the job.
On the other hand, promptness, enthusiasm, dependability and cooperation are indications of high morale.
The present exodus of teaching personnel at all levels of our educational system to greener pastures, especially the private sector and politics, is a clear indication of the growing dissatisfaction that plagues the teaching profession.
Abject poverty, disregard by the society, low emoluments and lack of incentives, lack of social mobility and lack of security are responsible for the low morale of teachers at all levels of Nigeria’s educational system.
To stem the tide, governments should through appropriate agencies, enhance the status of not only teachers but also the teaching profession.
There should be a deliberate policy of emancipation regarding all cadres of teacher to make teaching as lucrative as any other job within the public sector.
This would not only attract qualified personnel to teaching but also retain them on the job.
Teaching, more than any other profession touches the life of practically every citizen either as students, parents, guardians, or administrators or planners.
3.2 Boosting the Morale of Staff Effective administration is measured by the extent to which it contributes to teaching and learning.
A school administrator makes his largest contribution by providing and retaining staff, and by furnishing them and their students NOUN 73EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION with efficient and sufficient working tools and creating a conducive environment in which they can work.
A warm and consonant psychological climate for staff and students in a school setting has the magical powers of boosting staff morale and enhancing their self-investment in their work.
A school leader must subject periodic shots of enthusiasm in his colleagues by respecting their views, recognizing their worth, confiding in them on policy issues and trusting their abilities and disabilities.
Informal interactions remove elements of fear, opposition and suspicion while at the same time enhancing good rapport between school heads and staff.
Apart from striving to be friendly and accessible to staff, school administrators must be flexible and willing to effect the necessary possible and practicable changes in their administration.
Fair distribution of available fringe benefits to worthy and deserving staff helps to raise personal prestige of individuals.
There are indeed several forms of reward systems at the disposal of school heads that can contribute towards the maintenance of high morale among staff.
These include praises, assigning posts of responsibility, recommending effective staff for promotion and facilitating professional and academic growth or advancement.
Money is indeed important for motivational purposes, but it is not a substitute for effective administrative leadership.
3.3 Staff Morale and Motivation Motivation is the inner drive which prompts people to act in a certain way (Musaazi, 1992).
Motivation is also an urge or drive within or outside an individual which makes him to take action.
It could be aroused by a tangible physical need, an emotion or an idea.
To ensure that an organization functions efficiently and effectively in attaining its goals, there is very need to motivate its work force to avoid deviation from the standard operating procedures.
For any organization like a school to function effectively, money, physical facilities, well thought out policies, equipment and human input are very essential.
Human resources are the life-blood of an institution.
Thus, the success of any school system, therefore, depends to a large extent, on the quality of those who perform its tasks leading to the set objectives, as well as conditions, which affect their mental and physical health.
Against the above background setting, maintaining and retaining efficient and effective school staff is one of the most essential tasks of school authorities.
This task is not an easy one because each staff within the school system exhibits his or her personality traits, needs, hopes and aspirations which are NOUN 74EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION not always compatible with the demands of the set up.
However, the extent to which these individual need dispositions are integrated to achieve organizational goals determines the success of an administrator.
This makes the disposition more meaningful to those in the system than he himself can imagine.
Although the provision of material benefits in form of remuneration, advancement and fringe benefits are not entirely within the powers of the school head, he nevertheless, has power to initiate them.
The school head can do a lot by filling staff confidential report forms as at when due, recommending deserving staff for promotion and further studies, recommending their annual leave and pursuing their leave bonus for them, getting staff salaries for them on time, rectifying abnormalities in the payment vouchers like omission or pay shortages and so on.
All these are motivating factors that can stimulate staff to react positively to the school system leading to the achievement of organization goals.
There are three basic types of behaviour which are essential for an organization to function effectively namely: People should be induced to enter and remain within the system.
They must carry out their role assignments in a dependable fashion.
They must be involved in innovative and spontaneous activity in achieving organizational objectives.
There is embedded in the three the need to motivate the staff towards a common goal.
Staff motivation, therefore has to do with how our staff in our educational institutions perceive their work and how much they have towards their work.
It is clear that a person will always know that what he has great enthusiasm in doing is that which will give him or her maximum satisfaction, or at least some contentment will be derived from it either to himself or to the institutions, which he belongs.
Motivation, therefore, is not bribery, and it is not about manipulation.
It is but understanding the needs of workers and providing ways to help them attain or satisfy those needs through the organization.
Theories have been postulated to help us understand the role of motivation in human organizations.
Abraham Maslow in 1943 formulated his theory of needs.
He explained motivation as a contingent “series of ascending urges” from the basic physical needs through safety and social needs to self esteem and self-actualization.
The significance of Maslow’s theory of hierarchy of needs is that the behaviour of any person is dominated by the lowest group of need, which remain unsatisfied, but once the needs have been satisfied they NOUN 75EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION cease to play an active role.
The next higher need in the pyramid will be pursued.
School principals are duty bound to see that the teachers under them are motivated and their interests are always high.
Challenging situations should be provided so that the teachers find themselves moving towards self actualization.
According to Frederick Herzberg (1959), the hygiene factors, which are in the work environment, are sources of dissatisfaction in workers.
Managers are to be aware of them and rectify them.
These factors include workers’ pay, fringe benefits, working conditions, quality supervision and administrative policies.
On the other hand, there are motivators which management should undertake to encourage the workers.
These are needs for recognition, advancement, achievement, personal growth and self-fulfilment.
It is pertinent to note that needs are in a continuum.
The Herzberg model lends itself very much to school authorities’ practice, despite its value loaded connotations.
When a teacher is denied his salaries, deprived of fringe benefits and kept outside the decision-making process in the school, we shall expect nothing but low performance and sometimes antagonism from such a teacher.
The downing of chalk by teachers in many States of this country is an indicator of the dissatisfaction of teachers with their environment.
It has been argued that men are led to behave sensibly and to do the right thing by a variety of stimulations, inducements and the organization of the work environment.
The working environment of teachers should be improved.
The staff will feel happy if after teaching for some periods they come to the staff room and find water to wash their chalky hands, can have some cold water to drink and above all some tea or coffee to refresh themselves.
School principals, can take the lead in making the working environment conducive for teachers to stay and for motivation to thrive.
Of course, school heads have their own handicaps in boosting morale and motivation among their fellow teachers.
For example, it is beyond the powers of a school principal to provide housing accommodation for teachers without building grants from the government or school proprietors.
Teachers however, enjoy rent subsidy but report late to school and or forfeit some vital school activities owing to immobility.
It is not the principal but the Ministry of Education or Teaching Service Board / Commission that are supposed to advance vehicle and housing loans to teachers.
Prospects for promotion motivate staff to work harder to achieve school goals.
Promotion makes an individual see a concrete sign of his worth and recognition for his past performance.
He is ignited to work harder to justify the confidence reposed on him.
Promotion should be purely on merit and not by any kind of favouritism.
Favouritism is a negative impetus towards staff NOUN 76EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION motivation.
It is unfortunate that in most of our Ministries of Education, promotion issues are not treated fairly.
Some teachers are known to have been stagnated on one grade level for many years without promotion.
Such teachers are killed professionally as they continue to grudge and lose interest in the job.
A teacher experiences psychological imbalance when he sees his mates and contemporaries promoted over him.
The Ministry of Education has a great role to play in motivating staff.
Lack of effective coordination by the Ministry leaves us with a bizarre situation in the schools.
The Ministry is in a better position to improve conditions of service to boost the image and morale of the teacher in the society.
Thus, personnel in a school setting need high morale and motivation for their social, economic and psychological satisfaction.
The urge to belong should be encouraged and developed in the staff.
It is the contention that unless the human factor is treated carefully, and seen to be important as the productive system, the organization may not succeed.
Human beings crave for love and recognition, their worth should be appreciated and rewarded to cement their ego and this can be done through proper morale and motivational processes.
Exercise 1.1 • What is morale?
• What is motivation • What is the relationship between the two concepts?
Answer Kit • Morale is the emotional reaction of a person to his job.
Elements of morale are courage, zeal, discipline and enthusiasm.
• Motivation is the process a leader devises to get the best out of his staff.
It is the way he uses to get the best of people.
Thus motivation is concerned with the cause of workers behaviour.
• There is a positive relationship between the terms morale and motivation.
Morale is the foundation on which motivation is based and motivation is related to morale in that a person who is motivated would not only be enthusiastic in his job but would also ask for extra work and undertake other functions on his own initiative.
The higher the level of morale and motivation, the NOUN 77EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION higher the quality of workers’ contribution to the achievement of the organizational goal will tend to be.
4.0 Conclusion Motivation is an essential aspect of morale and morale is very important for the attainment of the school’s goals.
Morale refers to confidence in the means of goal attainment in the leaders, subordinates, and in oneself.
Morale is not concrete.
It cannot be seen or isolated, but its quality can be determined by careful observation of the way people act.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learned about morale and motivation.
We have stated that morale is the emotional and mental reaction of a person to his job and motivation is the inner drive which prompts people to act in a certain way.
Morale and Motivation are related and they are significant in boosting staff performance.
6.0 References Otu, D. O.
(1998).
Educational Leadership in the Primary School.
Sumaru – Zaria S. Asekome & Co. Publishers.
Musaazi, J. C. S. (1982).
Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London, Macmillan.
7.0 Tutors Marked Assignment Do a Case Study of your school set up.
Examine the human needs of your staff.
What are they?
How are these needs met?
How can they be better met?
Unit 11 Principles and Theories of Motivation Table of Contents NOUN 78EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Principles of Motivation 3.1 Theory of Human Needs 3.2 Theory X and Theory Y 3.3 Implications of Motivation for Staff 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This unit focuses on theories and principles of motivation.
A detail examination is made of Douglas McGregors theory X and theory Y and Abraham Maslow’s theory of human needs.
The unit gives a deep insight to the link between these theories and personnel behaviour and performance in their work places.
It is hoped that the application of aspects of these theories would enhance personnel performance in the school setting.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Describe two theories of motivation  Understand the principles of motivation  Apply some elements of motivation to actual practice in the school organization.
 Establish factors that can enhance or weaken the effect of motivation on staff.
3.0 Principles of motivation Motivation is concerned with the cause of behaviour: why people act, speak or think the way they do.
It is part of good leadership for school heads to know how to motivate.
In a school the school head needs to get results through people.
This is best done if the school head helps staff experience job satisfaction.
This is known as “intrinsic motivation” which comes from NOUN 79EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION within rather than “extrinsic motivation” which is too often based on fear.
The best motivation is the one which comes directly from within the individual worker.
The following are the principles of motivation: 1.
Principle of Participation The staff is involved in decision making and in matters which affect them directly.
The more the staff become involved, the more they are prompted to help in achieving the objectives.
If a school head involves the staff in decision making, he nevertheless remains accountable for taking the final decisions and for results.
2.
Principle of Communication If the staff are informed about the objectives and the results achieved, they are inclined to co-operate more and feel that they are part (members) of the staff (group).
But if the staff do not know what they are supposed to be achieving, they will show little interest and have little motivation.
Staff should not only be informed about results but also about changes and progress.
3.
Principle of Communication If a staff member receives the necessary recognition and work satisfaction, he is inclined to work harder.
Earned recognition brings a feeling of satisfaction and should not be leveled immediately after giving positive recognition.
Recognition should be given to the staff member as a person and not just as a human resource.
4.
Principle of Delegated Authority A school head should be prepared to delegate authority to capable people.
In this way a person’s post is enhanced, and this serves as a means of personnel development.
Delegated authority also means that more people will be allowed to make decisions themselves in connection with their work within set guidelines.
These principles of motivation outlined above indicate that certain factors determine individual work motivation.
Motivation factors can be grouped into four namely, personal needs, work characteristics, the social system and management methods.
In other words, for successful motivation, the head of the school should not only have some knowledge of the staff, but should also bear certain factors in mind which can enhance or weaken the effect of motivation.
These are factors that are inherent in human beings, factors in the work situation, management factors and community factors.
NOUN 80EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 3.1 Theory of Human Needs According to Abraham Maslow, human needs occur in hierarchy, that is in graded levels of importance.
The basic human needs essential to sustain life are physiological needs such as, food, shelter and clothing.
Until these basic needs are satisfied to a considerable degree, the majority of a person’s activity will tend to be at this level and the other levels will provide him with little motivation.
As soon as the physiological needs are satisfied, other levels of needs become important and these motivate and dominate the behaviour of the individual.
When these needs are somewhat satisfied, other needs emerge, and so will the need with highest strength become dominant as shown in figure 1 below: Self-actualisation (maximum self- development) Esteem (self respect, ego and status needs) Social (associations with others, belonging to group, giving and receiving friendship and affection.
Security (protection against danger, threat, and deprivation).
Physiological (hunger, thirst, shelter, clothing.
Figure 1: Maslow’s Hierachy of Needs While these levels in the need hierarchy can be separated for analysis and understanding, they are probably all active in actual behaviour patterns.
The lower level needs are never completely satisfied – they recur periodically – an if their satisfaction is deprived for any period of time, they become extremely strong as motivators.
On the other hand, a completely satisfied need is not an effective motivator of behaviour.
Esteem and self- actualisation needs are rarely satisfied; each individual seeks indefinitely for more satisfaction of them once they become important for a person.
Yet they are usually not significant until physiological, security and social needs are reasonably well satisfied.
NOUN 81EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Furthermore, a need does not have to be hundred per cent satisfied before the next level of need becomes strong.
Needs change as an individual develops psychologically; for instance, physiological and security needs are dominant early in life, while social, esteem and self-actualisation needs become relatively more important as a person matures.
The explanation above indicates mere general tendencies and averages; an approximation of understanding human motivation and in predicting behaviour.
There are significant individual differences that the school head must recognize in the school setting in interpreting the behaviour displayed by the people with whom he works.
Exercise 1.1 How can you help teachers in your school to meet their needs for self- actualisation?
Answer Kit You may consider the following means: 1.
Give them opportunities to attend courses/training programmes that can help to advance them.
2.
Make provisions for them to attend seminars, workshops and conferences in their areas of specialization.
3.2 Theory X and Theory Y The proponent of this theory is Douglas Mcgregor.
Under Theory X he has the following assumptions: 1.
Average human being is by nature indolent, he works as little as possible.
He has an inherent dislike of work and will avoid it if he can.
2.
The average human being must be coerced, controlled or threatened with punishment before he works.
3.
The average human being lacks ambition, dislikes responsibility, lacks initiative and prefers to be led by others.
4.
The average human being is by nature self-centered, indifferent to organizational needs, and is just concerned about security and nothing else.
NOUN 82EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 5.
The average human being is by nature resistant to change.
He prefers to stick to the status-quo or simply leave the sleeping dog alone.
6.
The average human being is gullible, dull not intelligent, or a sort of moron.
7.
In view of his responsibility to organize the elements of productive enterprise which include both human and material resources, a manager has to direct the efforts of the workers, control their actions and modify their behavior to match the needs of the organization.
Nevertheless, management under Theory X has been criticized from various quarters for being too repressive and it is like trying to make water run uphill.
Of course, such managers are reminded that it is easier to take a horse to the stream than to force it to drink from its water.
Such management style is ineffective because it runs contrary to human nature.
It tends to breed more rather than solve existing industrial conflicts, as the experiences of the post war period have shown.
Thus, instead of sitting down and blaming every worker or the “average human being” for being lazy, stupid or un- cooperative, management should endeavour to find out why workers behave the way they do, and make necessary adjustment in the management style in order to ensure effective management and integration.
In meeting this requirement, a new style of management known as Theory Y, has been developed, based on the knowledge obtained from the studies in the social sciences for almost half a century.
Under Theory Y, the following basic assumptions have been made: 1.
The expenditure of physical and mental effort in work is as natural as play or rest.
In other words, it is wrong to assume that a worker, be he “above average” or an “average” human being, does not dislike work naturally.
Instead, work is regarded by him as play or rest.
2.
Secondly, it is wrong to assume that the worker must be coerced or punished before he works, because the worker is committed to his job and organization is prepared to put in his best for both his personal and organizational objectives.
3.
Thirdly, it is wrong to assume that the worker lacks ambition, avoid responsibility, lacks initiative and prefers self-control and self-direction; he is naturally ambitious, seeks responsibility and would prefer to be allowed to use his initiative instead of subjecting himself to other workers or supervisors’ directives all the time.
NOUN 83EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 4.
Fourthly, it is wrong to assume that the average human being or the worker is self-centred and naturally indifferent to the organization’s objectives, because the worker gives his loyalty to his organization and is consciously concerned about the progress or achievements of the organization.
5.
Fiftly, it is wrong to assume, that the average human being has inherent resistance to change, because, change itself is a social phenomenon which influence the behaviour of the individual.
No individual can resist the influence of social change.
6.
Sixtly, it is wrong to assume that the average human being is gullible, dull, not intelligent or a sort of moron, because the issue of intelligence is a cross- cultural phenomenon as recent psychological tests have shown (see for example, the results of the 1987 “Gifted Children Test” in the US where Nigerian gifted children are placed among the best 10 in the world).
In other words, intelligence is not a monopoly of any race or class or groups of people.
It is a natural phenomenon which cuts across racial, class, and community boundaries.
What management needs to do is to try and develop individual’s potentiality for the benefit of the organization in particular and the society in general.
3.3 Implications of Motivation for Staff Performance in Schools What we should note from these theories of motivation is that, in any case, a man tends to work when he is happy within the environment of his work.
This means that: (i) The physical facilities in which the person works must be both comfortable and secure.
(ii) The people with whom he works should be friendly and capable of creating a good social atmosphere for interaction among the workers; and (iii) The machines, tools and equipment with which he performs his duty must be safe and secure for his use.
Moreover, a man works well if his superiors take notice of his work and constantly reinforce him according to his performance.
This means that when an employee’s work is good, the employer should commend him for the good performance.
Similarly, if he goes wrong, he should be told so.
As human beings we all feel encouraged when praised for our effort and work.
In order to motivate staff, the school head must remove all negative factors in the environment.
These include: frequent and unnecessary circulars crowded staff room or none at all, favouritism and victimization.
Staff can be motivated to work hard by the inclusion of the following positive factors: NOUN 84EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION real appreciation for good work, sincere concern for professional progress and development of individuals, good working conditions, adequate supplies and equipment, recognition that teachers are professional colleagues rather than menial subordinates and, encouragement to go beyond minimum expectations.
Above all, it is important that teachers perceive that these efforts are being, made, and that the purpose is direct rather than ulterior.
Exercise 1.2 Identify some negative factors which may hinder motivation of staff in the school setting.
Answer Kit Some negative factors which may hinder motivation of staff are favouritism, victimization, crowded staff room, frequent and unnecessary circulars.
4.0 Conclusion We would like to conclude by saying that much as the work to be performed in the school is important, the mood of the man to perform the job is equally important.
For high productivity and maximum goal attainment, he school head must ensure the comfort and happiness of the worker about everything else.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have been introduced to the principles and theories of motivation.
The implications of motivation for staff performance in the school setting were highlighted.
6.0 References Out, D.O.
(1998) Educational Leadership in the Primary School Samaru – Zaria S. Asekome & Co. Publishers Federal Ministry of Education (1993) Better Schools Management: Head Teacher Education and Resource Material Lagos F.M.E.
NOUN 85EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment As a school head, what are those practices you would engage in to motivate teachers in your school?
Unit 12 Job Analysis, Job Satisfaction and Performance Table of Contents NOUN 86EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Job Analysis 3.1 Job Satisfaction and Performance 3.2 Job Performance Appraisal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This unit centres on job analysis, job satisfaction and performance and job appraisal.
The unit describes what job analysis entails and sheds light on the means by which it can enhance job performance.
In addition, the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance were highlighted.
Finally, the place of job performance appraisal in helping teachers be as effective as possible was described.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain what job analysis entails.
 Establish the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance.
 Carry out staff performance appraisal.
3.0 Job Analysis and Description Quite often, you hear comments and complaints in respect of a staff member’s job performance.
One thing that is not often mentioned is the issue of whether the person is adequately informed of what his job entails.
This is what we intend to do in this sub-unit-to examine what job analysis and job description involves and to discuss its relevance to job performance.
NOUN 87EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION The process of job analysis is also known as job review or job classification.
It is a vital task that management performs and so it is significant for us to know what it entails.
Before we go into a discussion of job analysis and job description in details we would like to define some related terms.
 Task: This refers to a distinct work activity which has an identifiable beginning and end (for example, using manual means to sort mail into appropriate boxes).
 Duty: Means several tasks which are related to the performance of events (for example, pick up, sort and deliver incoming mail).
 Position: Is a collection of tasks and duties which are performed by one person (for example a mail room clerk prepares out-going mail, sorts incoming mail and operates addressing machines and postage machine).
 Job: Refers to one or more positions with an organization (for example clerical jobs located in different departments).
 Job Specification: Means the minimum skills, education and experience necessary for an individual to perform a job.
 Job Classification: Is the grouping or categorizing of jobs on some specified basis such as by the nature of work performed or by the level of pay.
Classification is often used as simplified method of job analysis.
 Job Description: Is a written summary of tasks, duties and responsibilities of a job.
It is often referred to as schedule of duties or position guide and must be given to an employee on assumption of office.
It is one of the oldest personnel tools., and has received renewed interest in recent years because of governmental regulatory guidelines.
Job description may also be used to develop recruitment advertisements and to provide applicants with additional information about the job openings.
Job description may be used as a means of providing the interviewer with concise accurate information about the job.
Job analysis is an important personnel function because it gathers information to be utilized in writing job description or making job evaluation.
How information is collected and utilized is of critical importance because such information may directly affect employees such as in pay or work assignments.
Thus, job analysis may indirectly affect an employee’s satisfaction and productivity.
NOUN 88EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Job analysis determines the minimum and the desirable qualification necessary to perform a job; for example N.C.E., B.A.
(Ed.
), B.Sc.
(Ed) for teaching in schools.
Such information is crucial in putting together a recruitment plan.
A job analysis indicates what tasks, duties responsibilities the job will entail.
It yields what must be learned to complete a job successfully.
This can usually be determined by comparing the employee’s post work history and training to the tasks specified in the job analysis.
Job analysis can also help management to determine an equitable pay system.
Through job analysis, management can find out exactly what tasks are performed on each job and can compare individual tasks for similar jobs across the organization.
Performance appraisal which determines how well employees have performed their jobs in the past as well as promotion decisions can be facilitated by a system that evaluates, that is the use of annual performance appraisal (A.P.A.)
form.
Job analysis can be helpful in determining which duties and responsibilities should be considered in an evaluation.
A good job analysis system is important to the personnel function; the primary focus is to maintain a high level of employee performance, productivity and efficiency.
A poorly planned job analysis affects most areas of employment and, therefore, will directly affect performance appraisal, compensation and training which in turn affect employee performance productivity.
Exercise 1.1  What do you understand by the following terms: Job Description, Task, Duty and Position?
Answer Kit Job Description: Is a written summary of the tasks, duties and responsibilities of a job.
It is also known as position guide or schedule of duties.
Task: Is the distinct work activity which has an identifiable beginning and end.
Duty: Means several tasks which are related to the performance of events.
NOUN 89EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Position: Is a collection of tasks and duties which are performed by one person.
3.1 Job Satisfaction and Performance Job is the composition of tasks, roles, responsibilities, interactions, incentives and rewards.
Job satisfaction is the quality, state, or level of satisfaction which is the result of various interests and attitudes of a person.
The job satisfaction of teachers is measured from the efforts made by teachers themselves, school heads and students towards the actualization of school’s goals.
However, the amount of efforts teachers put to the actualization of goals depend to a very large extent on the needs satisfaction teachers derive from the school head.
Job satisfaction of teachers is, therefore, to be seen as a measure between school academic performance and the needs satisfaction of teachers which is greatly influenced by the prevailing organizational climate in the school.
Jacobson (1973:15) is of the opinion that the school cannot be effective organization unless teachers find satisfaction in their work.
It is a major responsibility of the school head to create a school climate which is conducive to a high degree of teacher satisfaction.
In Simmons (1973) human relations movement scholars like Elton Mayo, William Dickson and Fritz Roethlisberger share these views.
These people believe that high morale leads to improved productivity, because a happy worker is a productive worker.
This is a relevant and significant fact of the school system.
Ejiogu (1985) said that scholars in the area of leadership like Vroom and Scott argued the claim made by human relations movement that management can increase productivity by satisfying the needs of employee.
Ejiogu (1985:36) cited Scott as saying that: High morale is not longer considered a prerequisite of high productivity.
But more than this, the nature of the relationship between morale and productivity is open to serious questioning.
Is it direct?
Is it inversed?
Is it circular between the two?
Are they independent variables?
It is worthy of note that the relationship between job satisfaction and performance is considered by some researchers as a complex one.
Apart from employee motivational levels many factors influence employee performance Researchers enumerate the factors as: nature of the job being designed; the extent to which employee can identify with the end result of labour; the meaningfulness of employee’s work; and the impact of NOUN 90EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION technology, organization and authority, which is determined by the prevailing organizational climate.
Lipham and Hoch (1974:13) are of the opinion that a participating leader who assumes an active role in the group, by giving support to his workers, delegating authority and exercising an optional degree of supervision, is likely to have a higher level of productivity and morale among the subordinates than an authoritarian leader who places more emphasis on institutional goals.
Tawari (1988) seems to have similar view with Lipham and Hoch when he noted that teachers would certainly prefer to work with principals who make their policies clear and assign work schedules to teachers after the group has democratically approved of the schedule.
Also teachers would perform better, if they are able to recognize and accept a principal’s concern for their personal well being and comfort.
Tawari considers the above views relevant because it is evident that positive organizational climate is the only condition for staff performance in school.
A school with a leader having no concern for teachers experiences low morale of teachers and high disengagement hence, low academic performance by students.
There is clear-cut evidence clearly indicating that a teacher’s satisfaction with his job and his effectiveness of performance are related.
It seems logical to expect that such kind of a direct relationship exists, because where teachers have freedom to plan their work and opportunities to participate in making policy in matters of curriculum and teachers welfare, morale is high.
Perhaps the most important ingredient in teacher satisfaction is his attitude toward the principal.
Some factors of job satisfaction are:  Good pay  Regular payment of salary  Attractive fringe benefits  Conducive work environment  Friendly / understanding colleagues and others Exercise 1.2  How does job satisfaction contribute and lead to increase in performance?
NOUN 91EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Answer Kit Job satisfaction and performance have some relationship if a person is happy at his job, if he has materials and equipment to work with, if his colleagues and superiors are kind, sympathetic and friendly to him, he will reciprocate by putting in his very best in the performance of his job.
He may even be willing to go to extra length to initiate activities on his own to ensure that the goals of the organization are met.
3.2 Job Performance Appraisal This is a system of measuring workers output or productivity or efficiency either qualitatively or quantitatively.
Through this technique, the activities of workers are monitored and measured with the aim of according reward or some form of motivation.
It is also a method of accountability and corrections for improvement.
Appraisal is a process of review by teachers, school heads, other senior teachers of the individual staff competencies, performance and professional needs.
Performance appraisal is imperative in an organization because as the organization grows and expands, it becomes large and complex so much that the managerial functions of the head become very cumbersome and difficult.
The organizational head may then find it almost impossible to have direct contact with every individual worker let alone knowing what the staff is doing.
Since the heads of organizations, large and complex, small or simple must know what each unit, section or individual staff is doing in order to attain the set goals, as well as, to enhance efficiency and higher productivity, the performance appraisal must come in as a tool to measure these variables of job dimension.
Performance appraisal is usually an integral part of management for more productivity and efficiency in organizations.
It is a tool (technique or approach) through which the activities of units, sections and workers are monitored and measured possibly with the aim of according reward or some form of motivation.
You should note that for performance appraisal to be effective, jobs and duties must be clearly defined, and a summary of duties, well spelt out, must be given to position holders (or individual staff performing the duties).
Individual staff must be assigned to the right jobs or else the question of accountability becomes difficult if not impossible.
It is gross injustice to hold a worker responsible for failure in a job which you have not clearly spelt out for him to do.
For an effective performance appraisal, the organizational objectives must be clearly understood by all the respective staff in the organization.
Furthermore, you should inform your staff about the methods NOUN 92EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION and techniques of doing the jobs.
In order works, the staff must possess the necessary skills either though training and retraining or experience or all the means indicated if we are to operate performance appraisal effectively.
The performance appraisal methods differ from one organization to another.
However, a common method of performance appraisal consists of an annual evaluation through a standardized or structured form.
Using this method, superior officers are expected to evaluate their subordinates by filling the forms to be submitted to the top management.
The problems associated with this method are so many and vary ranging from subjectivity to vindictiveness.
Knowing the objectives or importance of the performance appraisal to the individual, some unscrupulous superior officers operate it as a means of settling personal scores against their subordinates.
This is why it is strongly recommended that the performance appraisal or staff evaluation should be an open exercise, so that erring officers are made to account for their errors or malice.
This in essence calls for a Performance Appraisal Review (PAR) which is also practiced in many organizations especially in the private sector.
Such a practice should be extended to cover all organizations in both public and private sectors of the economy.
The method of Performance Appraisal discussed above is the formal type.
It should be noted however, that Performance Appraisal does not have to be formal.
It could be informal.
The informal type takes place through informal discussions of employees by their supervisors or heads usually in informal meetings.
Through informal discussions in informal meetings, supervisors or heads exchange idea about the qualities or habits of their subordinates.
This method enables the management to collect a lot of data which can be used for various purposes including promotions, advancements, transfers, termination or dismissals.
In fact, in practical terms, it is this informal performance appraisal that is widely used for the purposes enumerated above; and in each case, the formal method is referred to as documentary evidence.
It is pertinent to mention here that the informal performance appraisal method is a two-way traffic in the sense that each of the two categories of personnel in the organization – the super-ordinate (superior officer) or heads of organizations and the subordinates – evaluate the other.
However, the purposes and effects of the informal performance appraisal on organizational heads by their subordinates are weaker than those of the super-ordinates on the subordinates.
While for example, the super-ordinates use the data collected for the purposes already mentioned (promotions, transfers and dismissals), the data collected from the subordinates about their super- ordinates informally, merely end up at a ‘gossiping data bank’ which may not NOUN 93EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION serve any useful purpose in decision making in respect of the concerned officer.
In carrying out a performance appraisal on a teacher, for example, all aspects of his work – organization of his classroom, management of classroom activities, including the use of time and materials, how he behaves toward learners, other teachers, school head, parents and the community – should be included.
You need to see and use performance appraisal as a means of helping your staff become as effective as possible in his work and also towards meeting the staff’s needs for professional development, for example, in-service training and career prospects.
You should not view and use appraisal or performance as a mechanism for fault-finding and destructive criticism but rather as a means of building the staff’s positive motivation to be as good a teacher as he is able to be.
There are a number of steps to be taken in carrying out staff performance appraisal.
Before these can begin, you need to have discussion with the staff as a whole.
The staff need to feel confident that there can be full and frank discussion so that if management style is felt by the staff to be faulty, this can be said in the knowledge that you and other management staff will also review your own style.
In addition, whatever is said during the process of appraisal should be treated as confidential.
A staff who reveals personal details of an unhappy domestic life during discussion, needs to feel sure that this will not become common knowledge in a staff-room or community.
Professional ambitions, too, should be kept private.
Appraisal should not be used as a means of making comparisons between one staff member and another.
The following are the benefits of staff performance appraisal: • It leads to skills development since staff areas of professional needs (weaknesses) are detected and rectified through in-service training, experiments with teaching styles and others.
• It results into career development through in-service training • It can enhance relationships as each staff is able to understand the other better.
• It could lead to improved learning opportunities for students.
NOUN 94EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION • It contributes t o improved morale and efficiency with the school.
Exercise 1.3 • What is job performance appraisal?
• Identify three main benefits of performance appraisal.
Answer Kit • Performance appraisal is a system of measuring workers output, productivity or efficiency either in qualitative or in quantitative terms.
It is a method of accountability and corrections for improvement.
• Some benefits of performance appraisal include: i) Career development through training ii) Increased knowledge of the workers and the school system iii) Improved learning opportunities for students iv) Improved morale and efficiency within the school 4.0 Conclusion When carried out in a spirit of willing cooperation you would find that staff performance appraisal contributes to school effectiveness.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learned that job analysis is the process of gathering information to be used in writing job description.
It determines the minimum and desirable qualification and experience necessary to perform a job.
It also indicates what tasks duties and responsibilities the job will entail.
Job satisfaction is said to be the quality, state or level of satisfaction which is the result of various interests and attitudes of a person.
We have said that job performance is measured by the quality and efforts a person devotes to his work.
Job satisfaction and performance have been found in several scholarly works to be related.
Factors of job satisfaction and performance include: NOUN 95EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION  Attractive and regular pay;  Conducive working environment  Sympathetic and kind colleagues and school head.
Finally, we described job performance appraisal as the system of measuring workers’ output, productivity or efficiency either qualitatively or quantitatively.
6.0 References Enaohwo, J. O. and Eferakeya (1989).
Educational Administration.
Ibadan.
Paperback Publishers Limited.
Musaazi, J. C. S. (1982).
The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London.
The Macmillan Press Ltd. Dawson, S. (1986).
Analyzing Organizations.
London.
Macmillan Education Ltd. Lipham, J. M. and Hoch, J.
A.
(1974).
The Principalship: Foundations and Functions.
New York.
Harper and Row Publishers.
Maehr, M. L. (1989).
Building Job Commitment Among Employees” In Rubin, R .
(ed).
Personnel Management in Libraries, Library Trends.
28 (1).
Illinois.
Graduate School of Library and Information Service.
University of Illinois, by M. D. 91970) Current Perspectives for Managing Organizations.
New Jersey.
Prentice Hall Inc. Ejiogu, A.
(1978).
Behavioural Decisions in Organization.
Dallas Scolt, Foresman and Company.
Simmons, R. E. (1978).
Managing Behavioural Processes: Applications of Theory and Research.
Illinois.
AHM Publishing Company.
Tawari, O. C. (1986).
“Principals Leadership Behaviour and Teacher Effectiveness”.
The Nigerian Journal of Guidance and Counselling.
Vol.
2 No.
1, March 7.0 Tutors Marked Assignment NOUN 96EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Discuss the relevance of job performance appraisal in schools in your state.
MODULE 4 Unit 13 Staff Services: Safety, Security and Health Services in School Organization.
Table of Contents NOUN 97EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Staff Services: safety, security and health services in school organization 3.1 Safety and Security Services 3.2 Health Services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction This unit is related to Human Resource Management.
The unit specifically focuses on safety, security and health services of staff in the school organization.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain staff services in respect of safety and security  Describe the nature of health services of staff in school organization.
3.0 Staff Services: Safety, Security and Health Services in School Organization.
Personal Management is a broad but necessary aspect of the organization if it must survive to achieve its aims.
This is more so especially when the relationship between super-ordinates and subordinates is considered as an important spice necessary for the enhancement of productivity.
The employer, therefore, has to provide certain services that will act as lubricant to the staff or employees.
NOUN 98EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Employee services therefore, are the services the employer should render to his employee in the organization.
Edem (1987) identified the services to include: making employee share in the decision making process; assisting him to improve his productivity; being attentive to his material and social needs and others.
Perhaps these could be interpreted to reflect what the school administration must do for his staff if he is to create conducive teaching learning situation.
Our concern in this unit is safety and security services, and health services in the school.
As administrators we need to bear in mind the very essence of these services if we want to achieve our educational objectives with considerable ease.
Let us examine these services one by one although in some industrial organizations they are considered a common act.
3.1 Safety and Security Service Many organizations especially the non-industrial ones, underestimate the importance of staff safety and security.
Some of the things that make the staff in the school to feel secure are the satisfaction of his basic needs such as food, clothing and shelter.
They are the foremost reasons why people take up jobs and they appear to be strongest in an employee’s early work life and must be satisfied to make him feel secure.
The principal or school administrator should therefore, see the importance of money to the staff which has a dominating influence on him especially in the early stage of the staff’s career.
The school head should therefore, make sure staff salaries are paid accurately, regularly and promptly and, should therefore, arise a situation where salaries cannot be paid promptly the staff should be informed and the reasons explained in detail.
The school head should desist from unnecessary delay of payment of salaries due to minor offences or mistakes.
This is so because such delay could cause insecurity for his family and they may starve or fall sick.
The school head should ensure that staff are duly promoted.
Promotion gives the staff an additional security in terms of monetary rewards that follow promotion.
His promotion may also move him from a lower level position to a higher one where his authority and powers are increased.
It is therefore, wise that the school administrator should take the issue of promotion seriously by recommending staff who are due, filling their annual evaluation reports and assisting them to overcome barriers hindering their promotions.
When security is established the administrator has to take into account the safety needs of the staff.
Question such as what happens to a member of staff if he gets sick?
How is he protected from the school environment hazards such as students’ uprising or parent’s hostile confrontations?
So the services should aim at protecting the staff against bodily harm, danger, loss of job, NOUN 99EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION deprivation or threat.
The major areas of concern for teachers is getting permanent and pensionable appointment and confirmation of appointment because lack of these make the staff to get worried of they fear discrimination or arbitrary managerial action.
The school head should therefore, see that recommendations are made on staff who deserve these.
Listening to, and taking interest in the personal problems of the staff is one sure way the school administrator can make the staff feel secure.
One major area of providing safety and security for the staff is housing, staff that have no house allocated to them cannot be sure of the safety and security of their families and their belongings and these will invariably affect their productivity or performance.
In a school situation, there are some categories of academic and non-academic staff who are entitled to institutional houses.
Where houses are not available, the school principal may not be able to render much help than to explain the situation to the staff and make suggestions on how they can make arrangement to obtain private accommodation.
Some principals who actually know the importance of the safety need to staff performance, may contemplate beyond mere suggestion to the staff.
They go personally to exert their influence in order to make very suitable and modest accommodation arrangements for their staff in the town where the school is situated.
They meet landlord and make arrangements for the accommodation of their teachers in suitable and favourable house.
In-service programmes can ensure the safety and security of the workers in many ways.
This is a quick way of enhancing the staff esteem by self or others.
An additional educational qualification from say NCE to university degree to the staff gives a sense of security and safety on the job since he is aware of the additional monetary awards that will follows such a promotion advancement.
The princiipal should play a helpful role in making sure that deserving staff go on in-service training, and where there is deficiency, effort should be made to help remove it.
One other aspect of staff service is to give the members of staff a sense of direction.
They should have a clear knowledge of where the school is heading to through the clarification of the school goals and objectives and the role each staff must play to achieve these goals.
The principal should be able to assist the staff in fulfilling their roles as is expected of them.
Some categories of teachers need some form of security measures because of the tasks they perform.
Discipline and labour masters fall under this category.
Their responsibilities can lead to hostile reaction either in the school or outside the school where a student who has been disciplined may accuse the teacher or in some cases threaten the life of the teacher.
The principal should make the students and parents understand that the discipline masters do not victimize students; they merely carry out the instructions as directed by the NOUN 100EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION school or the Ministry of Education.
In addition, teachers should be allowed to play their assigned roles without undue interference either from principal or influential parents.
3.2 Health Services Health, it is said, is wealth.
In organizations health is higher than productivity or performance.
The state of both physical and mental wellbeing of staff should be the major concern of the employer or school administrators.
The distinction between safety and health is somewhat arbitrary in the sense that “safety generally refers to hazards resulting in direct injuries such as cuts, bruises, sprains, impaired hearing, loss of eyesight, and broken limbs”.
Health refers more to the role of working environment in producing disease and illness.
This definition may tend to be in favour of working factories with sophisticated machines but it still has relevance to the school situation.
The situation avails in the school where teachers may be injured for example the Physical Education teachers become sick in the course of their duties, or laboratory staff getting burnt by chemical factions and so on.
All these means that something must be done to help the staff that are affected.
For most organizations including the school, the function of medical services has been to provide pre-employment physical examinations, to review claims for workers and to offer first aid and other routine medical services.
It is unfortunate that in our present dispensations, schools DO NOT and CANNOT render such medical services.
What actually is rendered is the time the staff may be allowed to go to health clinic, and hospitals but it does not cover the costs for consultation and drugs.
What should the school administrator do here?
Perhaps he can borrow from the industrial environment health service programme so that a preventive medical programme within the organization can make a big contribution to the goal of keeping workers healthy.
A starting point is the pre-employment screening process.
This only screens out individuals who might be a liability, but assists in proper job placement.
This may not be very practicable in the school situation but a basic knowledge of the health of the staff will enable the school administrator to know what responsibility to assign to them.
Another area is to ensure the maintenance of good health by members of staff in the school.
Periodic examinations performed by a medical personnel or in consultation with private physicians and clinics can help serve this purpose.
The Nigerian Union of Teachers (N.U.T) could liaise with State Governments, the largest employer of labour in schools, to handle this initiative.
NOUN 101EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Another health service the school administrator can render is in the area of transfer of staff.
He should be able to make recommendations regarding staff health conditions so that those with poor health should be transferred to and not from schools near hospitals.
Since the economy of the country is “not buoyant” now, there is little the school administrators can do about health services for the staff but to offer an understanding when a member of staff or any member of their families falls sick by allowing them to go to a hospital.
In some schools, the bursary may have money from which the administrator can loan the staff having a health problem (either himself or any member of his family) to enable buy medicine.
Some schools even have first aid boxes where cheap and viable drugs are available such as panadol, aspirin, bandages, iodine and others.
Although primarily the first aid box is meant for students, the staff members can take advantage of it in times of emergency.
Perhaps one way to keep the school first aid box going is to ask members of the staff to contribute money to buy drugs.
In some schools, the government has established sick bays (clinics) with a school nurse and clinic master.
The government regularly supplies these clinics with medicine.
It is left to the school head to constantly pursue the sources of these drugs.
He can always meet with the school nurse to know areas of shortages.
The members of staff in the school can make use of the school clinic especially in the instance of mild sicknesses such as fatigue headache, cuts and simple fractures.
Exercise 1.1 Identify the types of services available for staff in secondary schools in your state.
Answer Kit I.
Safety and Security Services 1.
Working in a safe environment 2.
Removal of factors/elements which may threaten staff members safety/security.
3.
Living in safe and secure houses 4.
Protection against hazards, danger, deprivation and loss of job.
NOUN 102EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 5.
Securing for staff permanent and pensionable appointments.
6.
Listening to and taking interest in personal problems of staff.
7.
Staff development through in-service.
II.
Health Services 1.
Establishment of school clinics (if a school is too small to have one, two to three schools in the same vicinity could share one).
2.
Periodic medical examination 3.
Health Insurance Scheme to be taken by teachers to reduce burden of heavy medical expenses in case of serious illness.
4.0 Conclusion We have seen the need for safety, security and health services in the school.
There is the need for members of staff to be promptly paid, have housing accommodation arrangements made for them by way of providing and where not possible, assisting them to get it in order to make them feel their families and belongings are safe and secure.
Health services are very important but because of poor financial situations, large number of schools in most States and large number of work force in the education sector, the government cannot meet up with the requirements of staff health services.
The school head can only allow the staff ample time to take members of their families that are ill to the nearby hospitals.
It is necessary for the school head to understand the health conditions of staff before assigning them tasks.
Finally, the growing importance of staff safety and health mandates change in the current practices.
The best way is to ensure a safe and healthy working environment which will give the staff a sense of security and where he will perform better towards the attainment of the school objectives.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt about the importance of safety, security and health services to the attainment of school goals.
The types of services provided in schools in the country have been described.
A call for change in the current practices was also made in order that staff can perform better.
6.0 References Edem, D.A.
(1982) Introduction to Educational Administration in Nigeria NOUN 103EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Ibadan, John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Describe the employee services that you would need to satisfy your staff and move them towards increased performance.
Unit 14 Personnel and Human Relations Table of Contents NOUN 104EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Meaning of Human Relations 3.1 Personnel and Human Relations 3.2 Principles of Human Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This unit specifically focuses on personnel and human relations and principles of human relations.
The unit sheds light on the important role played by human relations towards the success of organization.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define human relations.
 Explain the importance of human relations to workers productivity  Enumerate the principles of human relations.
3.0 Meaning of Human Relations Human relations simply means being with people and interacting with them.
Human relations involve recognition of workers as human beings and treating them as such.
This implies bearing in mind constantly that the employee is more important than the work itself even though the work has to be done.
Human relations means recognition by the administrator that man is part of NOUN 105EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION the organization.
Since man is the most important part of the organization, everything possible must be done by the administrator to make him comfortable in his work.
The idea of human relations is based on the fact that friendliness begets friendliness.
This fact emphasizes that since nearly seventy-five per cent of the school administrator’s time is spent with and for human beings, who have individual needs, expectations, feelings, emotions and interests, the school administrator must learn how best to relate to the individuals so as to make the best out of them.
Human relations imply such ideas as respect, courtesy, kindness, consideration, confidence, trust, sincerity, open-mindedness, justice and fairness in dealing with people.
The good administrator is essentially a friend, accessible to all members.
He is a friend to all in the school on equal levels.
An administrator who considers the comfort and the social welfare of his staff can be said to be employee-centred.
That means that he believes that increased productivity on the part of the staff occurs when the staff’s basic human needs are given due consideration by the employer.
While it is true that financial incentives may serve to motivate workers, a school head must recognize and try to meet other needs which are common to his staff.
These consist of social needs such as friendship, group support, acceptance, approval, recognition, status and the need for self- actualization which involves the development of the individual’s talents, creativity and personality to the full.
In addition, human relations practices involve knowing the best way to communicate to people at the right time.
It also implies dealing with people with trust, respect and consideration.
Exercise 1.1  What does human relations mean to you?
Answer Kit NOUN 106EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Human relations means giving due respect and recognition to the human elements (workers) in an organization.
It means showing workers kindness, courtesy, treating them with sincerity and trust.
3.1 Personnel and Human Relations In organizations, some individuals in positions of leadership see the achievement of their tasks as being essentially dependent on how well they can structure the various functions with appropriate job description.
They believe that when this is done, each individual will know whom to report to and who reports to him, leading logically to proper coordination and supervision of the various units in the particular organization.
Others, on the other hand, believe that the achievement of organizational tasks depend to a large extent on how well rules and regulations are made and followed.
It is natural that these contrasting perceptions of the means that can lead to an adequate realization of organizational goals, will attract different attitudes to subordinates by super-ordinates.
To those who think tasks can be more appropriately realized when there are strict guidelines to follow, specification of function as well rules and regulations, their view of those who work with them will be such that more attention will be given to how these general principles of administration can be strictly adhered to.
This means that the head of such an organization will be more concerned with issuing directives and seeing that these are immediately carried out.
In short, he will be more interested in the achievement of tasks even at the expense of members’ personal feelings in the organization.
Those who however, feel that the human condition is more important in the achievement of organizational goals will similarly do all they can to make such individuals feel happy to work.
Human relations also means the consideration of the human factor in an organization as being an important one in the realization of goals.
This calls for proper handling of persons in the organization in order to make them satisfied.
While upholding this view, it does not sacrifice the achievements of organizational tasks but nevertheless considers that these tasks can best be achieved when individual members in the organization are made to feel happy and therefore, willing to contribute their very best.
It is important to point out that, administrators who believe that with proper structuring of organizational conditions and methods of operations as being more important for the achievement of goals, view man as being essentially hardworking, likes responsibility, capable of self direction, responsive to change and so is capable of helping realizing such goals if conditions and methods of operations are arranged properly.
On the other hand, NOUN 107EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION administrators who believe that the human factor is important in the achievement of organizational goals view man as one who needs direction, motivation and control because he is by nature lazy, dislikes responsibility, dull and resistant to change.
These two beliefs of man are generally known as “Theory Y” and “Theory X” respectively.
In “Theory X”, individuals have to be persuaded, rewarded, punished and controlled if they have to perform the various tasks assigned to them.
It, therefore, places considerable reliance upon external control of human behaviour.
Human relations is in general a softer view of “Theory X” in which individuals in an organization have to be persuaded, encouraged or praised in order to reinforce their behaviour towards goal achievement.
3.2 Principles of Human Relations The general principles of human relations in an organization include the following:  Subordinates are liked and respected;  Recognition is given to all;  Those in positions of authority must be friendly and approachable;  There must be fairness and justice;  Good communication must exist in the organization; and  Participation in decision making and planning is encouraged.
When subordinates in an organization are liked and respected by those in positions of authority, they are more likely to identify with the concerns of such an organization.
In a school where the principal shows he cares about the staff, there is a greater tendency for such staff to feel more concerned with achieving the various tasks which they are called upon to perform.
On the other hand, when members of staff are not liked by those in authority positions and are not also given the respect that are due to them, they are also more unlikely to like those in authority and disagreement becomes widespread.
Recognition is a very common way of reinforcing behaviour.
Accordingly, when individuals in a school feel that their contributions are being recognized and appreciated, they acquire a sense of satisfaction and will become more willing to contribute more positively towards the achievement of tasks assigned to them.
When, on the other hand, members of an organization feel NOUN 108EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION that their contributions are not being recognized and much less appreciated, they develop a cold attitude when next tasks are assigned to them.
Thus, by showing recognition and appreciation to tasks performed by subordinate staff, school executives can do much to make them work towards goal achievement.
In a school where those in positions of authority are friendly to subordinates and allow themselves to be easily approachable, a healthier atmosphere of warmth and friendship will prevail.
Such an atmosphere will break any barriers between those in authority and subordinates, thus resulting to greater cooperation.
However, when there is no friendship in an organization among members and where those in authority positions create a gap between themselves and subordinates, there can hardly be any meaningful cooperation between the two groups.
This is simply because subordinates will not feel that they are part of the organization.
Instead, they will tend to view such an organization as being primarily the concern of those in leadership positions.
They would think that it is those in authority who would benefit from any success arising in it and not themselves.
With such an attitude, it is needless pointing out that there can hardly be any understanding in the organization between one another.
An atmosphere of justice and fairness gives members in an organization the assurance that they are adequately protected.
Under such conditions, individuals feel that actions will be judged purely on facts and not on feels.
They are more likely to think that very fundamental issues like promotions and appointments would be based on merit alone.
When this is the case, individuals feel happy to work for the achievement of organizational tasks.
Good communication in a school does not only enable individuals to be aware of their duties and the general progress being made in the school It also serves an important psychological function because it makes the individual who is constantly informed of the progress being made in the school that he is actually recognized as being important.
On the other hand, when individuals are never informed on the progress being made in the establishment where they are part, the tendency is to feel that they are not actually being valued.
This may dampen the spirit of the members of the organization.
Under such conditions they will not be able to contribute their best.
A greater sense of identification with the purposes of the school or any other organization can be achieved when all the individuals who are to be affected by particular measures are allowed to participate in the decision-making process.
The point here is not that their suggestions will necessarily be taken.
What is the point of significance in this case is that by being allowed to NOUN 109EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION participate in decision-making, individuals will tend to feel some worth and important that they are actually functional members of the organization.
When individuals feel this way, they are more likely to contribute their best towards the achievement of the goals of the organization.
On the other hand, when individuals that are to be affected by particular measures are not called upon to take part in the making of such decisions, they would naturally feel that they are mere tools being used to achieve certain ends and not as individuals with any reasoning or worth.
Such feelings are certainly not the best in seeking the cooperation of individuals in an organization.
Exercise 1.2  Briefly describe some principles of human relations.
Answer Kit  Recognition given to all  Effective Communication  Practices of fairness and justice  School head likes and respects staff  Participative decision making in the school  School head should be friendly and approachable.
4.0 Conclusion Human relations is a factor of morale and motivation.
They are closely intertwined.
They are essential areas that the school head must develop if the staff will perform their job efficiently so as to achieve the goals of the organization.
Human relations imply that although the work must be done effectively, the workers who perform the job are more important than the work itself.
5.0 Summary In this unit you have learned that human beings are very important in organizational goal attainment and so the school head must develop skills in human relations so that workers will be effective.
Human relations was defined as the recognition of workers as human beings with feelings, interest, needs and emotions and, should be treated with respect, courtesy and NOUN 110EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION sincerity.
Human relations practices that the school head can use to build the morale of his staff were highlighted.
6.0 References Out, D. O.
(1998).
Educational Leadership in the Primary School.
Samaru – Zaria.
S. Asekome & Co. Publishers.
Afolayan, T. A. F. (1989).
Principalship: An Introduction to the Administrtion of Post-Primary Institutions in Nigeria.
Zaria.
Institute of Education, A.B.U.
7.0 Tutors Marked Assignment Discuss the relevance of job performance appraisal in schools in your state.
Unit 15 Staff Conduct and Discipline in Schools Table of Contents NOUN 111EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Staff Conduct and Discipline in School Organizations 3.1 Staff Conduct 3.2 Staff Discipline 3.3 Approaches in Maintaining Discipline Among Staff 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction This unit is related to human resource management.
This unit specifically focuses on staff conduct, staff discipline in school organization, and approaches in maintaining discipline among staff.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit, as specified in the unit objectives below: 2.0 Objectives • By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain what is meant by staff conduct • Describe types of indiscipline among staff in school • Apply positive approaches in maintaining staff discipline 3.0 Staff Conduct and Discipline in School Organizations The main function of the school, apart from teaching students how to read, write and calculate as the public perceives it is the maintenance of ‘discipline’.
In order to maintain discipline, therefore, there is need for the existence of good conduct amongst individuals that are to maintain discipline.
It is reasonable that professional educators are aware of public expectations in this respect.
Discipline is important in any social unit, be it school, religious organization, a government establishment of a political party.
NOUN 112EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION It is generally agreed that everybody in the education institutions, including the principals, staff and students need to be highly disciplined and of good conduct.
But what actually is the meaning of conduct and discipline?
Conduct is a general behaviour or manners of directing or managing affairs, which could either be good or bad.
Thus it then means that conduct will now mean those general good behaviour expected, of all staff within the educational institution (a school).
Note however, that when we say staff, this connotes both teaching and non- teaching staff (Matron, Bursar, Nurse, Librarians, Driver, Messenger, etc.)
in a school.
Discipline, like education, is very difficult to define.
We know an educated man when we meet one but to say exactly what it is that makes him educated is difficult.
In a similar way we recognize that a man is disciplined but again to define what makes him the way he is, is not easy.
Some people see discipline as everybody conforming in totality to laid down rules and norms and, as a complete obedience to orders.
To these people discipline conjures up a picture of any army parade ground, with soldiers responding instantly.
The word discipline is apparently derived form the word disciple, meaning a follower or student of an educated leader.
In education “discipline” can be used in two senses.
In one usage it can be titled academic “discipline” or behavioural “discipline”.
When we talk of academic discipline we mean a branch of learning or subject particularly at the university level.
In the second sense it can be defined as behaviour indicative of submission to genuine authority and high ideals.
With specific reference to staff and students, it denotes willing obedience to the school rules and regulations as well as behaviour and work in ways generally acceptable to the school community to the Ministry of Education and society in general.
Exercise 1.1 • What is discipline?
Answer Kit NOUN 113EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION • Discipline is the ability of a person to conform to the laid down rules, norms and regulations and a complete obedience to orders within the environment where he lives or works.
3.1 Staff Conduct As defined above conduct refers to the general behaviour of an individual, such behaviour will determine the manners the individuals carry out his activities or sense of direction.
You may note here however, that all staff in the school includes both teaching and non-teaching staff.
The greatest single factor in the achievement of educational institutional aims lies heavily on the staff as such, those staff are expected to be of good behaviour or conduct.
However, in this unit we shall focus more attention on teachers’ conduct and briefly speak on other non-teaching staff conduct.
This is because teaching staff contribute the greatest factor and influence on the children’s learning and activities.
Thus as regards teachers we shall classify their expected conducts into two headings, namely: Personal Conducts and Professional Conducts.
The personal conducts expected from staff therefore includes, dedication and hard work.
One important conduct expected of staff especially teachers is dedication and hard work.
Thus every teacher is expected to come to school and do his work accordingly.
One other conduct expected from staff is the way they appear generally.
This includes the way an individual staff dresses to the school.
For instance, a female teacher is not expected to dress in jeans trousers or very shot skits to school and male teachers are expected to dress properly and not to keep bushy hair.
No staff is expected to come to school drunk or smoke within the school premises.
Another good conduct expected of staff is that they should always report to school on time and not to leave the school premises before closing time.
Every staff is expected to be self-disciplined; as such the principal should provide those conditions that are conducive to self-discipline on the part of staff to help them to know the requires of their jobs as well as the conditions which relate to their employment.
It is a dirty administrative trick to keep the staff ignorant of their rights and privileges in an attempt to prevent them from claiming their entitlements.
NOUN 114EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION On some occasions, the standard of work and behaviour of some staff may be occasionally or frequently below expectation.
In such cases, specific discipline measures have to be taken.
Not all these measures need to be punitive.
For example lateness, absence from school or class, delay in submitting students’ termly grades, inefficient discharge of teaching and related functions and refusal to perform reasonable duties, all constitute signs of indiscipline.
Example of other serious disciplinary cases are gross misconduct such as converting school property to one’s own use, impregnating of female students by male staff, unholy relationship with male students, falsification of records, examination leakages, (releasing questions out to students, giving answers, inflating marks, etc).
Coming to school very late and being drunk to school.
All the above enumerated points constitute to staff indiscipline in our educational institutions as such it is the responsibility of the principal to make the staff aware of what, how, when and where to take certain actions or behave properly.
It is pertinent to know that, wherever we have different people coming together in the same organization such as the school, we cannot expect hundred per cent disciplined human beings, as such there must be an exceptional case or an individual who will misbehave at one time or the other.
Such indisciplined actions may depend on the strength of the offence.
However, there are some possible ways of how to take care of indiscipline behaviour of staff.
These include informal discussion, interview, query and others.
The interview is an informal way of a friendly talk, which can be in form of counseling with the teacher concerned.
The principal can have a talk with a teacher found guilty, for example, a teacher who has been absent from the class for two days.
It is quite possible that such teacher has not been guilty of such an act before but his action may be due to circumstances such as, sudden sickness, or other academic problem such as compilation of marks or marking scripts which made the teacher unable to attend classes.
During such interview the principal would be able to understand and give necessary advise.
The way staff relate with one another and the students generally should be cordial and that which will contribute to the development and achievement of the school goals and education in general.
A staff is not expected to be absent from school without permission and he is not expected to fight either his colleague, students, parents, or any member of the community.
Staff are NOUN 115EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION expected to be loyal, honest, patient, enthusiastic, creative and very resourceful.
Professional Conduct: This pertains to those behaviour or conduct of staff towards their profession.
Thus they are expected to master what they teach, to understand principles of child growth as this will help them to know how to treat youths, prepare their lessons properly, and to have positive attitude to work, in this sense they should grow to like their job.
3.2 Staff Discipline When genuine efforts are made it is not difficult to maintain discipline among teachers when compared with other categories of workers.
Many of them especially the professionally trained ones appreciate the value of discipline and respect even before they are appointed, they will be required to follow certain rules and regulations pertaining to their work and relating to the institution they work with.
Dynamic leadership and the recognition of individual differences is the basis of approach to individuals problems.
Principal can be reasonably assured of genuine cooperation from the majority of his staff.
Teachers must set good examples of discipline behaviour for the students to follow.
We should always remember that self-discipline is not externally imposed and is not based on fear; staff should always display courtesy, consideration, respect, a professional manner, honesty, punctuality and good speech.
Staff are expected to cooperate in establishing, maintaining and revising school rules.
Every teacher is expected to work hard and behave well under favourable conditions.
The principal should adapt and maintain this sense in respect of every teacher until a teacher’s pattern of behaviour and mode of work have proved beyond reasonable doubt that the principal’s confidence reposed in that teacher has been misplaced.
However, it is pertinent to know that such teacher might be used to such habit, as such, it is now left for the principal to counsel such staff and give advice and to let the teacher know the implication of such behaviour to educational development and attainment of educational objectives.
Exercise 1.2 NOUN 116EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION • What are some acts of misconduct among teacher sin secondary schools?
Answer Kit Acts of misconduct among teachers include: • Absenteeism • Improper Dressing • Negligence of Duty • Lateness to School • Immorality • Fraud with students’ scores and grades It is possible such teacher might refuse to change, then there is need for the principal to give oral warning.
This is an aspect when the principal gives warning to such a teacher telling him that if he does not desist from such action a more serious step will be taken.
The next step is the written warning.
This can come in form of query asking the teacher to explain why he was absent from the school, or class, or why he was drunk in school, or was improperly dressed to school.
It is quite true that some staff after all the above steps, do not change.
Hence, there is need to take other serious steps.
Therefore, one of the last steps to be taken on staff indiscipline action should be to make report to the Headquarters testifying on the staff’s behaviours.
In reporting to the headquarters, the principal can make reference to the written warnings that has been given to the staff in question.
This reference is to show the headquarters that the principal has done his best in correcting such staff.
3.3 Approaches in Maintaining Discipline Among Staff Good discipline should be maintained to help the individual staff adjust to the personal and social forces of his experiences.
The staff has to adjust to the existing culture and institution within which he participates.
NOUN 117EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION A reasonable degree of cooperation, conformity and consistency of behaviour is expected from the staff.
Therefore, there are certain approaches that are necessary in order to maintain certain level of discipline among staff.
The positive approach stresses that staff discipline should not be a separate area of school administration.
As such staff could be made to understand that all rules and regulations are enacted for their welfare and peaceful co- existence.
There is need for the principal to treat teachers kindly and endeavour to sue positive reinforcement in assisting staff to develop his conduct.
School rules and regulations must be flexible, they should not be too rigid and should be simple and clear.
Staff should be made to participate in the formulation of such rules so that they can easily be obeyed.
There is need for a blue print of such rules to be distributed to every staff for personal use and for them to read every time.
There should be a general one to be placed on the notice boards in the staff room.
Such rules should guide teachers in their general conduct and discipline in the school as a whole.
The next approach is the method of communication.
There should be a clear line of communication between the principal and the staff in general.
Principal should at least have brief meetings with staff every morning before assembly and to know if a teacher has any problem.
There is need for staff meetings.
During such meetings the principal should let staff know about latest developments from the headquarters either in relation to the general working conditions or on problems like leave grants, promotions or documents to be signed or submitted.
Principals can also maintain discipline among teachers if he can try his best through recommendations of teachers to the headquarters for promotion or in-service training.
From the preceeding discussion, it is then clear that it is not an easy task to maintain discipline in schools but with dedication and hard work and adequate understanding of staff, it will be possible.
The most important thing that will lead to adequate maintenance of discipline is that the principal himself needs to be a well-disciplined person with adequate self-control; he should be able to relate with people, have patience, intelligence and self- confidence, have positive attitudes towards the profession.
NOUN 118EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Exercise 1.3 • Mention steps (approaches) to maintain discipline among staff in your school.
Answer Kit • Prepare rules and regulations guiding staff conduct.
• Give each staff a copy of rules and regulations guiding their behaviour.
• Place rules and regulations on staff conduct on notice boards in the staff room.
• Make sure staff conduct rules and regulations are simple, clear and unambiguous.
• Establish effective lines of communication in the school.
• Hold staff meetings – general and individual with staff regularly.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of staff discipline and conduct in a school setting cannot be over-emphasized.
They are expected to be examples (models) of moral and academic excellence to the students they teach.
As such, they are expected to mould the characters of the students through their own conduct.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have been discussing the issue of staff conduct and discipline in school organizations.
The meaning of staff discipline and conduct as stated.
Some acts of staff indiscipline were analyzed and lastly, approaches to maintain staff discipline were examined.
6.0 References NOUN 119EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Afolayan, T.A.F.
(1989).
Principalship: An Introduction to the Administration of Post-Primary Institutions in Nigeria.
Zaria.
Institute of Education, A.B.U.
7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Describe some strategies you utilize to maintain staff discipline in your school.
Unit 16 NOUN 120EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Organizational Culture, Personnel Commitment to Work and Organizational Effectiveness Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 What is an Organization 3.1 Organizational Culture 3.2 Personnel Commitment to Work in Organization 3.3 Organizational Effectiveness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction In this unit the discussion centers on organizational culture, personnel commitment to their work and organizational effectiveness.
The unit stresses the importance of a favourable (healthy) organizational culture towards enhancing personnel level of commitment to their work.
The relationship between personnel work efforts and organizational effectiveness was highlighted.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define the term organization  Describe the features of an organizational climate (culture)  Discuss the influence of organizational climate on personnel commitment to work  Explain the effect of personnel commitment to work on organizational effectiveness.
NOUN 121EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION 3.0 What is an Organization An organization is a collection of people who, with consciously coordinated efforts, pursue and contribute to the attainment of a common purpose.
Organization can also mean collection of two or more people who work toward achieving common goals.
Reasons for formation of an organization were given in Hicks (1976:6) to be because of the emotional, spiritual, intellectual and economic needs of individuals that need to be satisfied.
It is our opinion here that through schooling, emotional, spiritual, intellectual and economic needs of the individuals can be achieved with given favourable organizational climate; since schools are built to attain those needs.
Mayo and his associates in Fleishman and Bass (1974:388) view organization as a social and economic systems.
Mayo believes that organization can only succeed if the leader is able to build good human relationship.
We believe that effective administration of schools is built on Mayo’s submission of good human relationship as a precondition of organizational success.
Thus, an organization is to be seen as a collection of people brought together under ‘able’ leadership toward achieving common goals.
The success of any organization depends to a very large extent on the interpersonal relationship existing in that organization.
Successful leaders, therefore, establish good inter-personal relationship with their subordinates.
3.1 Organizational Culture Organizational culture, sometimes referred to as organizational climate, can be defined as the prevailing quality and style of how people relate to one another, as viewed by the members of the organization, or by other people having anything to do with the organization.
It is the prevailing person-to- person atmosphere in the organization as sensed by people outside and inside the organization.
When people talk of organizational climate in the school they are referring to how principals, teachers and other staff, and students feel about the relationship among members of the school with regard to the following:  The degree of friendship among the members of the staff;  The degree of cooperation between the principal and the teachers; NOUN 122EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION  The relationship between the teachers and the students; and  The ways rules and regulations are applied and obeyed.
Organizational climate can be classified as either healthy (favourable) or unhealthy (unfavourable).
In many schools in Nigeria, it is somewhat sad to note that the organizational climate is unhealthy.
The psychological and social atmosphere is charged: either there are constant outbursts, or people prefer to suffer in silence and refuse to talk about their work.
These situations are often caused by the use of inappropriate leadership styles.
Admittedly, an administrator may rely on the use of force to get the cooperation of his staff either to do their work or obey him, but the use of force is likely to result in strained and negative relationship, which in turn, will tend to work against the effectiveness of the organization.
It is important for the school administrator to realize that he, more than any other single person else, is responsible for creating favourable atmosphere.
Teachers usually function effectively in a healthy organizational climate in which:  Ideas and feelings can be openly expressed;  Each idea is assessed on its own merit rather than on the basis of who offers it;  The staff members work together as a whole rather than operate as small cliques in warring camps.
 Respect for individual personality is reflected in the professional behaviours of the school; and  The zeal for living is sensed in the atmosphere.
It is not just teachers who are affected by the general interpersonal atmosphere pervading in the school.
Students are keen observers of the principal / teacher and teacher / student relationships.
They may develop unfavourable news about the school if they observe that their teachers suffer indignity from the hands of the principal, or if there is disharmony among their teachers.
In addition, you find that where the students are bored, bullied, and publicly disgraced by their teachers or principals, they will be afraid to come to school and be happy to leave the school immediately after closing time.
NOUN 123EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Outsiders, such as parents, usually appraise the organizational climate of a school with which they are related.
If the principal is arrogant and cold to people, the teachers are unhelpful and the students are disrespectful, people coming to the school will sense an unfavourable situation.
On the other hand, if they find the principal cooperative, humble and ward to visitors, the teachers helpful, and the pupils polite, people will refer to the school as possessing a healthy organizational climate.
An administrator sets the tone for the school organization.
Some of the practices he has to build up to improve the school climate are:  Having positive values, attitudes and behaviour to work with his staff and students.
 Using appropriate leadership style in decision making.
 Applying organizational rules fairly.
 Promoting originality and creativity among the staff.
 Showing respect for human dignity.
Promoting cordial relationship between the school and the community as cooperation from local people is essential to effective administration.
The principal should build a conducive organizational climate, which staff members need to be able to perform their job efficiently.
Exercise 1.2 • What is organizational culture (climate)?
• What are features of a healthy organizational climate?
Answer Kit • An organizational culture is the prevailing quality and style of how people relate to one another, as viewed by the members of the organization or by other people who have dealings with the organization.
• Features of a healthy organizational climate: i) Feelings and ideas are openly NOUN 124EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION ii) Idea is appraised on its own merit rather than on the basis of who offers it.
iii) Respect for individual personality is reflected in the professional behaviour.
3.2 Personnel Commitment to Work in Organization The concept personnel commitment to work simply means total sacrifice personnel have to make to ensure the attainment of organization’s basic objectives.
The term connotes personal investment since it entails loyalty to organization of the subordinates and their willingness to make efforts towards the positive realization of the basic objectives.
Personnel commitment to work is formed in terms of individual experience and social context.
This means that the behaviour of a staff to his work is formed in terms of individual experience and social context.
This means that the behaviour of a staff to his work depends on the nature of an individual; how he is as a person, the nature of the work, reward system, how he relates with colleagues and the general atmosphere in and outside the organization.
Personnel commitment to work is a predisposition of the staff to perceive, evaluate and act in a particular way to the tasks assigned to them within and outside organization, which is relatively enduring.
According to Pyme (1970:138) “commitment to work is made up of three elements namely, feelings (of like and dislike) beliefs and values (of truth and falsehood) good and bad, and a predisposition to act.
Personnel commitment to work is seen in Maehr (1989:1) “as that sine quo non of effective organization, subordinates put on their best towards positive realization of the institution objectives”.
Where staff do not commit themselves effectively in their places of work, the objectives of the organization at that level will not be achieved.
Organization cannot be effective unless subordinates are committed to their work under the leader who makes his policies clear and assigns work schedules to staff after the group has democratically approved of the schedule.
A more elaborate view as to the effective role played by a good leader is raising the level of commitment of subordinates to their work is given in Lipham and Hoch (1974:13) when they noted that: Participating principal who assumes an active role in the school by giving support to his teachers, delegating authority and exercising an optional degree of supervision, NOUN 125EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION is likely to have teachers who are more committed to their work than a principal who places more emphasis on school goals.
From the above viewpoint, it implies that the best organization is one characterized by high commitment of personnel to work, which is resultant from consideration of their personal needs satisfaction by the leader.
Thus, organizational effectiveness depends on the level of personnel commitment to work and this also depends on effective role played by the leader.
When personnel’s voices are heard and their needs are satisfied by a democratic leader, one expects high commitment to work.
When personnel are motivated by the leader, it is expected that positive change in their attitudes to work is noticed.
This, therefore, goes to say a happy staff is always committed to his work.
However, commitment to work depends on three basic factors, namely, the person, the job and the organization.
This was supported and elaborated in Dawson (1986:4) when she noted that: The influence of the social, economic and political scene, which includes industrial and employment structures, forms of government, national policies relating to industry and employment, and dominant belief systems among different national, regional and social class groupings; all these wider factors will have influence within the work place on such characteristics as corporate strategy, technology, products, structure and size.
These in turn will influence the particular nature of an individual’s work, which will both be affected by and affects his attitudes to work.
According to Meahr (1989:5) “one can view the problem of change in attitude to work in organization to lie squarely on the nature of an individual”.
Some individuals believe in their places of assignments, while others do not.
If more commitment is not noticed on a staff, what the leader has to do is to concentrate on selecting the “right” persons.
That is, persons who are believed to exhibit high personal investment in the role assigned to them.
Nature of members of an organization generally, determines the level of staff commitment to his work.
This depends on two factors, namely, the attitudes to work by other staff and the interpersonal relationships.
In a situation, for instance, where staff are not serious to their work and they do not have positive interaction among themselves, this will go a long way in destroying the zeal of a new staff in the organization.
This depicts the saying that, when you are in Rome, do as the Romans do.
Such is the behaviour of work mates NOUN 126EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION and the level of their relationship, which influence the commitment of employees in their places of work.
Thus, job situation, the task to be done, and the role to be played are the determining features in personnel commitment to work.
Nonetheless, the nature, structure, policies, goals, and values of the organization influence the commitment of personnel to their work.
However, other factors outside the organization such as family problem, nature of the community, influences social group, location of an individual’s house and experience also play significant role in influencing the personnel commitment to work.
Commitment to work by staff evolves from the motivation given to them by the head, which is in a form of caring where their needs are satisfied.
Furthermore, commitment to work plays a key role in the development of organization since it gets the best from the personnel.
It suffices to say that the leader needs to ensure that he does not discourage the staff from committing himself more to work.
It is observed in Brickman (1987:175) that in developing zeal for personnel commitment to work the process is not an easy one.
He opines that: In process that builds commitment to work there is a continual ebb and flow in this process as positive and negative elements arise and are dealt with.
The development of a commitment follows a characteristics pattern in which an early, unreflective positive motivation is challenged and eventually replaced by a different form of motivation that integrates the negative elements of the challenges.
Brickman’s view by implication means an individual finds challenges in an organization when he wants to commit himself to work, but eventually he overcomes it.
In certain organizations staff who are always committed to their work are seen by some of their colleagues as being too ‘colonial’ and subservient to rules and regulations.
Thus, to compensate staff who are highly committed to their work, it is important that they are given prompt promotion and opportunities for in- service training to develop them for future responsibilities.
It is common to hear from certain organizations cases of staff promotion tied to their level of commitment to work.
Exercise 1.2 • What is personnel commitment to work?
NOUN 127EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION • How can you as a principal attain this from your staff in the school?
Answer Kit • Personnel commitment to work refers to the total sacrifice staff have to make to ensure the attainment of organization’s basic objective.
It connotes personal investment and entails loyalty of staff to organization.
• Some of the ways of achieving this are: i.
Creating a conducive work environment ii.
Enhancing staff participating in decision making iii.
Making clear work policies iv.
Assigning work to staff after work schedules have been democratically approved by the group v. Enhancing cordial inter-personal relationship 3.3 Organizational Effectiveness Organizational effectiveness is viewed by Herbert (1976:59) as the overall attainment of results by the administrator which might be attained by an increase in the pressure for production, threats, incentive systems, and so on.
Elbing (1978:346) states that system’s effectiveness in its capacity to survive, adapt, maintain itself, and grow regardless of the particular function it fulfils.
In view of the aforementioned views, organizational effectiveness is attained when leadership insists on being both production oriented and people centred.
A school head attains success in his administration when he is production- centred and people-centred.
Therefore, successful leaders in schools adopt transactional leadership style, that is, operate their leadership on the continuum of idiographic and nomothetic leaderships.
As leaders accomplish organizational tasks successfully, they feel a greater sense of competence.
Weber in Hicks (1977:377) identified three groups on which legitimate authority could be based: the leader-oriented; the patriarchal; the bureaucratic organization.
Each type has its own kind of organizational administration.
Hicks summarized these group leaderships as follows: In the leader-oriented organization, decision is taken by the leader alone, no delegation of authority and little orientation to rules and regulations.
In patriarchal organization, decisions and commands are bound by precedent.
In bureaucracy rules and regulations exist NOUN 128EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION and decisions are shared by the organization members.
A hierarchy results, with levels of graded authority and firmly ordered superior- subordinate relationship.
Naylor, et al (1980:239) view leadership as a dynamic interaction between a leader and each of his or her subordinates.
The interaction varies in quality from the routine application of policy and practice to an active sharing of the leadership role with the subordinates accomplish the group’s conditions that allow subordinates to choose courses of action that will reach their goals and those of the organization.
In view of the above, therefore, it is duty bound on a school head to create conducive climate that will make his / her subordinates to behave positively, as the success of any school lies on how teachers and students behave to the leader.
In any organization, individual members, in response to the organizational demands change their behaviour.
What influences the behaviour of organizational members to the organizational demand.
Organization cooperating under favourable climate is most likely to have members acting alike in matters that prevail in the organization.
Bandura (1978:345) commented that though behaviour is influenced by the environment, but the environment is partly of a person’s own making.
By their actions, people play a role in creating the social milieu and other circumstances that arise in their daily transactions.
Naylor, et al (1980:228) seem to agree with Bandura when they noted that whether or not the others are members of the organization, a large proportion of behaviour in organization is shaped and influenced by others.
As long as members retain their membership within an organization, they have similar status even if their behaviour in organization, the need arises for persons who are competent to be appointed to head that organization.
The behaviour of people and the process by which they interact are the means by which goals are achieved.
Behaviours and interactions are the means by which potential energy and motivation are converted into results.
Thus, we can conclude that the more consistent the behaviours as well as interactions are with organization’s objective, the more efficient the organization is when it comes to job performance.
We can also conclude that the idea of managing an organization is the idea of managing and guiding human behaviour.
NOUN 129EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Exercise 1.3 • Define organizational effectiveness.
Answer Kit • Organizational effectiveness is the ability of the school administrator to strike a balance between being production-centred and personnel (people) centred, that is achieving the goals of the organization at the same time meeting the needs (or satisfying) the personnel.
4.0 Conclusion Personnel (human resource) is the life-blood of an organization be it a business enterprise manufacturing shoes or an educational institution that has educated, and enlightened graduates as its finished products.
The work the staff perform, the amount of efforts expended and the level of commitment they have to their work all go a long way to ensure overall goal attainment.
5.0 Summary This unit has discussed the issues of organizational culture, personnel commitment to work and organizational effectiveness.
An organization was defined as a social unit or collection of people who with consciously coordinated efforts, pursue and contribute to the attainment of predetermined goals.
The culture of an organization sets the tone for personnel performance, and the tone of the organization contributes to a large extent to personnel commitment to work.
Organizational effectiveness can only be achieved when the staff’s level of sacrifice or commitment to their work is high.
6.0 References NOUN 130EDA 702 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN EDUCATION Bandura, A.
(1978).
“The Self System in Reciprocal Determinism”.
American Psychologist.
Vol.
33, pp.
334 – 358.
Elbing, A.
(1978).
Behavioural Decisions in Organizations.
Dallas: Scott.
Foresman and Company.
Fleishman, E. and Bass, A.
(1974).
Studies in Personnel and Industrial Psh\ ychology.
Illinios.
Dersey and Press.
Herbert, T. (1976).
Dimension of Organizational Behaviour.
New York.
Macmillan Publishing Company.
Hicks, H. (1976).
The Management of Organizations.
U.S.A. McGraw Hill.
Naylor, J. C. Pitchard, R. D and Ilgen, R. D. (1980).
The Theory of Behaviour in Organizations.
New York.
Academic Press.
7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Examine the influence of organizational climate on personnel commitment to work.
NOUN 131
