PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY PED 110 EDUCATIONPED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Course Code PED 110 Course Title Philosophy of Primary Education Course Developer Dr. Osuji, U.S.A Lagos School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Writer Mr. Uhie, H. C. Abia State University Uturu- Abia Course Editor Prof. J. N. Omatseye Faculty of Education UNIBEN, Benin-City Course Coordinator Dr. Osuji, U. S. A. Lagos School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. Alhassan, A.
B.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiPED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-820-5 All Rights Reserved iiiPED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION CONTENTS PAGES Module 1 Philosophy of Primary Education………………1 Unit 1 The Concept of Education Aims, Goals and Objectives... ………………….……………….
1 – 10 Unit 2 Meaning, Scope and Function of Philosophy... …………………………….…..… 11 – 17 Unit 3 Philosophy of Education……………………..... 18 – 23 Unit 4 Philosophical Foundation of Childhood or Primary Education …………………………… 24 – 36 Unit 5 The Role Expected of the Primary School Teacher ……………………………………..… 37 – 47 Module 2 Philosophy of Primary Education.
………..… 48 Unit 1 Characteristics of Primary School Children … 48 – 55 Unit 2 The Meaning and Purpose of Primary Education ……………………………………… 56 – 67 Unit 3 The Origin of Primary School in Nigeria a Historical Perspective………………………….
68 – 77 Unit 4 The basic Outlines of the National Policy on Primary Education ………………..………... 78 – 85 Unit 5 The Concept of the Universal Basic Education.
…………………………………….
86 – 106 Module 3 The Role of the School in Personality Development……………………………….. 107 Unit 1 Contribution of Plato to Primary Education….. 107 – 115 Unit 2 Contribution of Jean, Jacques Rousseau and John Amos Communions to Primary Education.
……………………….………….… 116 – 124 Unit 3 Contribution of John Heinrich Petalozzi and Maria Montessori to Primary Education..… 125 – 133 Unit 4 Contribution of John Dewey to Primary Education.
………………………………..… 134 – 142 Unit 5 Relevance of Philosophy of Education to the Primary School Teacher..…………………….
143 – 147 ivPED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION MODULE 1 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Unit 1 The Concept of Education Aims, Goals and Objectives Unit 2 Meaning, Scope and Function of Philosophy Unit 3 Philosophy of Education Unit 4 Philosophical Foundation of Childhood or Primary Education Unit 5 The Role Expected of the Primary School Teacher UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT OF EDUCATION, AIMS, GOALS AND OBJECTIVES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Education 3.2 Meaning and Definition of Education 3.3 The Aims of Education 3.3.1 The Minimum Skill 3.3.2 Vocational Training 3.3.3 Stimulating the Desire for Knowledge 3.3.4 Development of Critical Outlook 3.4 The Concept of Childhood Education 3.5 Specific Philosophical Aim and Objective of Education in Nigeria 3.5.1 The National Policy on Education 3.5.2 Nationalism 3.5.3 Value System 3.5.4 Intellectual Formation 3.5.5 Skill Acquisition 3.6 Evaluating Nigerian Education Aims and Objectives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcome to your first unit of learning in this course – Philosophy of Primary Education.
You have read the course guide and have known what to expect in the course.
So for this first unit we shall start with the concept of education and refresh your mind or memory on 1PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION the meaning and definitions of education and the aims of education.
We shall look at vocational training, stimulating the desire for knowledge and developing a critical outlook.
We shall also touch on democracy as an aim of education, and some philosophical aims of education in Nigeria.
The National Policy on Education, Nationalism, Value System Intellectual Formation, Skills Acquisition and the Evaluation of Nigeria Educational Aims and Objectives will also form part of this unit.
Before you continue let us look at the objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of education; • define education; • list the aims of education; • list the specific philosophical aims and objectives of education in Nigeria; and • explain the National Policy of Education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Education Like philosophy, there are as many definitions as there are educators?
Education is an umbrella word under which a large number of processes take place there is no agreement as whether or not some activities may be considered to be educational.
Individual differences about education are more or less determined by their philosophical orientations.
3.2 Meaning and Definition of Education Whenever we hear the word Education the first place the mind goes to is the school.
Most of the time, we tend to think of education in terms of what teachers and their pupils do in school.
We mean that what takes place in the school is only a small fraction of education.
Indeed, education is the process that starts the very moment a person is born and ends when the person dies.
The process of education is one that involves a number of activities on the part of several people, including the teacher, the pupil, parents, the governments and every citizens of the country.
They all participate in the process in one way or the other.
As you are well aware, teaching is a key factor in education and learning is another.
The first teacher a child ever has is his parent, and the learning process starts as soon as he enters 2PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION the world.
Since the teaching-learning process starts with the child’s parents, the mother in particular, the background of the learner matters a lot.
If for instance, the mother of the child is an educated lady with a good means of livelihood, that is, a good earning capacity one can be sure that the child will be fed and taught a lot of things that another child from a less enlightened family is not likely to have.
A child growing up in a home where both parents can find time to teach and interact with him certainly has some advantages in terms of education.
This is even moreso when there are such things as books, newspaper, magazines, radio and television to stimulate his learning in the home to increase his development in education.
As you can see, education begins at home with parents leading the way.
At the school, the teacher continues the process of educating the child.
You should understand that the teacher does not take over the education of the child.
The teacher and the child’s parents are partners in progress as far as the child’s education is concerned.
At the school level also, the responsibility of educating the child is shared by all the agencies of education, which ensure that adequate facilities, including books, furniture, materials and qualified staff are provided.
It is also government’s responsibility to ensure the safety and health of the child through its various agencies.
The process of education therefore, involves different activities on the part of the parents, teachers, the community, the government and the child.
The goal is to help him acquire knowledge, skills and morals.
These components of education are essential to the making of the person.
The educated person is one who can apply his knowledge and skills in such a way as to find solution to whatever problems that may confront him.
Education indeed, is the practical way of attaining individual and social fulfillment.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Who is an educated person?
ii.
What is education?
3.3 The Aims of Education The statement of aims of education has become a common feature of the activities of educational planners and administrators.
But more often than not, there is confusion as what is meant by the term.
Sometimes, one finds that the word “aim” is regarded as the equivalent of purpose or intention.
Headmasters and classroom teachers are not sure of what exactly is expected of them with regard to the pursuit of what is 3PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION intended.
Our exploration of the aims of education here is to relate the issue to our school.
3.3.1 The Meaning of Educational Aim We can define educational aim as a statement of what we hope to do in order to achieve our goals of education.
Some philosophers attempt an etymological definition of education.
They trace it to opposite roots, which originate from two opposing philosophical tenets.
One view derives “education” from the Latin word “educere” which means, “to lead out”.
This group of philosophers, following the tradition of Plato and other idealists, believed that the learner has innate ideas, which only need to be squeezed out, pulled out and expanded.
The other opposing school of thought holds that education comes from the Latin word “educere” which means “to form” “to train”.
This group follows the tradition of John Locke and other realists which states that the child’s or the learner’s mind is a “tabula rasa” (an erased or blank sheet” on which to write).
External objects make impressions on the mind and fill it with information and knowledge.
A.N.
Whitehead defines education as the process by which people acquire the art of utilizing knowledge.
It is guidance towards a comprehension of the art of life.
To John Dewey, education is the process of living, not a preparation for further life.
It is a continuous process of growth.
Its purpose is the development of the intelligence in such a way that the experience one gets at one time can be carried to a subsequent experience and used in solving one’s life problems.
Moreover, education is meant to develop both the individual and the capacity for social living.
R. S. Peter’s in his contribution defined education, as a process of socializing, enculturation and transmission of what is worthwhile to those who are committed to it, be they children or adults.
In view of all these, we can define education as a process of developing knowledge ability in learners in such a way that they use this knowledge to improve themselves and their society.
You should understand that the word ‘aim’ conveys some suggestion of an object that is not near at hand or so easy to attain.
When we ask the headmaster of a school what he is aiming at, it is only one way of drawing his attention to what he and his teacher must be doing to raise the standard of education in his school.
From the foregoing, the main points made about the aims of education are as follows: 4PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 1.
We tend to ask about the aims in context where we think it important to get people to specify more precisely what they are trying to do.
2.
Aims suggest the concentration on and the direction of effects towards an objective that is not too near or close at hand.
3.
Aims suggest the possibility of failure or falling short.
Having examined the suggestions that are generally associated with aim, we will now identify some aims of education and discuss them.
The aims of education are as follows 3.3.2 The Minimum Skill Education should provide men and women with a minimum of the skills necessary for them: a.
To take their place in society and b.
To seek further knowledge This is the least controversial of the listed aims.
It is essential that everyone in our society should know how to read and write and calculate sufficiently to go through their ordinary daily business.
You should know that it is irrelevant what a person is.
He needs the skills in order to do his work well.
3.3.3 Vocational Training At every stage in our adult life we should be able to use not only our heads but our hands as well.
We cannot all be medical doctors, engineers, lawyers or teachers; some of us must be plumbers, carpenters, electricians and auto mechanics.
No matter what vocation you have learnt, you should take interest in areas outside your own in order to be able to help yourself when you are in need.
Our education should aim at making us useful not only to ourselves but to the society at large.
3.3.4 Stimulating the Desire for Knowledge Our educational system wrongly emphasises the acquisition of knowledge as a means to an end.
While no one would quarrel over using acquired knowledge as a means to earning our living; quest for knowledge can be for its own sake.
Education has an intrinsic value, that is, it does not have to be seen as something that must always bring material reward.
For instance, when you read novels for your own personal enjoyment and not for the sake of passing any examination, it does not only give you some satisfaction but also builds up your 5PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION vocabulary.
Such will also improve your outlook in many ways.
Our education should therefore, promote our quest for knowledge at all times because it is not only good for the individual but for the entire nation as well.
3.3.5 Developing a Critical Outlook This aim of education is a very controversial one.
Government officials and private proprietors of schools or employers in general do not always appreciate people who are critical of their actions.
But criticism is essential in a democratic system.
Our education must enable us read in between lines to detect possible areas of conflicts and point them out before it is too late.
Although some people may be uncomfortable whenever such is done, it may prevent a lot of problems in the long run.
Constructive criticism is usually better especially when the issue is a very sensitive one.
Sound education therefore, develops in us a critical mind to enable us to detect flaws and disagree with even those we respect most.
Being critical is a sign of being an educated person.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Define educational aim.
ii.
Mention two aims of education.
3.4 Democracies as an Aim of Education When you take a close look at our educational system, you will see how traditional and authoritarian our schools have remained.
The average child does not see going to school as enjoyable.
For many children, schooling is a painful experience that they must live with.
But does it have to be that way?
What makes it that way?
Who is responsible for fear of school despotism?
Somehow, the traditional teacher sees himself as a person who knows everything and has every right to inculcate knowledge and moral in every child who chooses this path.
How he does it must not and cannot be challenged by anyone including the child’s parents.
He sees it as his God given right to mould and shape “the child according to his own will”.
As far as the teacher is concerned, what he teaches in class is not as important as how he teaches it.
The old lesson note that he has been reciting to every group of children that comes along must never be touched or altered.
He uses it for every generation that passes through the school.
He probably taught the child’s father years ago with the same materials that he is using now.
If you suggest a change of material, he dismisses you with a wave of hand.
6PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION All these show that the process of education relies too much on dictating what should be done, whereas it should be democratic.
Although the picture painted above still exists in most primary schools in Nigeria, there have been some efforts or moves towards democratization.
Our teacher education programmes at different levels have started to emphasize the need to educate instead of training.
An educated teacher is more humane than a trained teacher.
The educated teacher does not lack self-confidence, he is always innovative and willing to learn in order to be more useful to his student.
He is also ready to learn from his students.
If our aim is to make education less painful to our pupils, teachers in the system need to be more democratic.
Given that an aim of education emphasizes self-realization, he must pay as much attention to the processes of education as well as content of work and teaching method.
The child centered educator would ensure that the child’s feeling and interest are accommodated in a given programme of study.
Individual self-realization emphasizes the importance of learning by individual experience and discovery and the importance of a principle of actions in a curriculum.
In other words, children should be given an opportunity to choose from a given set of subjects in a curriculum.
Teachers should be willing to accommodate this as much as possible.
When this is being done, the teacher is democratic.
This lays the foundation for the development of democratic principle as a national goal.
3.5 Specific Philosophical Aims and Objectives of Education in Nigeria 3.5.1 The National Policy on Education was Publish in 1977 and Revised in 1981 and 2004 Various goals and aspiration were stated in the policy, which form the basis of the Nigerian educational aims and objectives, which include the following: 3.5.2 Nationalism The inculcation of national consciousness and national unity is referred to as nationalism.
You should know that what is expressed in this statement is that the determination to make every Nigerian aware, in the first place, of himself as a Nigerian, and in the second place, of the inseparable bond that exists among all Nigerians.
We should understand that dedication to selfless service and the strength of the nation could be derived from the statement.
7PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.5.3 Value System The inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society is of paramount importance.
You should understand that the emphasis here is on the development of habits and attitudes that may get an individual and the society to manifest worthwhile (behaviour)?
activities.
You should understand that this amount to a determination to get things right, to find out the truth, to get ascertain the reality of a king to the bottom of things, and to take pride in (completing a task?)
finishing thing’s, in shaping things with accuracy and precision with practical reference to Nigeria, for the survival of the individual and the society.
3.5.4 Intellectual Formation Intellectual formation has to do with the development of the mind in relation to understanding the world around.
You should understand that the desire is to promote desirable states of mind that may transform the world into a community of nations as well as make a person aware of realities around him.
3.5.5 Skill Acquisition The acquisition of appropriate skills, abilities and experiences both mental and physical, are essential attributes for the individual to live for and contribute to the development of the society.
You should know that this statement of aim and objective seeks to provide men and women with the knowledge and skills necessary for them to take their place in the society and contribute to its development.
3.6 Evaluating Nigerian Educational Aims and Objectives In restating the five main national objectives from the second national development plan as the foundation for national policy on education, Nigeria has been criticized as being over-ambitious and utopian.
I want you to know that this is particularly true when Nigeria is by no means near both ideals nor does it seen to take seriously the journey towards them.
How near is Nigeria to its objectives of “building of.
• A free and democratic society • A just and egalitarian society • A united, strong and self-reliant nation • A great and dynamic economy • A land of bright and full opportunities for all citizens?
8PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION To what extent have all the citizenry felt integrated into a sound and effective citizenry with equal educational opportunities at primary, secondary and tertiary both inside and outside the formal school system?
Has the quality of instruction at all levels of education really changed?
And are we in consequence achieving these glorious values of: • Respect for the worth and dignity of the individuals, • Faith in mans ability to make national decisions, • Moral and spiritual values in interpersonal and human relations, • Share responsibility for the common good of society, • Respect and the dignity of labour and, • Promotion of the emotional, physical and psychological health of our children”?
These and many other enunciated values may still be eluding us.
But awareness of them and adoption of them are several milestones on the right part.
There is no doubt that eventually committed citizens will rise to realize or carry out those dreams of the founding fathers of our political life.
In piloting their journey towards a better Nigeria, they will have at least some clear aims and objectives to guard their courageous leadership.
4.0 CONCLUSION There are many definitions of education as there are educators.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have learnt: • The meaning and definition of education • The aims of education • Specific philosophical aims of education in Nigeria ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may have included that an educated person is a person who can apply his knowledge and skills in such a way as to find solution to whatever problems that confronts him.
Your answer may also include the following: ii.
Education is the practical way of attaining individual and social fulfillment.
It is a process of socialization, enculturation and 9PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION transmission of what is worthwhile to those who are committed to it, be they children or adults.
It can also mean a process of developing knowledge, ability in a learner in such as way that he uses this knowledge to improve himself and the society.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may have included that it is a statement of what we hope to do in order to achieve our goal of education.
ii.
Your answer may have included that it provides men and women with a minimum of the skills necessary for them to take their place in the society and to seek further knowledge.
It also enables us to develop a critical outlook.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who is an educated person?
2.
What is education?
3.
Mention two aims of education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adaralegbe, A.
(1985).
A Philosophy for Nigerian Education.
Ibadan: Courage Printing Works.
McClellan, J. E. (1976).
Philosophy of Education.
Eaglewood Cliff.
Okoh, J. D. (1989).
Philosophy of Education.
Owerri: Total Publishers.
10PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION UNIT 2 MEANING SCOPE AND FUNCTIONS OF PHILOSOPHY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Philosophy 3.2 Philosophy 3.3 A Scope of Philosophy 3.4 The Functions of Philosophy 3.4.1 Analytical Function 3.4.2 Speculative and Normative 3.4.3 Inspirational Function 3.4.4 Prescriptive Function 3.4.5 Co-ordination Function 3.5 Philosophy as a Guide to Curriculum Design 3.6 Implication of Philosophy for Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you studied the concept of education, the aims of education and the philosophical aims of education.
In this unit, you will learn about the definition and meaning of philosophy, the functions of philosophy and the implication of philosophy to education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the meaning of Philosophy; • define what philosophy is; • explain who is a Philosopher; • describe the functions of Philosophy; and • state the implications of Philosophy for Teaching.
11PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Philosophy People think of philosophy in different ways because of their differences in viewing the world.
The various ways people see things have accounted for the argument about the way things and how man fits into the universal scheme.
The word philosophy came from the Greek words, ‘Philo’ and ‘Sophia’.
These Greek words are interpreted as follows – ‘Philo’ refers to friendliness, affection or love.
The ‘Sophia’ on the other hand, refers to the highest intellectual, especially philosophical excellence which the human mind is capable of and which is the result of studying nature for its own sake.
The two concepts would combine to form philosophy, which is literally translated as ‘love of wisdom’.
3.2 Philosophy Although, contemporary philosophers do not parade themselves as ‘wise men’ wisdom is certainly an attribute of philosophy.
But who is a wise man?
What would make us refer to a person as wise in African society?
To refer to a person as a wise man in Africa, the person must know the traditional practices and customs of his people.
Such a person must also think critically and deeply about the world around him.
It is only when a person has these qualities that you can refer to him as a wise man or a philosopher.
In order words, how much schooling or paper qualification a man has does not account for his becoming a philosopher.
Now, let us look at some definitions of philosophy.
Philosophy has been defined as: a.
A mental attitude between science and religion.
Like science, it is concerned about factual evidence about the world.
Like religion, philosophy is never definite about anything said about the nature of God or man.
b.
A way of simplifying complex ideas and statements about our experiences in life in order to make us understand them fully.
c. A study, which examines the nature of the world and the reasons behind many things or events happening in it.
A sum total of what a person accepts as guiding principles to act in a particular way at different times, places and circumstances.
12PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.3 The Scope of Philosophical Inquiries Understand that philosophical inquiry is about the following areas of study: i.
A comprehensive explanation of why man occupies a particular position in the world.
ii.
An explanation of the nature of knowledge and its relevance to human life.
iii.
A study of theories and principles which guide social behaviour which we call ‘Good’ or ‘bad’, ‘right’ or ‘wrong’.
Philosophy as subject examines the question, which affects human existence and the existence of other objects in the world.
The subject also examines the question of the existence of God and other divine forces.
The subject also examines and clarifies important topics like life, happiness and time, predestination, immorality among others.
When we study such topics, we study an area of philosophy called metaphysics.
A teacher should study this subject because it would help him to understand human nature better and, therefore, be better able to develop the knowledge of his learner.
This is why you need to study it well.
Philosophy is also concerned with studying the nature of knowledge.
Philosophers try to define knowledge.
They try to identify the qualities of knowledge.
They try to trace the origin and source of knowledge.
While some philosophers believe that knowledge comes from reasoning, others believe that it comes from senses.
Again, others believe that knowledge is determined by the person looking for it.
The branch of philosophy concerned with knowledge is called epistemology.
It is important to education because to be able to educate, we must have knowledge.
Again, the process of education is the process of making people acquire knowledge.
As you read through, you are acquiring knowledge.
Philosophy is also concerned with the principles guiding our social actions.
This is called ethics or moral philosophy.
Again, philosophy interprets ‘good’, ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ in many ways.
This again depends on their background experience.
To a person who is brought up in a period of war, the good life may be the life of peace.
To those who suffer from ignorance, knowledge to them is good.
Philosophers do not only try to define the good life, they also prescribe ways of attaining it.
As an educator, you should know the ways of life that are valued to your people so that you can prepare your learner for good social relations.
Over the years, philosophy has assumed a more moderate role by confining itself to analyzing and clarifying concepts and statements.
It 13PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION also tries to resolve issues in human life.
This is done in order to improve our understanding of the subject matter of life in general and discipline as well.
3.4 The Functions of Philosophy The functions of philosophy are the uses of the subject to us as individuals and as members of a society.
Some contemporary thinkers called the Analytic philosophers see philosophy as a study that essentially simplifies and analyses issues and statements pertaining to other subject in order to enable us understand them better.
The functions of philosophy are explained as follows: 3.4.1 Analytical Function This has to do with the analysis and clarification of ideas, issues, and statements to enable us understand the subject matters of other disciplines.
This analytical function is considered to be the primary function of philosophy.
3.4.2 Speculative and Normative Function The mind is a very essential instrument for doing philosophy.
The mind is one gift to man, which enables him to think about himself, the people around him and the world in general.
With it he can speculate about things he is not sure of; he can imagine things that are possible and even those that are not possible.
It is to be noted however, that, when we think about things or speculate on issues it is done within the context of our social and cultural environment.
3.4.3 Inspirational Function The educational process is constantly inspired by philosophers.
Such works, as Plato’s Republic and other like it have become the reference book for many educators because they obtain a lot of insight from these books to guide their activities.
For one thing, every society has its ideal and thus, strives to attain it.
Plato’s ideal in the Republic is one in which education serves as an important criterion for assigning social positions and responsibilities.
It is therefore, believed that, people should be educated in order to enable them achieve self-fulfillment.
Even though Plato’s society does not pretend to strive for equality of all people, it is still a model to inspire the Nigerian educator in his effort to bring about a measure of equality in society.
14PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.4.4 Prescriptive Function Every nation has its problems, which call for solution.
It is expected that every one would contribute to the best of his ability.
Although philosophy has a lot to contribute, philosophers are sometimes excluded from the decision-making process.
This appears to have made the situation worse.
For example, before adopting a new educational or social policy in the country, one would expect that philosophers would be included in the planning.
Such contributions would benefit all concerned.
Some educational philosophers in the country hold the view that the poverty of Nigeria’s philosophical base is responsible for our technological under-development.
They also blame the country’s social political instability on the weakness of its philosophical foundation.
Philosophical prescription is therefore, made to help to overcome these difficulties.
Indeed every society expects some guidance from its philosopher, especially in education.
It is on this score that philosophy is made compulsory in all Teacher Education and Law Programmes.
3.3.5 Co-ordinating Function Since it is well known that all other disciplines are generated from philosophy, philosophy cannot be seen as competing with its offspring.
In view of the fact that these disciplines have established their knowledge base solidly, philosophy has mapped out for itself other responsibilities.
The fact that there exist at present such area as philosophy of science, philosophy of social science, philosophy of law and philosophy of education among others, shows the contribution that philosophy still makes to learning.
Consequently, the coordinating role of philosophy in articulating the knowledge base of these disciplines should not leave anyone in doubt about the prescriptive function of philosophy.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE i.
List the function of philosophy ii.
Explain the analytic function of philosophy 3.5 Philosophy as a Guide to Curriculum Design The educational process relies on curriculum for guidance while philosophy constitutes the base of curriculum design.
Curriculum design is the fruitful ordering of subject matter designed to produce knowledge, skills and attitude in our children.
If the products of curriculum design are so important to the educational process, we 15PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION should expect philosophy to play an important part in the shaping of education for one thin; knowledge and social outlook are key components of philosophy.
In fact the skills referred to are basically intellectual because thinking is involved.
Whether curriculum is seen as the total interaction between the teacher and his pupil or as the general name for school subject, like mathematics, language, arts, health and physical education among others, curriculum is based on philosophy because of the inspiration it derives from philosophy.
3.6 Implication of Philosophy for Teaching From the foregoing, you must have seen that it is apparent that philosophy has great implication for teaching.
If we accept the main task of teacher as to impart knowledge skills and moral, and these elements are grounded in philosophy.
The use of the mind as an effective instrument for thinking one’s way out of problem is very important.
The teacher who acts before he has the opportunity to reflect can certainly not be an effective one.
Philosophy therefore, makes teachers able to think and this process is encouraged in his learners.
As one whose activities are guided by an inspired curriculum, the teacher must see himself as a nation builder in the strictest sense of the word.
The country depends on him to teach in such a way that the manpower needed to man the different areas of responsibility is efficient and effective.
Therefore, philosophy helps the teacher to understand his work better.
Philosophy also helps the teacher to understand the national and educational goals of his country.
It is therefore, essential for the teacher to relate the functions of philosophy to education so that he can use knowledge to produce the educated and skill Nigeria needed to develop the nation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Over the years, philosophy has assumed a more moderate role by confining itself to analyzing and classifying concepts and statements.
It also tries to resolve issues in human life, in order to improve our understanding of the subject matter of life in general.
16PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about: • The meaning and definition of philosophy • The functions of philosophy • Philosophy as a guide to curriculum design • Implication of philosophy for teaching ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE i.
Your answer may include that the functions of philosophy are: a. Analytic function b.
Speculative function c. Inspirational function d. Prescriptive function e. Coordinating function ii.
Your answer may include that the analytic function of philosophy has to do with the analysis and clarification of ideas, issues, and statements to enable us understand the subject matters of other disciplines.
This analytical function is considered to be the primary function of philosophy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the scope of philosophical inquiries 2.
List the functions of philosophy and explain one 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinpelu, J.
A.
(1981).
An Introduction to Philosophy of Education: London: Michigan Press Ltd. Ezewu, C.C.
(1993).
Philosophy of Education.
Ugheli: Eddu-Joe.
Omoregbe, J.I.
(1990).
Knowing Philosophy: General Introduction.
Lagos: Joja Press.
17PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION UNIT 3 PHILOSOPHY AND EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Relationship between Philosophy and Education 3.2 Conceptions of Philosophy of Education 3.2.1 Philosophy as an Application 3.2.2 Broad Based Approach 3.2.3 Historical Approach 3.2.4 Philosophical Approach 3.2.5 Analytical Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you read through important definitions in philosophy of education, philosophical inquiries the functions of philosophy and implication of philosophy of Education In this unit, you are going to study the relationship between philosophy and education and concept of philosophy of education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the relationship between philosophy and education; • discuss the Concepts of Philosophy of Education; and • describe the philosophical approaches to education 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Relationship between Philosophy and Education You should know that the philosophical orientation apparent in the idea of making men “critical” is to make the teacher or the educator to be “self critical”.
This is to illustrate the passion for certainty which is perhaps innate in all humans.” This fact brings philosophy into close relationship with education.
Which seeks to impart knowledge through an acceptable manner to the people.
The critical attitude developed as a 18PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION result enhances human knowledge and creates an avenue for the building of principles of relational beliefs.
It creates open mindedness in educational practices by practioners (teachers and the educators) who allows their belief decision to be subjected to further study and examination.
Philosophers look at theories, assumption, postulation, statements and value judgment critically as to justify them.
The logicalities and consistence of any claim in education in the process become clarified.
Philosophy equips the teacher to deal with educational problems by obtaining self-reflection, criticism and analysis.
He reasons and assesses critically the validity of principles.
Dewey (1966) describes the relationship as very close and remarks: Philosophy of education is not an external application of ready-made Ideas to a system of practice having a radically different origin and purpose.
It is only an explicit formation of right mental and moral habit in aspect to the difficulties of contemporary social life.
The most penetrating definition of philosophy, which can be giving is, then that it is the theory of education in its most general phases.
Nweke (1995:25) was of the view that “philosophy gives education the thought and education gives it an outlet in practice”.
This means that Philosophy and education are complementary disciplines to each other and they are mutually re-constructive.
They are not only a process but also a product in terms of the child’s maturation, moral and intellectual development.
Brus and Brauner (1976) maintain that: “Philosophical activities serve pedagogical purposes as analytic, evaluative, speculative and integrative process”.
Finally, Philosophy and education work for the harmonization of education policies, theories and practices” evaluation of possibilities in educational practices and benefit to the recipients.
Philosophy and education have a common mode of thought and action that is thinking and acting strategies in educational context.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
List four areas of relationship between Philosophy and education.
ii.
What are Dewey’s opinions concerning the relationship between Philosophy and education?
3.2 Conceptions of Philosophy of Education Philosophy of education is referred to as the use of philosophical tools, theories method, and principles for the explanation and solution of 19PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION educational problems.
It is an applied philosophy.
However, many philosophers see it in different ways.
3.2.1 Philosophy As An Application Newsome (1962) accepts the application of the problems of education and suggests: Philosophy might also be applied to education by utilizing the methods, tasks, techniques of philosophy in investigation problems of formal schooling.
This view of application appears most acceptable to majority of educational philosophers.
It should be seen too that philosophy of education benefits from the various method of analysis in clarification of concepts and issues of national interest.
Philosophy of education makes positive suggestions and recommendations about how educational theories and practice might be improved upon and is more effective in their functions.
To John Dewey (1966) philosophy is the theory of education.
In its most general phases.
3.2.2 Broad Based Approach Philosophy of education considers the broad based statement of principles, which projects the goals of the society.
Some times the goals of an ideal society are mapped out and used in any less developed society.
Akinpelu (1981) holds that, it is “a projection of the social, economic, political and cultural life of any community to education formulated after considering the ideal society would prefer to live in, in a way, educational philosophy means the national policy on education, which is government’s process of achieving its national objectives that can be achieved using education as a tool.
It is a broad statement of aims with well-articulated general principles of education.
This would later be interpreted for easy application at the several levels of educational theories and practices.
3.2.3 Historical Approach We ought to understand that the philosophical views and thought and ideals of the great Aristotle, Rene Descartes and others, are studied in that order their approaches and solutions are carefully applied to present day educational problems.
The fact is that, certain problems have being existing from the onset with the possible approach of problem solving.
It will be a waste of time and effort to postulate new theories for such 20PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION similar problems instead of using well recognized solutions.
However, because of the dynamic nature of the society and its peculiar problems, emphasis should be laid on the development of critical abilities needed for tackling contemporary problems of education.
3.2.4 Philosophical Approach We wish to understand here that the philosophical ideals of important schools of thought are superimposed or applied to educational ideals.
Such schools of thought among others are realism, Idealism, Humanism, existentialist, pragmatism, and Naturalism.
The major deficiency here is that the schools are not originally concerned with educational issues.
“No system of education corresponds to them in a straight jacket, logically derives” according to Akinpelu (1974).
The application might be difficulty and sometimes attract unnecessary and unhealthy human manipulation.
3.2.5 Analytical Approach Philosophy of education is seen as an “eye opener” to the teacher.
It gives the teacher a professional training by developing and cultivating in him a critical attitude and rational way of examining issues.
This analytical approach is the most recent and the one that brightens the teacher professional outlook.
Analysis identifies and clarifies ambiguities and inconsistencies inherent in some words, concepts and issues in both philosophy and education.
It makes people feel that philosophy of education is basically to criticize and analyze words, concept, theories identifying proper usages, clarifying ambiguities, inconsistencies and absurdities ethical issues such as justification for punishment in Nigerian school, by analyzing punishment and critically looking into problems arising from the implementation of national policy like “provision of equal educational opportunity” and so on.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Discuss the historical approach of the philosophy of education ii.
What do you understand as the philosophical approach of philosophy of education?
4.0 CONCLUSION Philosophy of education is the use of philosophical tools, theories, methods, principles for the explanation and solutions of educational problems.
21PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about: • Relationship between philosophy and education.
• Conceptions of education • The philosophical approaches to education ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may include that the four areas of relationship between philosophy and education are: a.
Philosophy seeks to impart knowledge to the people through acceptable manner.
b.
The critical attitude developed as a result of studying philosophy enhances human knowledge and create an avenue for the building of rational belief.
c. It creates open-mindedness in educational practices by practitioners who allow their beliefs and decisions to be subjected to further study and examination.
d. Philosophy looks at theories, assumptions, postulations and statements and value judgments critically so as to justify them.
ii.
Your answer may include Dewey’s opinions summarized as follows: a.
Philosophy of education is not an external application of ready made ideas to a system of practice having a radically different origin and purpose.
It is only an explicit formation of right mental and moral habit in respect to the difficulties of contemporary social life.
b.
You have read through some of the areas of relationship between philosophy and education.
We will go further into this relationship to enable you to appreciate it the more.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that the historical approach which states that the philosophical views and thought of the great educators of the past such as Plato, John Dewey, John Locke, Pestsllozzi.
Aristotle, Rene Descartes and their approaches and solutions are carefully applied to present day education problems.
The fact is that, certain problems have being existing from the onset with the possible approach of problem solving.
It would be a waste of time and effort to postulate other theories for the similar problems instead of using the recognized solutions.
22PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION However, because of the dynamic nature of the society and its peculiar problem, emphasis should be laid on the development of critical abilities needed for tackling contemporary problems of education.
ii.
Your answer may include that the philosophical ideas of important schools of thought are applied on educational ideas.
Such school of thought among others is realism, idealism, humanism, existentialism and pragmatism.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List four areas of relationship between philosophy and education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinpelu, J.A (1974).
“Conception of Education” in West African Journal of Education.
Akinpelu, J.A (1981).
An Introduction to Philosophy of Education.
London: Macmillan Publishers.
Brutus, H.W.
and Brauner, C. J. I (1976).
Problems in Education and Philosphy.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
O’ Connor, J.D.
(1957).
An Introduction to Philosophy of Education.
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
UNIT 4 THE PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 23PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Scope of Philosophical Foundation of Childhood Education 3.2 The Influence of Education on the Perception of Realities 3.3 The Concept of the Great Personality 3.4 The Fundamental Responsibility of Parents to the Child and the Needs of the Child 3.5 The Child’s Readiness for Primary Education 3.6 The Child’s Interest in Primary Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you studied the concept of education, the aims of education, the philosophical aims of education and the concept of childhood education.
In this unit, you will learn about the philosophical foundation of childhood education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • enumerate the bases of philosophical foundation of childhood education; • say the responsibilities of parents to the child; • explain the needs of the child; • explain the child’s readiness for primary education; and • describe the nature of the child.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 24PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.1 The Scope of Philosophical Foundation of Childhood or Primary Education In considering the philosophical foundations of primary education, you have to understand that there cannot be a universal educational system for all humanity.
Every society designs its own educational system based on its own realities.
The philosophical foundations of primary education in any society are based on certain solid ideas, beliefs or principles arising from the realities of that society.
The reality of a society includes its problem and prospects.
The problems are the sad experiences that regularly manifest themselves in the living conditions of most members of the society.
They affect their mental, physical and affective well being.
The problems include those inhibiting experiences that affect the personality of most people in a society.
The aspirations may include those worthwhile intentions, which could abate or eliminate most of the problems that confront the people.
The methods of achieving the aspirations have to be defined.
Education is one of the methods.
As you have known that in discussing the philosophical foundations of primary education in a given society, there have to be some reflections on the realities of that society, which, of course are the same realities, surrounding the child.
How those realities influence the education of the child-his intellectual, physical, emotional and attitudinal development.
Other considerations have to do with aspirations for the child, which has to be reflected on.
They include: a.
The theoretical model envisaged for the child, that is, the ideal man which education should stimulate the child to approximate; b. Formulation of an appropriate curriculum that can lead the child’s intellectual growth towards the ideal man.
c. Adequate implementation of the curriculum requires the production of teachers who share the qualities of the ideal man and are adequately equipped with different methods of teaching that can approximately stimulate the child; d. Critical appraisal of the curriculum, the teacher and the primary school pupils towards knowing the extent of success or failure in the educational enterprise in developing the ideal man as a product of the educational enterprise.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
List the bases of the philosophical foundations of primary education.
ii.
Explain the realities of a society.
3.2 The Influence of Education on the Perception of Reality 25PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION You have to understand that the type of educational system traditional or formal, to which individual members of a society are exposed influences their thought pattern, particularly, their perception of reality, their perception of problem or lack of them, even their proposals for problem solving.
Given the influences of an educational system on the thought pattern of those exposed to it, it is pertinent to think of realities of a child in a society in which the parents are illiterate and poverty stricken.
They live in a rural area.
The child is poorly fed, poorly housed and poorly clad.
The environmental stimulation of the child is poor.
Some of the sources of mental stimulation include fairy tales, stories about witches, mermaid, spirits and religious indoctrination.
The traditional African custom demands the total submission of the child to the will of the parents and elders.
The child is to be seen and not heard.
He is made to show total respect and obedience to the elders even those who may not deserve any respect whatsoever, because of their hypocrisy, pretensions and scandalous corrupt life.
Think of the perception of the child in that same society in which most of the adults shy away from those positions of responsibilities that their selfish interest is not protected.
A society in which most adult members have the attitude of shifting blames and looking for scapegoat.
Think about the child in the society where crooks, dropouts, never-do-wells, and sycophants seize, or are bequeathed positions of responsibility and they gamble with the society at their pleasure.
The critic is tortured, humiliated and disgraced.
Think of the realities of the child in the society in which education is fiddled with, material acquisition is elevated as the highest value, where the educated working class is ridiculed and humiliated because their members are subjected to poor financial embarrassment.
The primary school teacher is frustrated and poorly motivated and popular method of teaching is the chalk-talk-method.
Most of the teachers manage to stay onto etch out a living.
Given the above realities of a society, what philosophy of primary education can be evolved for that society in order to lay foundation for the possible humanization of its members?
The belief is that society can be humanized if the child in it is introduced to a well designed, humane educational system which should raise the consciousness of the child to appreciate and adopt humane behaviours.
These desirable qualities are perceived as some of the attributes of the ideal man.
It is conceived that the child in a dehumanized society has to be introduced to a humane educational system as the pupil of a primary school.
The pupil is to be introduced to an appropriate curriculum whose 26PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION educational activities include effective psychomotor and cognitive dimensions.
The effective dimension is initiated at home and sustained at school by the primary school teacher.
The psychomotor dimension is formally introduced by engaging the pupil in effective communication, writing and reading.
The pupil is exposed to the cognitive dimension in order to stimulate his intellectual ability.
He is exposed to some subjects, which include primary mathematics, science and social studies.
The philosophical basis of each educational activity is made explicit by analyzing the concept or idea involved, explaining what is done, how it is to be done and why it is done the way suggested.
Once the pupil is introduced to an appropriate curriculum designed for the humane educational system, and implemented by a well-oriented and committed teacher, the foundation for the growth of the pupil to approximate the Great personality has been laid.
But how is the idea of the theoretical model, the Great personality sharing some attributes of the IDEAL MAN, derived?
The theoretical model envisaged for the pupil in the given society is synthesized from the contradictions arising from the realities of that society.
The realities surrounding the child in the given society have already been highlighted.
They include the following: that .a Most adult members of that society are bedeviled by illiteracy, poverty, ignorance and are therefore inadequate models for the child.
b.
Many adult responsibilities are characterized by selfishness, greed and lack of personality projection, lack of commitment to duty, c. Poor tolerance of criticism and lukewarm attitude to formal education is inhibitive d. The initiation of the child into adult status quo-to think and behave like him does not help.
Given the above condition prevalent in the society, the primary school education should encourage the child to look up to the model conceived as the great personality, who is: a.
Human, intellectually sound, hardworking and highly responsible; b.
Open minded- interested in dialogue and tolerant of critics; c. A learner, reflective having freedom of thought, a man of conscience; the man of truth.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 27PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION i.
How can a dehumanized society be humanized.
ii.
What type of curriculum should a child be exposed to for a society to be humanized.
3.3 The Concept of the Great Personality The Great personality as a model has certain qualities that mark him out as a great character-a person of substance.
Qualities which mark him out as a personality include his rationality and conscious action.
But it is not just the self-determined action alone that marks out a personality.
In addition, the acting agent must accept responsibility for the outcome of his action-success, misdemeanor or failure.
Responsibility is an exercise of freedom.
It is marked by a personal judgment passed by a person on himself for an action he has taken, or for the liability of the outcome of an event he may caused, the failure resulting from an event he has caused.
Thus, a person is held responsible for his belief, intension, reason, and action and so on, to which he was in no way coerced into.
And once a person willfully and rationally accepts liability for all these, and then he is considered responsible.
The Great personality is not one who boasts of his numerous experiences but one who is conscious of his capabilities, potentialities and limitations of the discovered inaction and social interaction.
Socrates latter accepted the prediction of the oracle of Delphi that he was the wisest man on earth because he did not claim to know what he did not know.
Besides, the great personality is open-minded.
To say that the great character is open-minded does not mean that he does not make up his mind on issues of serious consequences.
He does, but not finally and irrevocably.
He is prepared to reconsider issues in the light of cogent reasons and substantive evidences.
His open-mindedness is directed as the desired to reduce his errors in reasoning and actions.
He is, therefore, prepared to withdraw or reconstruct any aspects of his ideas and actions that cannot stand the test of time.
Of course, he is determined to consolidate and defend his ideas and actions that have survived many encounters both from loved ones and those who have no allegiance or shared interest with the great personality.
He engages in dialogue in which he is very eager to tap the valuable contributions and opinion of others.
Importantly, the great character accepts the fact that man is fallible and therefore embraces the critic as a part of the dialectics of life.
The critic as an active agent helps to detect and eliminate errors.
Popper confirms 28PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION “we can hope to detect and eliminate error by criticizing the theories or guesses of others”.
He calls that “critical rationalism”.
Instead of the Great personality fighting to protect his belief, claims and assertions, he ask for experimental test that can refuse them, or cogent reasons that are more relevant.
He is always prepared to learn: quite reflective, a man of conscience, a man of truth.
The Great personality is not that educated man whose mind is stuffed with facts, skills and principles, which he can neither apply nor transform.
He is not educated man, the final product who is overwhelmed by what he thinks he knows and which he shows by his polished speeches.
The Great personality is a leaner whose mind is not finally made up by what he knows.
He is an experimenter who is always testing his experiences, and those of others made available to him to see how they work in action.
Besides, he is interested in what contributions he can make towards improving the experiences he comes across.
This is because he compares knowledge with living phenomenon, which is always growing, regenerating and transforming.
By reflection, he examines and re-examines an experience to see what new meaning can be made out of it or to what use it can be put.
The intelligent suggestion he comes up with is put to test to see how it works out in action.
He learns from his errors and is prepared for amendment.
But he is not content with his success; he looks forward to more and better successes.
The Great personality is a man of conscience.
He is one whose “inner voice” cautions on what to do and what not to do.
The caution is based on his previous environmental and experimental exposures.
There is an intellectual dimension, which considers the caution of the “inner voice”, examines the reasons for acting or not acting in a particular way and passing judgment on what ought to be done in a given situation SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the qualities of the Great personality?
3.4 The Fundamental Responsibility of Parents to the Child and the Need of the Child You know very well that parents have tremendous influence in the upbringing of the child.
The parents of the child must get acquainted with the child welfare orientation programme.
They have to allow the child to develop interest in primary school education, since the parents are aware of their role, which they must play before the child can benefit from the primary school curriculum then begin to play roles.
The parents 29PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION must meet the needs of the child.
There must be a conductive atmosphere in the family to enable the child grows in experience, and at the appropriate time, show his readiness to benefit from primary school education.
Importantly, he should have a sustained interest to gain from the designed primary school curriculum.
And the needs of the child as you know include parental love and security, and the initiation of the child to good personal relationship.
The child needs love from the parents and members of the family.
That love is initiated by a loving mother through her attachment to the child right from birth.
The attachment is initiated through mother’s breast feeding, fondling, stroking, eye appeal, talking to him, taking care of him after toileting, carrying him, sleeping with him, giving him warmth and so on.
Mother’s very close relationship with the child is the most needed by the child during the first three years of birth.
A child who loses his mother during this period and has no adequate substitute may become emotionally upset, mentally unhealthy and may become maladjusted in latter life.
Other members of the family add to mother’s love.
The father protects the child from external aggression.
He provides security for the child, talks to encourage to initial good relationship with his peers.
If the needs - love, security and good personal relationship are provided for the child before the age of six, the child has high chances of becoming emotionally stable, well adjusted and may indicate his readiness for primary school before or by the sixth year of birth.
You have to know that the value of the parent’s actions in initiating the child’s readiness for the primary education cannot be over emphasized.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
List some of the responsibilities of the parents to the child?
ii.
What are the basic needs of the child from his parents?
3.5 The Child Readiness for Primary Education There are some parents who are very anxious for their children to commence schooling without minding whether the child is ready or not.
Some parents who want to escape from some of their responsibilities to their children who are not yet ready for school.
In many society of the world there are specific ages at which the child is considered to be “mature enough” to commence primary education.
In Nigeria, the six year old is considered to be developed enough to benefit from primary education.
In Britain five years is considered adequate.
Many children of those ages express their interest to begin primary 30PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION school, to appear in school uniform, to learn how to read and write, and so on.
Before that age, the children have the impulses to engage in many self-organized plays.
For instance, two or more children who engage in hide-and-seek game laugh hilariously when one discovers the other.
At the personal level, the child builds out of sand constructs with materials readily available.
Those are necessary aspects of the child’s expression of himself.
They are important Attributes of the child’s development before the primary school education.
Froebel, a 17-century (1826) educationist, noted for his contribution to kindergarten education, considered play as a “self-active representation of the inner-from inner necessity and impulse”.
The child expresses his inner feelings in creative activities and plays.
“Making his inner outer”.
Again, he has the anxiety to ‘discover’ certain issues and events that battle him.
Fir instance, he imagines that “there are heads that live and talk in the radio and television.” He wonders what is inside the ball that makes it jump, what makes the “hands” of the clock move, and so on.
In the attempt to destruction of property, but which to the child, according to Froebel, is a case of making outer inner’.
John Dewey cautioned that adults should not expect that what children find valuable in their experiences should agree with adult values.
According to Dewey, once the child improves his experiences and enjoys it growth is manifested.
Hence, to him, the aim of education is to advance growth.
For the primary school child to grow in the experiences provided by the school the pre-primary stage must lay adequate foundation for his growth.
In the absence of a well-equipped kindergarten school with qualified nursery school teachers, or where- withal for such education, the child should be allowed the freedom to play and build on his own experiences and personal autonomy at home.
He not only chooses his play, he decides on his and interacts with, and gradually builds his own confidence in himself and others.
He accepts responsibilities for his actions.
But let it not be supposed that the child can showing some interest.
A child who is drop off in school may cry or wails as the parent leaves the school compound.
Inexperienced teachers, school administrators or school proprietors may threaten him with cane and force him to stop crying.
But the pants and may withdrawn from the school activities.
He builds his emotion within himself.
He may begin to develop a negative attitude towards the school.
If adequate care is not taken, he may lose interest in primary education.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 i.
Distinguish between a child who is ready for primary school and another who is not ready.
ii.
At what age is a child ready for primary education in Nigeria?
31PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.6 The Child’s Interest in Primary Education One dimension of a child’s interest in education is that which suggests that he should have some intrinsic appeal, a strong inclination and a positive desire to go to school.
A part of the child’s autonomy and personality development requires that he chooses for himself among other things, when to begin schooling.
The school activities are individualized and personal.
Each child attends school with his own personal materials.
Each child has to engage in the school activities in his own self recognition.
He has to answer his name from the register and be marked present.
Each child determines his school achievement positive or negative, which influences whether he proceeds to a new class or repeats at the end of the year.
Given the above conditions, one wonders whether it is right for parents or any other person to decide for the child whether to attend school or not, and when to attend.
If the child develops interest in going to school and the teachers and the school take cognizance of the experiences and the interests of the child in implementing the curriculum, then the achievements of the pupils is expected to be heightened.
But it may be argued that the child’s interest in formal education may not be entirely within the capacity of the child to choose.
Cultural background or environmental stimulation can heighten or dampen the child’s interest in education.
Take the cultural dimension for instance, some communities show negative attitude to western formal education.
Kaita discussed the biases against western formal education in some communities in the far northern part of Nigeria.
“According to her, ‘children are brought up from the beginning with some feelings against western education and in that respect they are unwillingly forced to go to school for which they already cultivate a traditional prejudice” Given such a background one wonders whether the average child from such communities could on his own develop strong inclination to western education.
But a family that encourages their children to aspire to western education may stimulate in them a strong desire for western education.
The situation would be different from a family that encourages children to take to trading or acquire occupational skill.
Hence another dimension of the child’s interest could be environmental stimulated.
While the child’s interest is important in the motivation to attend school, his interest may wane on facing the realities of the school life.
This is because at school the child is expected to learn things he has not experienced and which may be of interest to him and things he has not experienced and which may not be of interest to him.
Hence, a part of the role of the teacher is to rein enforce pupil’s existing interest, initiate 32PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION new interests and sustain existing interests.
What the teacher does and how he does it depends on the curriculum of the primary education in a society.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Mention any four factors that can heighten a child interest in primary education.
4.0 CONCLUSION Educational system of various societies is designed according the concrete realities of such various societies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have learnt about the following: • The scope of philosophical foundations of childhood or primary Education • The concept of great personality.
• The fundamental responsibility of parents to the child.
• The needs of the child.
• The child’s readiness of primary education.
• The influence of education on the perception of realities.
• The child’s interesting primary education.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may include that the philosophical foundations of education is based on the ideals, beliefs, and principles arising from the realities of that society.
ii.
Your answer may also include that the realities of a society include its problems and prospects.
The problems are the sad experiences that regularly manifest themselves in the living conditions of most members of that society.
The problems include those inhibiting experiences that affect the personality of most people in the society.
33PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION The aspiration may include those worthwhile intensions that could abate or eliminate most of the problems that confront the people.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that society can be humanized if the child in it is introduced to well designed, humane educational system which should raise the consciousness of the school to appreciate and adopt human behaviours.
The child in the dehumanized society has to be introduced to a well designed humane education system as the pupil of primary school.
ii.
Your answer may also include that the curriculum will be appropriately designed and whose educational activities include the affective, Psychomotor and cognitive dimensions.
The affective dimension is initiated at home but sustain at school by the primary school teacher.
The psychomotor dimension is formally introduced by engaging the pupil in effective communication writing and reading.
The pupil is exposed to cognitive dimension to stimulate his intelligential ability.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Your answer might include that he has the following qualities: i.
He is human, intellectually sound, hardworking and highly responsible ii.
He is open-minded, interested in dialogue and tolerance of critics iii.
He is a learner, reflective, having freedom of thought, a man of conscience, duty conscience and the man of truth.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Your answer may include that the parents must expose the child-to child welfare orientation programme.
They has to allow the child to develop interest in primary school education.
They should provide a conductive atmosphere in the family to enable the child grow in experience ii.
Your answer may also include that some of the basic needs of the child include: - Parental love and security - The initiation of the child to good personal relationship 34PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 i.
Your answer may include that children who are ready for primary education express their interest to begin school to appear in school uniform, to learn how to read and write.
On the other hand a child who is not ready for primary education is drop off in school cries or wails as the parent leaves the school compound.
The child after wards pants and may be withdrawn from the school activities.
He may begin to develop a negative attitude towards the school.
He may lose interest in primary education.
ii.
Your answer may also include that it is the age of six years.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Your answer may include that the factors are: a.
The child should have intrinsic interest, a strong inclination and a positive desire to go to school b.
The teacher or the school can take cognizance of the experience and interest of the child in implementing the curriculum.
c. Cultural background or environmental stimulation can heighten the child’s interest in western education.
d. The family can stimulate in their children strong desire for western education by encouraging them to aspire for it.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 Explain the realities of a society.
2 Enumerate the attributes of a dehumanized society.
3 What are the qualities of a great personality.
4 Mention four factors that can heighten a child’s interest in primary education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bourdieu, Pierre, (1971).
Systems of Education and Systems of Thought, in Knowledge and Control (ED) Michael E.D Yong, Michael E.D.
young, Collier Mac Millian London, 1971, p.4.
35PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Potawski, Andrezej.
Freedom and Dignity in the work of Kari Woijtyly’ ALETHEIA An International Journal of Philosophy Vol.
IV Epistermology & Logic, 1988.
Woijtyla, Karol (Cardinal).
The Acting Person, Dordrechi, 1977, cit.
Poltawski ibid.
Popper, K.R, on the Sources of Knowledge and of Ignorance in Studies in Philosophy, British Academy Lectures (Ed) J.N.
Finally, Oxford Paperbacks 1060.
Fagothey, Austin, ‘Rights and Reasons’.
The C.V. Mosley Company Louis, 1959 p.209.
KAITA Iro Hassu (Malama) “Women in Education in Nigeria” In a Philosophy for Nigeria Education (Report of the National Curriculum Conference 8-12 Sept. 1969) Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) Ltd. Ibadan.
1972 p. 141.
36PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION UNIT 5 THE ROLE EXPECTED OF THE PRIMARY SCHOOL TEACHER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Primary School Teacher 3.2 Qualities of Primary School Teacher 3.3 Roles Expectation of Primary School Teacher, Implication for Effective Teaching 3.3.1 Teacher Having Special Interest in Children 3.3.2 Possession of Sound Professional Knowledge 3.3.3 Teacher as a Model to the Children 3.4 The Relationship between Teacher and the Pupil 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you read about the philosophical foundations of childhood education, the child’s interest in primary education and the nature of the child.
In this unit you are going to study about the roles expected of the primary school teacher, the concept of the teacher, the qualities of the primary school teacher and the relationship between the teacher and the pupil.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this lesson you will be able to do the following: • explain the role of primary school teacher or teaching; • explain the qualities of the primary school teacher; • enumerate the roles expected of primary school teacher; • explain the relationship between the teacher and the pupil; and • describe the teacher as a model to the children.
37PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of the Primary School Teaching Who is a teacher?
The word “Learner” stands for one who imparts knowledge especially one whose professional occupation is teaching.
He is a person who has completed a professional curriculum in a teacher education institution and whose training has officially been recognized by the award of an appropriate teaching certificate.
To Good (1945) in Emenogu et al (1992:86) “A rich experience or education or both in a giving field is able to contribute to the growth and development of other persons who come intact with him.
The combination of children’s education and teacher forms a strong link between children and education (Ajayi Dopemu 1994).
The teacher has many roles to play in the upbringing of the child.
As a resource person, his main functions are to guide learning.
He is to provide enriched educational environment and expose the child to a variety of learning experiences in order to help them unfold the hidden talents in them.
Teaching is more than exposing the learner to the acquisition of skills.
In addition, it involves a systematic method of exposing the learner to a suitable environment to enable him develop his cognitive and affective potential using worthwhile materials.
The teacher is professionally prepared for his task through exposure to appropriate courses taught in a school of education.
The teacher should therefore be honest, trustworthy, tolerant, broadminded, sympathetic, kind, faithful, disciplined; he should be able to give unconditional positive regards and care to the needs and attention to the children.
He is the coordinating agent who ought to ensure the smooth running and development of teaching and learning.
These must be are well organized and supervised.
In other words, the teacher is seen in the background of learning activities as a guide encouraging and facilitating the protection of the child into prominence.
3.2 Qualities of Primary School Teacher The teacher of great personality has some distinct qualities, which make him unique among other professionals.
Among other things, he knows his responsibility, enjoys his autonomy, and demonstrates humility in 38PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION practice.
The teacher knows his responsibility because he plans his teaching diligently often far ahead of the day of delivery.
This enables him to reflect on the lesson and add the final touches before the day of presentation.
In planning any lesson, he thinks about the pupil his age and his environment.
He thinks about the content he wants to teach.
He searches for reference materials to guide his selection of the content.
As he reads the reference materials and gathers the content of the lesson, he critically reflects on them, and ensures that they are within the intellectual level of the pupil.
On the basis of his experience he adds some ideals on his own which are not in the reference materials.
He organizes them in sequence from what the pupil already know to what they do not know.
Then he looks for the appropriate teaching materials to illustrate the lesson.
He tries to dramatize the lesson to him self thinks about its effect then make final retouching here and there before he approves the lesson tentatively.
He is punctual to school, well dressed, neat and tidy.
At school he dose what he is suppose to do with out being ordered or driving about to do so.
He follows the time table and teaches his lesson diligently and consistently, with every commitment and enthusiasm.
He keeps his records up to date and marks his assignments promptly to enable the pupil know his errors and be prepared to correct them.
The teachers enjoys his autonomy the freedom and initiative to carry out his teaching activity using what ever worthwhile method he deems reasonable and most rewarding.
He does not tolerate being excessively supervised.
He is conscious of the disastrous effect of the excessive supervision of the Jesuits.
They were so excessively supervised that Quick and Kinlocke suggested that the amount of supervision was akin to spying and for it aimed to gain complete control over a human being, so that he becomes a mere instrument in the hands of his supervisor.
That the teacher abhors being excessively supervised does not mean that he thinks himself all knowing, efficient and perfect.
He acknowledges that he still has room for improvement; he has the humility to admit that the theories and principles of teaching acquired in teacher education institution are not enough to prepare him fully for his teaching activities.
He therefore, believes that the better part of teaching is acquired in the field by practice and learning.
He acknowledges with all sincerity, that one does not know everything and that improvement in life- undertakings demands consultation with those who are more experienced in particular fields of endeavor.
The desire to do better as a teacher and achieve higher results motivates him to watch the performance of others acclaimed to be very good at teaching.
He consults them when problems arise in the process of teaching he invites an experienced teacher to watch occasionally and criticizes his teaching.
There after, he endeavors to correct his shortcomings.
He has learned his 39PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION humility from Comenius (John Amos Komensky) a prominent Moravian teacher and later a superintendent of schools.
In his book Didactical magna, Comenius considered himself “a man of moderate ability and of almost no learning.” His humility made him proclaim that “it matters not to me whether I teach or be taught.” But the teacher maintains within himself that he is not a case advocating for over-humility which may result in the loss of identity and personality.
He maintains initiative and autonomy, because he is desirous of improving himself.
He only co-opts the good teaching methods of the other teachers into his own to yield, for him, a dialectical result, which is synthetically higher than what he knew before and what his experienced colleagues demonstrated.
Besides that, he does everything meaningful to improve on his teaching.
He even considers his voice a strategic natural appliance that can add some aesthetics to his teaching.
He recognizes that the voice of the teacher has some influence on how effectively the pupil learns or fails to learn.
He is aware that a coarse voice is repulsive to the pupil and a gentle voice is more appealing and inviting.
But of importance is that he articulates his speech so that he is distinctly and clearly hard by the pupil to enhance his understanding.
He adequately modulates his voice for effect and notice that this practice is very motivating to the pupil.
The teacher is conscious of when to introduce variation in the tone if his voice, when to stress his voice when to be loud and when to apply the voice for emphasis.
It was observed by Pestalozzi that the voice and attitude of the teacher affect the response of pupil.
In addition, it is the view of Chukwu that “sounds that come out of the teacher have to be clear and should be carefully and consciously considered in the creation of meaningful sensation for effective teaching” SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i. Enumerate five qualities of a Primary School teacher.
ii.
Explain one of the qualities of a teacher.
3.3 Role Expected of Primary School Teacher Implication for Effective Teaching/Learning 3.3.1 Teacher Having Interest in Children Personality traits of the teacher condition modulate and promote certain responses from pupils.
They motivate, direct, formulate pupils reactions in the classroom-learning situation.
Teachers of primary school are faced with many challenges.
The personality development of pupils at this stage is still immature.
This level of education needs warmth and friendliness on the part of the teacher.
As these have great effect on children’s learning.
40PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION The teacher should create an enabling environment where by he can communicate with the children effectively and friendly i.e.
passing the massages across to the pupil in a cordially way.
He has to spend time a good deal explaining things, talking to them be a good listener and ensuring that the pupil’s understand what he is saying and doing.
To surmount or cope with the mounting problems associated with children of primary school, the teacher should be energetic and physically fit, patient, kind, caring, loving, but firm.
He should be able to understand the child i.e.
has good knowledge of the child’s mind and how it works.
The teacher should create a happy atmosphere in the class and interact with them freely.
He could do this by involving them in class discussions, taking imagination, engaging them in drama and quiz.
He must be patient with them and guide their activities and behaviour.
It is generally contended that when the teacher appears as the friend of the child, not as his enemy the child learns faster because he is co-operating.
He learns with less fatigue, because there is not that constant strain of bringing back a reluctant and bored attention.
His sense of personal initiative is cultivated instead of being diminished.
3.3.2 Possession of Professional Knowledge A good school teacher should be someone who would have insight into children.
He must have a foundation of knowledge, which is fully backed by an intellectual understanding.
He should have a thorough study of educational psychology, sociology, history of education as well as philosophy of education in his training.
This wealth of knowledge will equip him well to cope with varieties of experience and queries of curious children and be able to work in their best interest.
The achievement of our primary school objectives calls for specialist teachers based on the realization that children need to be helped by trained pedagogues if they are to develop their maximum potentials.
But some are reported to be untrained to handle the primary children’s education.
(NERC 1980; Enesator, 1992; John – Nwosu and Okpara, 1995).
This underscores the need to have professionally qualified and competent teachers in our primary schools to guarantee commitment of excellence.
The academic training of the teacher will assists him to understand more fully his own personality, the demands of his profession and more ideas concerning the children under this custody.
Academically, he must be a teacher who imparts knowledge with ease, creates, builds and facilitates learning.
Besides interest in subject matter, good personality, perseverance, responsibility initiatives, self-control, sincerity, humour, loyalty and good leadership amongst others have been found necessary qualities, which a teacher possess.
Professional 41PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION training of the teacher will equip him to make him articulate about his work.
This means that his knowledge as a professional will guide him explain to others the specification and description of his job etc.
As a person with superior and richer experience, the teacher of primary school children serves as a resource for the identification of significance problems and for mapping out modes of attack.
He should encourage cooperation rather than competition among his pupils.
It is dishearten to note that only few primary school teachers have both the academic, moral and psychological disposition to cater for these children in their formative years.
The teacher has onerous duty to perform in the child’s education in order to guarantee future dedicated manpower.
Such teachers earlier indicated must be professionally trained and ready to devote themselves to the important assignment of training the young minds.
3.3.3 Teacher as a Model to the Children Teaching children is one of the helping professions that need dedicated practitioners.
The child-hood education profession needs happy, intelligent, energetic and creative teachers to guide the pupils in their character formation and intellectual development.
The role of the teachers in this includes inculcating good habits and socialization of the children so that they can easily adjust to any environment they may find themselves in future.
Psychologists and educationalists have confirmed that children learn by imitation.
The way the child perceives teacher determines his attitude to the subject the teacher teaches.
Children learn more by imitation than they do by listening to a lesson.
This calls for a teacher who is responsible, seasoned and academically equipped to direct the children’s programme.
This in effect is saying that the teacher should feel well, think well and act well.
Since the teacher is the main audio-visual aid that appears in every lessons, his images is highly important, as he is memorable because he is associated with some emotional experiences.
Children will like to remember that their teacher is warm, kind, honest, loving, fair, always punctual, neat, friendly, strict and proud and all these affect their learning.
It is also necessary to point out that energy and flamboyance in the teacher may stimulate the children’s active participation and involvement in the material to learn.
Children like to identify with their teacher, so teachers should be wise in what ever they do or say.
A good teacher should be aware of what is entrusted to him and should work in the best interest of the children.
He must be an example of good living.
He must communicate effectively to the children, have an ability to select his words correctly and think critically before talking.
Unnecessary reprimands of the child by the teacher could affect the children’s learning and their future life.
The teacher should be aware that whatever he does, or say are being watched 42PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION and copied by the little kids around.
Therefore, he needs to be well discipline and enrich himself with good manners.
3.3.4 The Teacher as a Facilitator of Learning The teacher of the great personality has some distinct qualities in facilitating the learning of children.
He is an inevitable factor in the children’s development that is the teacher has the most fundamental, far reaching and direct influence on the children.
He knows his responsibility because he plans his teaching diligently often far ahead of the day of presentation.
In planning he thinks of the pupils, their age and their environment.
He thinks also about the contents, he wants to teach and searches for reference materials to guide him in the preparation of the lesson.
All the strategies which the teacher employs in the classroom enhances the general atmosphere of life in the classroom thus encourages the children to learn optimally either individually or collectively.
Even though a conducive and stimulating learning environment is very vital for the children yet the teacher remains the most important factor in the environment of learning because available instructional materials and children cannot educate unless the teacher gives directive and guidance.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Mention some of the traits of the teacher that can enhance learning.
ii.
Enumerate four benefits of having trained educated teachers in our primary school.
iii.
Since children learn better by imitation how best can a teacher use this method in teaching?
3.4 The Relationship between the Teacher and the Pupil The teacher demonstrates some virtues in his relationship with the pupil.
He is patient in dealing with him.
He endures the initial uncoordinated and ill-regulated habits of the newly admitted pupil.
He accommodates his occasional restlessness.
The numerous questions from pupils from highly stimulated families.
The appeal for recognition by some of the pupils and the desire of some to be closer to the teacher and to share some love.
He tolerates the occasional misunderstanding and quarrelling among some of the pupils, the aggregate behaviours of some pupils from different family backgrounds.
He counsels them to relate better and accommodate one another.
He is not upset or angered by some odd 43PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION behaviours of some of the pupils like messing themselves up.
He carefully takes care of them and later advises them.
He is always willing to help the pupil feel at home while at school.
After all he considers himself to have assumed the role of the parent at school.
The teacher extends his friendly relationship to the pupil by knowing his name and family background, not necessarily to exploit such knowledge for selfish interest, but to enhance the advancement of the education of the pupil.
There is a sense of belonging and recognition in the class when the teacher addresses the pupil by name.
Knowledge of the background of the pupil helps the teacher in the adequate use of evidences or in the diversification of evidences to ensure that the pupil understands from the background experience.
Another dimension of the cordial relationship between the teacher and the pupil is the use of dialogue in teaching.
The use of dialogue can act and do things.
The pupil is appreciative of the teacher’s friendly gestures and practices.
He opens up and recognizes the teachers as a person worth confiding in.
Such mutual recognition of each other by the two persons initiate and bound of relation of which the teacher is implicitly, the active initiator, but by which the overt activity of the pupil projects the pupil’s reality and existence.
But of significance is that each recognizes the existence, action and contributions of the other in their common experience in the process of teaching and learning.
Buber describes the dialogical relations as: First, a relation of no matter what kind is between two persons, second an event experienced by them in common, is what, at least one of them actively participates, and third, the fact that this one person, without forfeiting any thing of the of the felt reality of his activity at the same time leaves through the common events from the standpoint of the other.
By what seems an extension, Gentile, an Italian philosopher and educationist conceived the relations between the teacher and the pupil in the process of education as spiritual.
The spirit of the teacher and the pupil’s are indissolubly linked such that the previous gulf of distinction is filled and leveled.
The spirit, here, refers to consciousness of the teacher and the pupil, being conscious of each other.
At the same time the teacher stimulates in the pupil’s an intellectual well-being which, according to Gentile, can advance the pupil’s personality and self- creation.
But despite the very affinity between the teacher and the pupil, which is librating, the teacher recognizes his indispensable role as a guard and organizer.
The ideal of his being a guard should not, however,, be misunderstood to suggest that the pupil is blind and like the blind beggar, should be held by the hand for the teacher to guide while the pupil follows.
For the pupil to grow into a Great personality, the influence of the teacher, according to Buber, should not be too 44PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION obvious to the pupil.
The teacher has some specific objective to achieve in each lesson.
Those objectives nevertheless, should not be very obvious to the pupil.
The pupil should be made to feel that he is responsible for initiating himself into growth.
On no account does the teacher make any head-way personal interest, or that he is “helping” the pupil or that he is interfering in the pupils personal interest, or that without him the pupil can not make any head way in his dedication.
Thus the teacher does not just show the pupil the way he rather ‘guides’ the pupil to find the way himself.
The teacher takes that position in appreciation of one of John Locke’s important contribution to educational thought-the ideal that the pupil should be seen and treated as a rational being from the beginning.
In the process of teaching, the pupil should be stimulated to use his sense to discover and acquire knowledge, instead of stuffing him with available information.
That is not all; the teacher in addition, stimulates the pupil to make his own contribution to knowledge, by perceiving any short –coming in the existing knowledge and possibly seeing beyond the obviously given.
In that way the teacher makes the pupil an active participant in the acquisition and upgrading of knowledge, and not a dormant receptacle.
Perhaps it may be asked whether the friendly relationship the teacher establishes with the pupil will not affect the disciplines of the pupil at school.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List four ways by which the teacher can establish relationship with the pupil.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about the concept of a primary school teacher; the qualities of a primary school teacher.
You have also learnt about the role expected of a primary school teacher and the relationship between the pupils.
5.0 SUMMARY Developmental and educational psychologists have made it clear that primary school years are the formative period in the life of an individual.
As a critical period most of the concept and basic principles of life are engrained in the children during these early years.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may be that the qualities of primary school teachers are as follows: 45PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION • He is morally sound, • He is energetic, • He is just, • He is responsible and • He takes initiative.
ii.
Your answer may include that one of the qualities that he has is initiative, The teacher with initiative will never be a dull teacher.
His lessons will be unusually and interesting because he is always thinking of fresh approaches.
A good teacher is one who is always a learner i.e.
he knows that he does not know everything, and he spends his spare time learning how to improve his work.
He is even prepared to learn from his pupils.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that some of the traits of the teacher that enhances learning are as follows: The teacher should be friendly, effective and warmth.
He should be able to communicate well and be good listener.
He should be energetic, physically fit, patient, kind, caring, loving and firm.
ii.
Yours answer may include that it helps the teacher to be a good teacher; it equips the teacher to cope with the varieties of experiences and queries of curious children.
It enables the teacher to work in their best interest.
It ensures that the objectives of the goals of education are achieved.
iii.
Your answer may include that the teachers can use this method in teaching by being responsible, seasoned and academically equipped to direct the children’s programme.
He should be kind, honest, warm, loving, fair, always punctual, neat friendly, strict proud.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Your answer may include that; the teacher should be patient in dealing with the pupil.
He should endure the initial uncoordinated and ill- regulated habit of the newly admitted pupil.
The teacher should accommodate his occasional restlessness and the, numerous questions from pupils from highly stimulating families.
He 46PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION accepts the appeal for recognition of some of the pupils, and the desire of some to be closer for the teacher to share some love.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Enumerate the qualities of primary school teacher.
2.
Since children learn better by imitating how can a primary school teacher use this method in teaching?
3.
List four ways by which the teacher can establish relationship with the pupils.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi-Dopemu, Y.
(1994).
Welcome Address Presented at the Two-Day Workshop Organized for ECCDE Day-care Givers.
Eneasator, G.O (1992).
Implementation of Pre-primary Education Policy in Nigeria: A Case Study of Anambra State.
Hypbrid Publishers Nigeria (Ltd).
John Nwosu, A.D and Okpara, E.N (1995).
‘Who Should Teach the Nigeria Pre-school Child?
- The Unresolved Question.
‘Jocromep’.
Journal of the World Organization for Early Childhood Education 1 (1), 14-48.
Good, C.V. (1945).
Dictionary of Education.
New York and London: McGraw-Hill Books Company Inc. 47PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION MODULE 2 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Unit 1 Characteristic of Primary School Children Unit 2 The Meaning and Purpose of Primary Education Unit 3 The Origin of Primary School in Nigeria a Historical Perspective Unit 4 The Basic Outlines of the National Policy on Primary Education Unit 5 The Concept of the Universal Basic Education UNIT 1 CHARACTERISTICS OF PRIMARY SCHOOL CHILDREN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Physical Characteristics of Primary School Children 3.1.1 Educational Implication of Physical Characteristics for Effective Teaching in Primary School 3.2 Social Characteristics of Primary School Children 3.2.1 Educational Implication of Social Characteristic of Primary School Children to Learning 3.3 Emotional Characteristics of Primary School Children 3.3.1 Educational Implication of Emotional Characteristics to Effective Teaching and Learning 3.4 Cognitive Characteristics of Primary School Children 3.4.1 Educational Implications of Cognitive Characteristics of Primary School Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you studied about the concept of primary school teacher, the qualities of primary school teacher, the roles expected of the primary school teacher, the relationship between the teacher and the pupil and the teacher as a model to the pupils.
48PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION In this unit you will study about the physical characteristics of the primary school children, social characteristics of primary school children, emotional characteristics of primary school children and cognitive characteristics of primary school children, and their educational implications.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the lesson you should be able to do the following: • explain the physical characteristics of primary school children; • describe the social characteristics of primary school children; • explain the emotional characteristics of primary school children; • describe the cognition characteristics of the primary school children; and • describe the implications of these characteristics 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Physical Characteristics of the Primary School Children You should know that children between the ages of 6 and 9 years are extremely active, they participate in sedentary pursuit.
They also release energy in the form of nervous habit such as pencil chewing, finger biting, hair twirling, and general fidgeting.
They easily become fatigued as a result of physical and mental exertion.
Many children, especially boys, have difficult manipulating a pencil.
Many children have difficult focusing on small prints or objects.
Quite a few children may be far sighted because of the shallow shape of the eyes.
At the age of nine children tend to be extreme in their physical activities.
They have excellent control of their bodies and develop considerable confidence in their skills.
As a result, they often underestimate the danger involved in their move during exploits.
The accident rate is at a peak, a growth spirit occurs in most girls and starts in early-maturing boys in same age.
Fine motor coordination is quite good, therefore the manipulation of small objects is easy and enjoyable for most children.
As a result, arts and crafts and music activities are popular.
3.1.1 Educational Implication of Physical Characteristics for Effective Teaching in Primary School 49PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Every primary school should provide adequate, free and self opportunities for children’s play.
This will help them learn how to share interact and co-operate in teamwork.
The school should provide variety of play equipment for pupils’ use, this will help in the development of bones and muscles and keep them fit.
Specific games should be organized for the children under strict supervision of the teachers to minimize accident.
Children should be allowed to rest after strenuous exercise to avoid fatigue.
Children’s books should be written with bold letters and teachers writing on the chalk board to be legible, this will minimize children gazing at tiny objects.
Children with left hand should be encouraged to use them instead of compelling them to change.
Those who are physically handicapped should not be pitied rather should be engaged in activities that suit their physical capability.
Between the age of ten to twelve the teacher should help the pupils to adjust.
The school should encourage activities skills in creative ways.
3.2Social Characteristics of Primary School Children Pupils Understand that primary school pupils are somewhat more selective in their choice of friends.
They are likely to have more or less permanent best friends and many also pick out a semi permanent enemy.” Children of age six to nine often like organized games in small groups, but they may be overtly concerned with rules or get carried away by team spirit.
Quarrels are frequent within these groups.
Words are used more often than physical aggression, but many boys may indulge in punching, wrestling and shoving.
At the age of ten to twelve, the peer groups become powerful and begin to replace adults as the major source of behaviour standers and recognition of achievement.
The development of inter persons reasoning leads to greater understanding of the feelings of other primary school children.
Primary school children pick up habit very fast at this stage.
Habits like growing in love, self confidence, and maintaining stable relationship, development of self control, having self responsibility and self consideration for others.
3.2.1 Educational Implication of Social Characteristic of Primary School Children to Learning In the light of the above social characteristics of primary school children, teacher and school should: 1.
Take the place of parents in the school by loving, protecting and caring for the children so that parents absents will not be felt much.
50PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 2.
The teacher should inculcate in the children how to be polite, obedient, respectful, courteous and relate well with one another.
3.
The teacher should encourage the children to play, associate and work cooperatively on joint projects with other.
The shy and loner ones should be given enough encouragement to integrate with others.
4.
The teacher should allow the children to settle their differences on their own and only intervene if the quarrel gets off hand.
The school should provide adequate and enough play materials and teaching in other to minimize constant quarreling.
All this will enable the pupil to satisfy their curiosity when they want to play.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
List four physical characteristics of primary school children ii.
Enumerate four social characteristics of primary school children iii List three educational implications of social characteristics of primary school children.
3.3 Emotional Characteristics of Primary School Children Emotion according to oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary (1999:297) means a strong feeling of any kind, love, joy hatred, fear, jealous.
“primary school pupils have emotions it could be pleasant or unpleasant but both play important roles in the live of children and all of them contribute to the personal and social adjustment made by any individual.
Primary school pupils are sensitive to the feelings of others, unfortunately this permit them to hurt others deeply by attacking a sensitive spot without realizing how devastated the attack really is, girls may find it more difficult to develop to autonomy and independence because they identify more completely with the mother and her first teacher and also experiences less conflict with them.
3.3.1 Educational Implication of Emotional Characteristics to Effective Teaching and Learning To control this emotion the primary school teacher should provide the children with enriched environment full of friendliness, love, care and consideration.
The teacher should take care of the emotional needs of the children.
The teacher can do this by being sensitive to emotions that arise in her classroom since the children have much regard for teachers; the teacher should endeavour to give the pupils much attention but must spread it evenly to every member of the class.
The teacher should provide positive reinforcements as frequently as possible and reserve her negative reactions for nonacademic 51PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION misbehaviour.
It is important to avoid sarcasms and ridicule scrupulously in order to satisfy the desire to help.
The teacher should assign jobs on rotating bases.
Teacher should control the fears of the pupils by showing love and speaking softly instead of being harsh and reprimanding for every move or interaction of the children, teachers should be good listeners, cheerful, humorous when necessary among other these acts will lead them through their fears.
If coarse environment is created, school phobia and anxiety may set in and could affect latter life.
3.4 Cognitive Characteristics of Primary School Children Intellectual depicts the power to integrate experience and process of reasoning abstract.
Generally speaking, primary pupils are eager to learn.
One part of the best things in the Primary School is the build in motivation of pupils.
They like to talk and have more facility in speech than in writing.
They are eager to recite whether they know the right answer or not.
Because of their literal interpretation of rules, Primary grade children tend to be tattles.
Sometimes telling the teacher that someone has broken a school’s rules may be due to a child’s level of moral development.
This could sometimes out of malice or is simply a way to draw attention to the misbehavior of others.
3.4.1 Educational Implications of Cognitive Characteristics of Primary School Children The school should provide reasonable and stimulating environment through which the child learns to develop basic conceptional skills necessary for life, have a reasonable linguistic repertoire for meaningful communication and grows intellectually, the stimulating environment should include play grounds.
Teachers should exercise patience in answering children’s numerous questions and in conversation with them, by doing so learning will naturally take place.
Primary school children need a lot of exposure which involve what they could see leading to what they know through experience.
Teacher should then give the children enough time to interact with their rich environment in order to acquire attitudes for further living.
He should encourage the spirit of imagination, inventiveness and appreciation in the children.
This could be achieved by engaging the children in meaningful activities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
List three emotional characteristics of Primary School children.
52PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION ii.
Enumerate three cognitive characteristics of Primary School pupils.
iii.
Name three educational implication of emotional characteristics of Primary School children.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about the social characteristics, physical characteristics, emotional characteristics, cognitive characteristics of Primary School children and their educational implications.
5.0 SUMMARY Teacher should be sensitive to children’s unique characteristics at Primary School level so as to direct and guide them properly for meaningful development of habit and virtue which will have a long life influence on their personal and social adjustment to their environment.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may be that the children are active in sedentary pursuit, they also release energy in the form of nervous habit such as pencil chewing, finger biting, hair twirling and general fidgeting, they easily become fatigued as a result of physical and mental exertion.
Many children especially boys have difficult in manipulating a pencil.
Many children have difficult focusing on small point or object.
ii Your answer may include that the social characteristics of primary school children are as follows: children of primary school are more or less selective in their choice of friends.
They are likely to have a more or less permanent friend.
They loved organized games in small groups, but they may be overtly concerned with groups, words are used more often than physical aggression, but many boys may indulge in punching, wrestling and shoving.
iii.
Your answer may include that the educational implications of social characteristics of primary school children are as follows: - That teachers take the place of the parents in the school by loving, protecting and caring for the children so that parents absent will not be felt much.
- That teachers should inculcate in the children how to polite, obedient, respectful, courageous and relate well with one another.
53PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION - Teachers should encourage the children to play, associate and work cooperatively on joint projects with others.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that Primary School children are sensitive to criticism and ridicule and may have difficult adjusting to failure.
They need frequent praise and recognition.
Primary School pupils tend to admire or even worship their teachers, most Primary School pupils are eager to please their teachers.
They like to help and enjoy responsibility and want to do well in their school work.
ii.
Your answer may include that Primary School pupils are extremely eager to learn.
They like to talk and have much more facility in speech than in writing.
They are eager to recite whether they know the right answer or not.
Because of their literal interpretation of rules, Primary School pupils may tend to be tattletales.
iii.
Your answer may include that the educational implications of the emotional characteristics are as follows: In order to control these emotions, Primary School teacher should provide the children an enrich environment full of friendliness, love, care and consideration.
He should take care of the emotional needs of the children by being sensitive to emotions that arise in his classroom since the children have many regards for the teacher.
The teacher should endeavor to give the pupils much affection.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List four physical characteristics of primary school children.
2.
List four educational implications of the social characteristics of primary school children.
3.
Enumerate four emotional characteristics of primary school children.
4.
Describe the educational implications of the cognitive characteristics of the primary school children.
7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 54PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Akinola, B.M.A (2004).
The Place of Pre-primary education in Nigeria National Policy on Education.
Nigeria Journal of Educational Studies and Reaserch (NJESR) Vol.2, 25 (pg 194-2004).
Bloom, B.
(1964).
Stability and Change in Human Characteristics.
New York: John Willey.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC Press.
Obisanya, O.O (2001).
An Evaluation of the Childcare Development and Education Project in Nigeria.
Unpublished ph.d Thesis, University of Ibadan.
55PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION UNIT 2 THE MEANING AND PURPOSE OF PRIMARY EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Primary Education 3.2 Purpose of Primary Education 3.2.1 Factors that affect purpose are 3.2.2 Purposes of Purposes of Primary Education Change with Time 3.2.3 Purposes of Primary Education are not universal 3.2.4 Purposes of Primary Education should be Child- Centered 3.2.5 The Educated Person 3.3 The Purpose of Primary Education During the Missionary Era 3.4 The Purpose of Primary Education of Regional Governments 3.5 The Purpose of the Universal Primary Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Future Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learn about the physical characteristics of primary school children, the social characteristics of primary school children, the emotional characteristics of primary school children and the cognitive characteristics of primary school children.
You also learnt about their educational implication.
In this unit you are going to study about the meaning of primary education, the purpose of primary education during the missionary era and during the regional governments.
You will also learn about the purpose of the universal primary education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 56PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION By the end of this unit, you will be able to: • explain the meaning of primary education; • describe the purpose of primary education; • enumerate the purpose of primary education during the missionary era; • explain the purpose of primary school in the regional government era; and • explain the purpose of the universal primary education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Primary Education Primary Education is a very interesting and challenging aspect of education.
It is interesting because it helps to clarify and make you appreciate many things you did and learned at your primary school age, and so help you to understand your students better.
The study of primary education will open up a world of knowledge about children: the way they grow, think, play, learn and make friends.
It is challenging because it provide opportunities for children to aspire and attain the best they can under the guidance of teachers.
It challenges you to be interested, appreciative and especially be a part of what many dedicated teachers are doing to improve mankind.
A study of primary education is important because it is at this level that we can find the greatest number of pupils.
Indeed, it means that what ever knowledge, skills, values and attitudes that are relevant for living must be introduced in some way to the pupils at this stage.
Again, primary school pupils are in their formative years and so are most open to influence.
In this unit, you will be reading about the meaning and purpose of primary education.
Primary education is made up of two words: Primary and education, which we need to briefly, explain a.
Primary The Oxford Advance Learners Dictionary explains primary as “the earliest sin time or order of development”.
A thing is at the primary stage, when it is at the beginning.
The beginning of anything is very important.
If the beginning is strong, it is unlikely that the subject may fail or die.
57PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION b.
Education Education has been defined in several ways; Education can be viewed as “a process of training and giving instructions especially to the young and inexperienced.
“It is through training and instruction that children acquire knowledge, skills, attitudes and readiness for living a better and sustaining life.
Education can be acquired either formally or informally.
Informally education is received out of school.
Children learn to clean themselves, sweep their homes even before they go to school.
Formal education is received in the school from teachers.
With set objectives established curriculum and content for study.
c. Primary Education Primary education is the education given to children in the first six years of school.
It is for the children between ages 6 and 11.
You may wonder why primary education is referred to as the first years of schooling when children had already attended the nursery and kindergarten schools before being admitted into a primary school.
Again both the nursery/kindergarten schools are usually referred to as pre-school, which means before formal education.
Formal education begins with primary education, which is the foundation of all the education systems.
As a foundation, its quality will determine the quality of the rest of it.
In fact, primary education is the substructure upon which other education levels are created.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
What does primary education means ii.
Why is primary education important?
3.2 The Purpose of Primary Education A purpose is an intention, an aim, and objective for doing something.
A purpose is intentional.
It is not accidental.
If I ask your purpose for studying this course, you may reply that it is an essential requirement for obtaining a degree in education.
3.2.1 Factors that Affect Purpose are Purposes of Education Reflect a variety of Opinions: Primary Education, like other arms of education, has purposes.
Indeed it is interesting to observe that contemporary primary education reflects a variety of opinions on what education is all about.
Take a parent for 58PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION instance; ask him why he sent his son to school.
You may be surprised at his reply.
One parent may have sent his son to learn his name like “John Bull” while another may have sent his son to school so that he would be prepared to make lots of money later in life, take good care of his father in his old age and give him a befitting burial at his death.
If the same question were to be asked a clergy man, he may reply that he wanted his son to be honest, gentle, obedient and reflective about God.
A primary school teacher may even have a different answer.
He may feel that school children are sent to him to enable him teach them well for them to pass their examination and gain admission into secondary schools.
All the purposes of education indicated by the parents, clergy man and the primary school teacher are good purposes, yet each is deficient in many other ways that should help to produce an educated primary school child.
Take the purpose stated by the parents, neither the spelling of his name nor making money on earth can give a child self actualization and happiness.
The purpose indicated by the clergy man will produce a well behaved child who may lack the ability to create, solve problems and compete effectively with his peers in a dynamic world.
The primary school teacher will eventually produce a child who may go to a secondary school but lack affection and cannot use his hands in doing manual work.
Purposes of education are desirable, valuable outcomes of education.
They are desirable and valuable because a sound education should help children develop competencies in basic knowledge, skills, attitudes and values that are socially accepted and lead to individual development irrespective of their individual differences.
3.2.2 Purposes of Purposes of Primary Education Change with Time The society we live in is dynamic and education should also be the same, because individuals function in a changing society.
During the colonial period in Nigeria, the purposes of education were to produce people who could read and write, become interpreters and catechists.
The purposes above can no longer serve the present Nigeria.
This is why purposes of education change with time to reflect the needs of a society.
3.2.3 Purposes of Primary Education are not Universal Purposes of primary education are not the same in all countries of the world, purposes of primary education in Nigeria cannot be the same with Britain.
This becomes even more pertinent, knowing that the 59PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION purposes of primary education reflect the philosophy of education in each particular country.
3.2.4 Purposes of Primary Education should be Child- Centered Purposes of primary education should address the needs of the child and not that of the teacher.
This is basically so because any planned education should modify the behavior of the child.
Its effectiveness is assessed using the child.
The personal growths of the child in the cognitive, psychomotor and affective domains are important consideration when primary education purposes are stated.
Also since he is an integral member of his society, the purpose of education should reflect his personal social needs.
All knowledge, skills, attitudes and values he acquires should relate to his intellectual, physical, aesthetic, spiritual, emotional and personal as well as his social and moral developments as a member of a social group.
3.2.5 The Educated Person The purpose of primary education is to produce educated persons.
Some important questions worth asking at this point are: who is an educated person?
Is the educated person the one who always take the first position in his class?
The one who goes to the best university, the one with lots of money, or who has a good white caller job?
None of the answers above depicts an educated man.
From what we learned in this unit, we can conclude that an educated man should have the following attributes: 1.
He should develop knowledge and skills, positive attitudes and behaviors; and values that are relevant to his personal growth and that of his society.
Some of the relevant knowledge include: a wide vocabulary, wide general (not subject based) knowledge of times and places beyond his environment, variety of skills in reading, writing, concentration, library work, doing different arts and crafts.
Playing variety of games and appreciate beauty, etc.
2.
He should be able to transfer what he learned at school and apply them appropriately in different situations where there is the need.
3.
He should practise life long education and be willing to continue to improve himself even after schooling.
4.
He must be committed in his area of specialization and defend his commitment.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Why are purposes intentional?
60PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION ii.
What are the purposes of primary education?
iii.
What factors affect the purposes of primary education?
3.3 The Purpose of Education during the Missionary Era The main aims of missionary schools were religious and vocational education or the “Bible and the People” a slogan coined from the statement of Thomas Fowell Buxton.
According to Thomas Buxton, “It is the Bible and the plough that must regenerate Africa”.
The idea of the Bible and the plough meant that in addition to literacy education that was religious in content, the Mission schools should pursue vocational training.
Also included in the aims and objective of the curricula were “the development off the local and the identification and training of leaders”.
The aims and objectives of the programme reflected the needs and aspiration of the missionaries rather than those of the society.
The aim and objective of education, however, vary from mission to mission.
Some missionaries thought education “Is necessary to enable the native to read the Bible and understand the spirit of Christianity”.
But the local chiefs themselves had different idea about the school.
They wanted the school to cater for their economic needs.
Fro example, the Bonny Chiefs told Rev.
Samuel Ajayi Crowther that they did not want any religious education for their children because they had enough at home.
They would prefer schools to teach their children how to gauge palm-oil and get involved in other mercantile businesses.
The communities wanted education objectives structure around socio-economic needs and problems of the society; but the curriculum did not emphasize this.
Generally, the purpose of education to the missionaries was to bring up devout Christians who would be able to read and understand the Bible, preach the gospel, win converts, serve as interpreters, teach in Sunday and primary schools.
They also wanted people to work in mission hospital as nurses and dispensers and serve them at home as obedient cooks and stewards.
The various mission schools differed from one another in the content of instruction in the schools.
For example, 1882, the subjects taught in majority of the primary schools under the C.M.S were scripture, English Grammar, English Composition, Mathematics, Geography, Singing, Reading, Writing, Dictation, Handwork, (Needlework, drawing, etc) Hygiene, Rural Science including practical agriculture; and for girls, sewing in addition.
The medium of instruction in the school was the local language at the lower level of primary education while English was used at the higher level.
61PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION For the Wesleyan Methodist Society, which had six elementary schools around Lagos, English and Yoruba were the medium of instruction.
The subjects taught by the Wesleyan Methodist Schools included English Composition, Writing, Arithmetic, English History, Geography, Yoruba, Composition.
In addition, girls were taught Needlework.
In Eastern Nigeria, the Presbyterian, the C.M.S, the Roman Catholic and Qua Iboe Mission schools designed content of instruction, which was basically religious in orientation though the scope of subjects covered varied.
The textbooks used were the same as those in primary schools in England.
They were planned to meet the requirements of the education code of England.
They did not reflect the Nigeria background.
Good examples were “the Queen Premier” for the teaching of Reading at the lower level of primary education and “the Oxford Reader” for the higher classes.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
What were the purpose of education of the missionaries ii.
What was the educational needs of the local Chiefs 3.4 The Purpose of Primary Education of the Regional Government The western region government made a bold attempt in granting a free universal primary education to its citizen in 1955.
During the declaration of this scheme the then western region minister of education Chief S.O.
Awokoye said, “Education development is imperative and urgent.
It must be treated as a national emergency second only to war.
It must move with the momentum of a revolution.
This universal primary education shortened the duration of primary education from eight to six years.
The U P E abolished all school fees and made promotion from one class to the other automatic.
The government did not make enrollment compulsory for all children of school age but it hoped that by January 1959 all children between the ages of six and seven years would be registered in school.
Commenting on this scheme, Babs Fafunwa said that, “the boldest and perhaps the most unprecedented educational scheme in Africa south of the Sahara was launched by an indigenous government as a meaningful demonstration of its commitment to the vital interests of the people it governed”.
The eastern region government also attempted a universal free primary education, but the scheme ran into difficulties right from the beginning and it later collapsed.
The eastern government later introduced a half – free and half fee paying system (that is the first three years are free while the last three are fee paying).
62PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION The stated or implied aims of primary education in all the states of the federation are to help the child to: a.
Master the three Rs-reading, writing and Arithmetic and thus to develop permanent literacy.
b.
Develop sound standards of individual conduct and behaviour; c. Acquire some skills and appreciate the value of manual work.
To achieve these aims, the following subjects are taught in most schools; arithmetic, physical training, history, religious instruction, geography, nature study, domestic science, needle work and cookery for girls, music and singing, art and handwork, English and the Language of the locality which is taught as a subject and used as medium of instruction for the first three years.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
List the outstanding features of the western Regional UPE scheme.
ii.
Enumerate the aims of the primary education of the regional governments.
3.5 The Purpose of Universal Primary Education Since Nigeria’s attainment of independence in 1960, educational development has been a major challenge for successive governments.
The first major nationwide Military Government, under the leadership of Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo launched the Universal Primary Education (UPE).
Before then, the development of education at the primary level, especially, was left to the states and local government.
The result was uncoordinated and haphazard development of primary education.
Consequently, many children of school age could not attend school for so many reasons, including inability of their parents to pay fees.
That of course meant that primary education during the pre-UPE era was inaccessible and unavailable to many Nigerian children.
Generally, teachers were in short supply; infrastructure was inadequate in quality, while apathy to education was experienced in many communities.
This was definitely an intolerable situation for a country hungry for development.
Worldwide, education is recognized as the most important catalyst for national development.
That explains why nations that have achieved an appreciable level of development invest massively in education.
This is in line with Nwagwu’s (1976) observation that: Today, education is universally accepted as a form of investment in human beings, which yields economic benefits or returns and 63PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION contributes to a nation’s future wealth and development by increasing the productive and consumptive capacity of its citizens.
Viewed in this way, all expenditure on education can to a great extent be justified in terms of the potential contribution of education to economic growth and national development (pp 12-13).
While education generally gives impetus to national development, basic education is its cutting edge.
That is why the world over, there has always been the concern to provide basic education to the greater majority of the people.
Basic education not only lays foundation for further education; it also equips beneficiaries with survival skills.
Against this background, it was not a surprise, therefore, that the Federal Government in 1976 singled out primary education for intervention.
This intervention among other things, attempted to make primary education free and universal throughout the federation.
The overall purpose was to boost school enrolment throughout the country and correct educational imbalances between the different parts of the country and boys and girls.
Funds were massively injected into the primary education sub-sector in such vital areas as construction pf new schools, additional classrooms and new teachers colleges, training and recruitment of teachers and provision of facilities and instructional materials.
To all intents and purpose, the UPE Programme succeeded in raising school enrolments to an all time high.
It also raised the consciousness of the populace for education.
According to Taiwo (1980), “The UPE is a great contribution to education in Africa and of immense benefit to Nigeria in mobilizing its human resources, adjusting its educational imbalance and providing for the Nigerian children equal access to education”.
In concrete terms, the UPE scheme brought about a phenomenal increase in enrolment from six million in 1976 to twelve million in 1980.
However, for many reasons, including lack of political will, subsequent governments failed to sustain the programme by building the social and physical infrastructures already established.
The result was a gradual, but steady, decline in all facets of primary education, including enrolment, attendance, quality and quantity of teachers, infrastructure and facilities.
While launching the UBE Programme in Sokoto on September 30, 1999, President Obasanjo (1999) observed, “The UPE programme was, by the middle of the 1980s, bedeviled with a number of unforeseen and avoidable difficulties, which rendered it virtually unsustainable” SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 i.
What were the factors that inhibited many children from attending school before the UPE?
64PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION ii.
Enumerate the purpose of the UPE?
iii.
Mention one of the achievements of UPE.
4.0 CONCLUSION Primary education is the foundation of the educational system it should therefore be strong since all the educational systems rest on it.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have studied about the meaning of primary education, the purpose of primary educations, the purpose of primary education during the missionary \era, the purpose of primary school in the regional government’s era and the purpose of the universal primary education.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may include that primary education is the education given to children between the ages of six and eleven.
It is the foundation of educational system.
ii.
Your answer may include that primary education is important because: - It is the level where the greatest numbers of pupils are found.
This means that the greatest effort must be put at this level in order to teach most of the pupils.
- Children are at the4 formative stager of development at the primary school age.
They are more open to influence.
- That primary school is the foundation of the educational system means that it must be strong since all the educational systems rest on it.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Purposes are intentional because they indicate reasons or aim for doing a thing.
ii.
The purpose of primary education is to help children develop competencies in basic knowledge, skills, attitudes and values that are socially accepted and for their personal growth.
iii.
The factors that affect the purpose of education are a variety of opinions of people in the society, time, place and the learner.
65PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Your answer may include that the purpose of education to the missionaries was to bring up devout Christians who would be able to read and understand the Bible, preach the gospel, win converts, serve as interpreters, teach in Sunday and primary schools.
They also wanted people to work in mission hospitals as nurses and dispensers and serve them at home as obedient cooks and stewards.
ii.
Your answer may include that the local chiefs wanted the school to cater for their economic needs.
The Bonny Chiefs for example told Reverend Samuel Ajayi Crowther that they did not want any religious education for their children because they had enough at home.
They would prefer schools to teach their children how to gauge palm-oil and get involved in other mercantile business.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Your answer may include that the outstanding features of the Western Regional UPE scheme are: - The abolition of all school fees - The automatic promotion of pupils from one class to the other.
- The shortening of the duration of primary education from eight to six years - The assumption that by January 959 all children between the ages of six and seven years would be registered in school ii.
Your answer may include that the aims of primary education of the regional/state governments are as follows:- - To help the child to master the three RS-Reading, Writing and Arithmetic and thus to develop permanent literacy.
- Develop sound standards if individual conduct and behaviour; - Acquire some skills and appreciate the value of manual work.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 i.
Your answer may include that the factors are as follow: - Development of education was left to the states and local governments - Inability of parents to pay the school fees of their children - Infrastructure was inadequate in quality.
66PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION - Apathy to education reigned in many communities - Teachers were in short supply ii.
Your answer may include that the purpose of the UPE were as follows: - To make primary education free and universal through out the federation.
- To correct the educational imbalance between the different parts of the country.
- Boost school enrolment through out the country.
- To correct the educational imbalance between boys and girls iii.
Your answer may include that two of the achievements of the UPE was the UPE succeeded in raising school enrolments to an all time high: It also raised the consciousness of the populace for education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why is primary education important?
2.
Enumerate the purpose of the UPE 3.
What were the factors that inhibited many children from attending school before the UPE?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Nwangwu, N.A.
(1976).
U P E Issues, Prospects and Problems.
Benin City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
67PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION UNIT 3 THE ORIGIN OF PRIMARY EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Back Ground to our Study 3.2 First Missionary Endeavour 3.3 Second Missionary Endeavour 3.4 Educational Practice of the Missions 3.5 Government Involvement 3.5.1 Regionalization 3.5.2 The World Bank Mission 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learnt about the meaning of primary education the purpose of primary education, the purpose of primary education during the missionary era, the purpose of primary school in the regional government era, and the universal primary education.
In this unit you will learn about the origin of primary school, first missionary endeavour in establishment of primary school the second edeavour, of the missionaries in establishment of primary schools, the educational practice of the missionaries and government involvement in primary education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: 1. explain the origin of primary school in Nigeria; 2. describe the first missionary endeavour in establishing primary school; 68PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3. describe the second missionary endeavour in establishing primary school; 4. explain the educational practices of the missionaries; and 5. describe government involvement in primary education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Background to Educational System Nigeria is a federation of thirty six states with an area of 924,000 square kilometers (356,669 square miles) and a population of 140, 300000.
Nigeria is thus the most populated country in Africa.
This population is an important resource for national development; but human resources without training cannot be regarded as contribution to national development.
Education is therefore very crucial to development as it helps to develop the human resources for the exploitation of the natural resources.
Nigeria’s population is diversified.
There are over 250 different cultural groups with distinct linguistic characteristics.
The largest among these are Hausa, Ibo and Yoruba.
Beside the cultural and linguistic differences, there are also religious differences.
Islam and Christianity are the two major religions of the people and the both play major roles in the development and course of education in Nigeria.
A third religion, the traditional religion, otherwise known as animism was the original religion of Nigeria before introduction of Christianity and Islam.
Animism is still practiced by a good number of Nigerians.
Although it is now the smallest of the three religions of Nigeria, it is nevertheless embedded in the culture of the people and its beliefs and practices are in the background of a substantial number of people who have accepted and practice both the Christian and Islamic faiths.
Another factor that has influenced the development of education in this country is the state of the economy, which itself is influence by political factor.
Efforts made by Government in the development of education have been based on the availability of funds and on the ordering of priorities for development.
The discovery of oil in Nigeria in the 1960s has shifted the thrust of the Nigeria economy from agriculture to petroleum.
Before then Nigeria was the first world producer of groundnut and only second to Ghana in the production of cocoa.
Farmers became rich from cocoa, groundnuts, palm oil and other agricultural products and were able to send their children to school in spite of the high cost of schooling.
Government too was able to realize 69PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION tax and other revenue from fairly well-do-do farmers to pursue the development of education.
In the meantime educated Nigeria’s manned the offices where these agricultural products were sorted out for export to oversea countries.
They also worked in Government offices.
Other educated Nigeria’s engaged in trading, which was predominated by illiterate men and women who shared the business with Lebanese and Indians.
Many of these businessmen and women required little or no education; anyone who had been to school and knows how to read and write figures was employable as a clerk to these traders.
These clerks were the beneficiaries of early schools.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Mention three factors that influenced the development of education in Nigeria ii.
Name three type of activities educated Nigerian’s are engaged in.
3.2 First Missionary Activities As early as 1472 the Portuguese, in search of commerce, had visited parts of what is now known as Nigeria.
In their search for commerce the Portuguese realized that they needed to communicate with the people in a common language and share a common faith with their customers; consequently, the Portuguese decided to introduce the Christian religion (the Roman Catholic Faith) to their customers and to establish schools in which instructions would be carried out for the education of their customers’ children in order to facilitate communication.
The Portuguese visited Benin and Lagos at the beginning of their religious and commercial activities.
By 1515 Catholic Missionary activities had started in Benin and a school had been established in the palace of the Oba of Benin, for the sons of both the Oba and his Chiefs.
At the same time the Portuguese established trading posts in Lagos and Benin.
The trading posts in Lagos assumed so such prominence that the Portuguese named Lagos after a similarly important port in Portugal, port Lagos (“Lago” in Portuguese language means “Lagoon”).
The Portuguese also established trading posts, churches and schools at Brass and Warri.
About a century after the inception of its activities in what is now Nigeria (1571) the Portuguese established a Seminary on the Island of Sao Thome off the coast of Nigeria.
The purpose of this Seminary was to train Africans as Priests and teachers to man the churches and schools that were being established.
The Priest and teachers produced at the 70PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Seminary visited Warri, established more schools and preached the gospel.
The original commercial aim of the Portuguese was to trade spice from India; but they soon discovered that trading in human beings was more profitable than trading in other commodities.
The slave trade went on for over three centuries along the coast of West Africa among other places and the major participants in West Africa were the Portuguese, the French, the British, the Dutch and the Danes.
While the slave trade was going on it overshadowed the educational and religious activities of the Portuguese to the extent that the Roman Catholic influence had almost totally disappeared before the end of the slave trade.
When trade in human beings came under fire in Europe in the late 18th century and early 19th century, the European slave traders began to re- examine their continued stay in West Africa should the slave trade come to an end.
In preparation for such an eventuality explorers were sent out to trace4 the sources and courses of the major rivers of West Africa.
The thinking was that if the trade in slave stopped, it would no longer be possible to stay along the coast to trade; it would be necessary to go to the hinterland to explore the possibility of trading in other commodities nicknamed “legitimate” commodities.
They thought that it would be necessary to become familiar with the interior of Wes Africa and their inhabitants and make friends with them.
River Niger is the main river that flows across most of West Africa.
It was first explored by Mungo Park at the end of the 18th century, followed by Clapperton and the Lander brothers.
At the end of these explorations, the Europeans were reasonably sure of the source and course, of the river Niger most of which lies within what is now known as Nigeria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
What were the aims of the missionaries in their establishment of schools?
ii.
What was the major factor that led to the collapse missionaries activities of the early missionaries.
3.3 Second Missionary Endeavour In 1833, the slave trade was abolished.
The results of the exploration of the Niger River were already known in Europe.
Thus the Europeans were making preparation for a new thrust in their activities.
In 1842, the 71PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Wesleyan Missionary Society sent Rev.
Thomas Birch Freeman and Mr. & Mrs. William de Graft to Badagry on 24th September, 1842, in 1843, the Wesleyan Missionary Society started its first school in Badagry; this was then the first school in Nigeria since the Portuguese earlier efforts.
On December 19th 1842, less than three months after Wesleyan Mission, the Church Missionary Society (CMS) sent Mr. Henry Townsend to Badagry on his way to Abeokuta for data collection in preparation for missionary activities in Nigeria, Henry Townsend arrived at Abeokuta on 4th January 1843 three weeks after the arrival in the same town of Birch freeman of the Wesleyan mission.
It is ironical that the Wesleyan Mission arrived at both Badagry and Abeokuta before the Church Missionary Society, which was destined to play a more prominent role in missionary and educational activities in Nigeria.
After the initial exploratory visit of Henry Townsend (later Rev.
Townsend), in April 1844, Rev.
Samuel Ajayi Crowther and Rev.
C.A.
Gollmer were sent with Rev.
Townsend to Abeokuta for the purpose of establishing the Yoruba Mission using Abeokuta as their base.
The three the Missionaries were however unable to go straight to Abeokuta because of the death of king Sodeke of Abeokuta, they then stopped at Badagry to build a church, a school and a Mission house.
They finally arrived at Abeokuta on 3rd August 1846; that same year they opened two schools, one for boys and the other for girls.
In 1848, the Wesleyan Mission as a follow-up on their exploratory visit of 1842 sent Mr. Morgue to Abeokuta to establish a mission.
Mr. Edward Bickersteth who became the sole Wesleyan Agent in Abeokuta for the next one-decade later relieved him.
In 1846, a third mission, the Presbyterian Mission established a station at Calabar while the Southern Baptist Convention opened a mission at Ijaye to bring the number of Mission in Nigeria to four.
In 1853, the fifth mission, the Society of African Missions arrived in Lagos from Dahomey (now Republic of Benin), also to establish a mission.
The aim of all these mission was well summarized in a book written by Rev.
T.J. Bowen, a pioneer American Baptist Missionary when he declared in 1852: “Our designs and hopes in regard to Africa are not simply to bring as many individuals as possible to the knowledge of Christ.
We desire to establish the Gospel in the hearts and minds and social life of the people, so that truth and righteousness may remain and flourish among them, without the instrumentality of foreign Missionaries.
This cannot be done without civilization.
To establish the Gospel among any people, they 72PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION must have Bibles and therefore must have the art to make them or the money to buy them.
They must read the Bible and this implies instruction” In 1851 the British Government sent an expedition under Commodore Bruce to conquer Lagos.
John Beecroft was made the British Consul for Lagos.
John Beecroft soon after assuming office invited the Church Missionary Society from Badagry to Lagos to set up a mission.
In response to this invitation, James White was sent to represent the CMS while the Wesleyan Mission sent John A. Martin.
They both began missionary activities and opened schools in both Lagos and the interior of the Yorubaland.
By 1856, the CMS had established schools with pupil population of 256 in Lagos and 549 in the Yorubaland.
In 1855 the Southern Baptist Convention opened in Lagos its first school, which became the nucleus of Baptist Academy.
The Roman Catholics too made their impact felt in Lagos.
Before 1860 a large number of emancipated Africans from Brazil had settled in Lagos; they were active in Roman Catholic evangelical work.
“Padre” Antonio started as the founder of the Catholic Church in Nigeria arrived in Lagos to discover that there were already about 3000 Catholics in the area.
In 1868, the Roman Catholic Mission opens its first school in Lagos since earlier Portuguese Missionary activities.
As mentioned earlier, the Presbyterian Mission in 1846 established a station at Calabar.
Rev.
Hope Waddell who was himself accompanied by Mr. Edgerly represented the Mission.
The Eastern side of the river Niger was further opened up by the CMS in 1857 when it established schools at Gbebe and Onitsha under the leadership of Rev.
S.A. Crowther and Rev.
J.C. Taylor.
They opened more schools at Idda, Akassa and Bonny.
By 1867 about 50 children were in attendance in six schools.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Describe the events that led to the establishment of the first school in Nigeria after the slave trade.
ii.
What are the names of the missions that established schools in Lagos by 1868?
3.4 Educational Practice of the Missions Although the various missions adopted different approaches to the implementation of their policies, they all seemed to agree that literacy education should regarded as an integral part of their work; they also seemed to have agreed that missionary education should aim at converting the children to Christianity thus creating a society in which the village teacher was also the evangelist.
73PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION In the process of implementing their educational policies the missions faced some problem; firstly there were no central school laws and there were no standards for running the schools; varying techniques were adopted for schools management.
Secondly there were no standard qualifications for teachers; there were no regulations guiding the movements of teachers and children who came to school and left school during the school hours at will.
Thirdly there was disagreement over the concept of school between the Missionaries and many of the parents who thought that their children already had enough religious instruction at home and that it was a misplacement of emphasis for the missions to concentrate on religious instructions; instead of this the parents wanted concentration on practical education that would prepare the children for activities at home so that they could be respectful and be more serviceable to their parents.
Fourthly there was inadequate finance; the schools were maintained by the local missions with occasional donations from abroad; the missions were forced to charge fees at one stage much against their wish.
Lack of adequate funds also affected teachers and no training colleges; the problem of funds and shortage of teachers was acute that some schools had to be closed down.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Name two of the problems face by the missions in the process of implementing their educational polices.
ii.
Describe one of these problems.
3.5 Government Involvement 3.5.1 Regionalization In 1951 the McPherson constitution was introduced in Nigeria.
This constitution provided for democratic election to the regional houses of assembly, empowered each region to raise and appropriate funds, and more importantly, had power to pass laws on education, health, agriculture and local government.
With the regionalization in 1951 and the rise of three major political parties to power in each f the three regions in 1952, intensive political rivalry developed and each party tried to out do the other in providing social amenities of its own area of jurisdiction.
The Eastern and Western regional governments headed by the N.C.N.C.
and Action Group respectively placed highest priority on education.
3.5.2 The World Bank Mission 74PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION At the request of government of Nigeria and the United Kingdom the international Bank for Reconstruction and Development organized a mission to Nigeria in 1953.
The mission was: “To assess the resources available for future development, to study the possibilities for development in the major sectors of the economy and to make recommendations for practical steps to be taken including the timing and co-ordination of development activities.” The fact that the Mission’s report was operated mainly as the Nigerian National Development plan from 1955 to 1960 shows how important it was.
It was also significant that it came on the eve of Nigeria’s political independence; it thus prepared the country’s economy for this important landmark.
The Education Plan of the Mission followed the Ten-Year Education Plan which had ended in 1954 and thus provide for continuity in Nigerian educational development.
The Mission noted the remarkable demand for education in Nigeria and warned that there was danger of an enrolment explosion at the primary level if it was not backed up with equally rapid enrolment in the training of teachers.
The Mission observed that “The problem is to provide a proper balance between the urge for rapid expansion of educational facilities and the need to maintain adequate standards of instruction”.
The two events, the Regionalization of Education and the World Bank Mission precede the launching of Free Universal Primary Education in the Western Region in 1955, in the Eastern Region in 1957 and in the Federal Territory in 1957.
4.0 CONCLUSION Primary education, which is the foundation of formal education, has passed through various stages of development since its inception in Nigeria and has finally changed into universal Basic Education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have studied about: • The origin of primary school in Nigeria.
• The first Missionary endeavor to establish primary school in Nigeria.
• The second Missionary endeavor to establish primary school in Nigeria.
• The educational practices of the Missionaries.
75PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION • Government involvement in primary education.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may include that the factors are as follows: - Region- The Christian and Islamic region has plaid major roles in the development of education in Nigeria - The state of the economy of this nation has plaid important role in development of education in this country.
- The third factor is the efforts made by government in the development of education.
ii.
Your answer may include that educated Nigerian’s are engaged in the following activities: - Educated Nigerian’s manned the offices where agricultural products were sorted out for export to oversea countries.
- They work in government offices.
- They engaged in trading.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that the aims of the missionaries was to use school to convert the people to Christianity.
ii.
Your answer may include that the major factor is the slave trade ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Your answer may include that in 833, he trade was abolished.
The result of the exploration of the Niger River was already known in Europe.
As a result the European prepared for a new thrust in their activities.
In 842, the Wesleyan Missionary Society sent Rev.
Thomas Birch freeman and Mr. And Mrs. William de Graft to Badagry.
In 843, the Wesleyan Missionary Society started its first school in Badagry, this was then the first school in Nigeria since the Portuguese earlier efforts.
ii.
your answer may include that the names of the missions that established schools in Lagos by 1868 were: - Church Missionary Society - Wesley Missionary Society - The Southern Baptist Convention 76PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION - The Roman Catholic Mission ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Your answer may include that two of the problems faced by missions in the process of implementing their educational policies are as follows: - There were no central laws - There were no standards for running the schools - There was disagreement over the concept of school between the missionaries and many of the parents - There was inadequate finance.
ii.
Your answer may include that one of these problems was lack of finance.
The schools were maintained by the local missions with occasional donations from abroad, the missions were forced to charge fees at one stage much against their wish.
Lack of adequate funds also affected the availability of adequately qualified personnel; there were no trained teachers and no training colleges; the problem of funds and shortage of teachers were so acute that some schools had to be closed down.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the events that led to the establishment of the first school in Nigeria after the slave trade.
2.
What are some of the problems faced by the missionaries in the process of implementing some of their educational policies?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Babs, Faunwa (1974).
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Adewumi, Fajana (1958).
Education in Nigeria.
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development of Nigeria report of A Mission.
Bultimore.
The John Hopkins Press 1955.
77PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION UNIT 4 BASIC OUTLINE OF THE NATIONAL POLICY ON NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Philosophy and Goals of Education in Nigeria 3.2 General Objectives of Primary Education in Nigeria 3.3 Curricular Activities for Primary Education in Nigeria 3.3.1 Ways Government Proposes to Pursue the Objectives of Primary Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learnt about the origin of primary school in Nigeria, the first missionary endeavour in establishing primary school, the second missionary endeavour in establishing primary school, the educational practices of the missionaries and government involvement in primary education.
In this unit you will study about the philosophy and Goals of education in Nigeria, measures taken by government to implement the policy, general objectives of primary education in Nigeria, curricular activities for primary education in Nigeria, ways government proposes to pursue the objective of primary education in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By thee end of this unit you should be able to do the following: • list the five main national goals of the National policy on education; • list the general objectives of primary education in Nigeria; • list the curricular activities prescribed for primary school in the National policy on Education; and • discuss the ways government proposes to pursue the objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
78PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophy and Goals of Education in Nigeria The importance of education in National development can never be over emphasized.
Children must be educated in a social environment to be useful to both themselves and to the Nation.
Educating them along these lines cannot be left to chance.
The government must make and adopt statements of ideal, a plan of action with due consideration to all the interested people, the learner, parent ands various researchers in education for instance in order to guide educational practice.
This plan of action is called the National Policy on Education.
At present the National Policy on Education was revised in 2004 the New National policy on Education is a document with thirteen sections.
Primary education policy is found in section four of this document.
1.
A nation’s policy on education is government’s way of realizing that part of these national goals, which can be achieved using education as a tool.
No policy on education, however, can be formulated without first identifying the overall philosophy and goals of the nation.
2.
The overall philosophy of Nigeria is to: a. live in unity and harmony as one indivisible, indissoluble, democratic and sovereign nation founded on the principles of freedom equality and justice; b.
Promote inter-Africa solidarity and world peace through understanding.
3.
The five main national goals of Nigeria, which have been endorsed as the necessary foundation for the National Policy on education, are the building of: - a. a free and democratic society; b. a just and egalitarian society; c. a united, strong and self-reliant nation; d. a great and dynamic economy; e. a land full of bright opportunities for all citizens.
4.
In Nigeria’s philosophy of Education, we believe that: a.
Education is an instrument for national development, and the interaction of persons and ideas are all aspects of education: 79PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION b.
Education fosters the worth and development of the individual, for each individual’s sake, and for the general development of the society.
c. Every Nigerian child shall have a right to equal educational opportunities irrespective of any real or imagined disabilities each according to his or her ability; d. There is need for functional education for the promotion of a progressive, united Nigeria; to this end, school programmes need to be relevant, practical and comprehensive; while interest and ability should determine the individual’s direction in education.
5.
Nigeria’s philosophy of education therefore is based on: a.
The development of the individual into a sound and effective citizen b.
The full integration of the individual into the community; and c. The provision of equal access to educational opportunities for all citizens of the country at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels both inside and outside the formal school system.
6. for the philosophy to be in harmony with Nigeria’s national goals, education has to be geared towards self realization, better human relationship, individual and national efficiency, effective citizenship, national consciousness, national unity, as well as towards social, cultural, economic, political, scientific and technological progress.
7.
The national educational goals, which derive from the philosophy, are therefore: a.
The inculcation of national consciousness and national unity; b.
The inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society; c. The training of the mind in the understanding of the world around; and d. The acquisition of appropriate skills and the development of mental, physical and social abilities and competencies as equipment for the individual to live and contribute to the development of the society.
8.
In consequence, the quality of instruction at all levels has to be oriented towards inculcating the following values: a.
Respect for the worth and dignity of the individual; b.
Faith in man’s ability to make rational decisions; c. Moral and spiritual principle in inter-personal and human relations; 80PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION d. Shared responsibility for the common good of society; e. Promotion of the physical, emotional and psychological development of all children; and f. Acquisition of competencies necessary for self-reliance.
9.
In order to realize fully the potentials of the contributions of education to the achievement of these goals and values, all other agencies will operate in concert with education.
To that end, government shall take various measures to implement the policy.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List the main National goals of the National policy on education 3.2 General Objectives of Primary Education in Nigeria The policy explains what primary education means.
According to this document, primary education is the education given in institutions for children aged 6 to 11 plus.
Since the rest of the education system is built upon it, the primary level is the key to the success or failure of the whole system.
The duration shall be six years.
Number 18 of the same document states the general objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
It is important that you read and study these objectives.
They are as follows: a.
To inculcate permanent literacy and innumeracy, and ability to communicate effectively; b.
To lay a sound basis for scientific and reflective thinking; c. To give citizenship education as a basis for effective participation in and contribution to the life of the society; d. To mould the character and develop sound attitude and morals in the child; e. To develop in the child the ability to adapt to the child’s changing environment; f. To give the child opportunities for developing manipulative skills that will enable the child function effectively in the society within the limits of the child’s capacity; g. To provide he child with basic tools for further educational advancement, including preparation for trades and crafts of the locality.
81PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION These goals will form the basis of primary education in all he states of the Federation.
In pursuance of the goals above: a.
Primary education shall be tuition free, universal and compulsory.
b. Curriculum for primary education shall include: i.
Languages: ii.
Language of the environment iii.
English iv.
French v. Arabic vi.
Mathematics vii.
Science viii.
Physical and Health Education ix Religious Knowledge x. Agriculture/Home Economics xi.
Social Studies and Citizenship Education xii Cultural & Creative Arts (Drawing, Handicraft, Music and Cultural Activities) xiii.
Computer Education SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the general objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
3.3 Curricular Activities for Primary Education in Nigeria The national policy on Education of the federal republic of Nigeria (2004) recommends that the following curricular activities for primary education in Nigeria be practiced.
a.
Primary education shall be tuition free, universe and compulsory.
b. Curriculum for primary education shall include; c. The following educational services shall be provided: - School library; - Basic health scheme; - Counseling; - Educational resource centre; - Specialist teachers of particular subjects such as mathematics, Science, Physical Education, Language Arts (in relation to 82PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION English, French, Sign Language and Nigerian Languages), Librarian, music, Fine Art and Home Economics.
d. Teaching shall be by practical, exploratory and experimental methods.
3.3.1 Ways Government Proposes to Pursue the Objectives of Primary Education in Nigeria The National Policy proposes that the following educational services shall be provided: i.
School library; ii.
Basic health scheme; iii.
Counseling; iv.
Educational resources; v. Specialist teachers of particular subjects such as Mathematics, Science, Physical Education, Language Art (in relation to English, French, Sign Language and Nigeria Language), Librarian, Music, Fine Art and Home Economics.
e. Teaching shall be by practical, exploratory and experimental methods.
f. The medium of instruction in the primary school shall be the language of the environment for the first three years.
During this period, English shall be taught as a subject.
g. From the fourth, year, English shall progressively be used as a medium of instruction and the language of immediate environment and French shall be taught as subjects.
h. For effective teaching and learning, the teacher-pupil ratio shall be 1:35 i.
Advancement from one class to another shall be based on continuous assessment.
j.
The primary school leaving Certificate shall be based only on continuous assessment and shall be issued locally by the head teacher of the school.
k. With a view to correcting the imbalance between different parts of the country, with reference to the availability of educational facilities and the number of pupils receiving formal education and girls education : i.State government shall ensure the integration of formal basic education curriculum into koranic and Islamiya School.
ii.
Special efforts shall be made by all appropriate agencies to encourage parents to send their daughters to school.
83PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION l. Everything possible shall be done to discourage the incidence of dropping out at the primary level of education.
However, if this occurs, provision shall be made in the context of adult and non-formal education to enable such early leavers to continue with their education.
2.
Government welcomes the contributions of voluntary agencies, communities and private individuals in the establishment and management of primary schools alongside those provided by the state and local government as long as they meet the minimum standards laid down by the federal government.
3.
In recognition of the prominent role of information and communication technology in advancing knowledge and skills necessary for effective functioning in the modern world there is urgent need to integrate Information and Communication Technology (ICT) into education in Nigerian.
4.
Government shall therefore provide basic infrastructure and training for the realization of this goal at the primary school level.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List four ways the Federal Republic of Nigeria Propose to pursue the objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION The National Policy on education is governments statement of ideal, a plan of action with due consideration to all the interested people: the learner, parents and various researchers in education etc in order to guide the educational practices.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit your have studied about: • Philosophy and Goals of educations in Nigeria.
• Measures taken by Government to implement the policy.
• General objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
• Curricular activities for primary education in Nigeria.
• Ways government proposes to pursue the Objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Your answer may include that thee five main national goals of thee National policy on education are as follows: 84PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION i.A free and democratic society ii.A just and egalitarian society iii.A united, strong and self reliant nation iv.A great and dynamic economy v.A land full of bright opportunity for all citizens.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Your answer may include that the general objectives of primary education is as follows ii.Lay a sound basis for scientific and reflective thinking; iii.Give citizenship education as a basis for effective participation in and contribution to the life of the society; iv.Inculcation permanent literacy and numeracy, and ability to communicate effectively; v.Mound the character and develop sound attitude and morals in the child; vi.Develop in the child the ability to adopt to the child’s changing environment; vii.Give the child opportunities for developing manipulative skills that will enable the child function effectively in the society within the limits of the child’s capacity; viii.Provide the child with basic tools for further educational advancement, including preparation for trades and crafts of the locality.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Your answer may include that the four ways the federal republic of Nigeria proposed to pursue the objectives are as follows: i.The provision of school library ii.The provision of basic health scheme iii.The provision of counseling services iv.The provision of educational resource centre 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List three of the measures taken by government to implement the National Policy on Education.
2.
List the general objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Republic of Nigeria, National Policy on Education (2004).
85PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Mkpa, M.A.
in Mkpa A Mkpa and Ekenna C.C.
(ed.)
(992).
UNIT 5 UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Scope of Universal Basic Education 3.1.1 Aims of Basic Education 3.1.2 Rational 3.1.3 Shortcomings 3.1.4 Components of the Scheme 3.1.5 Implementation Approaches and Strategies 3.1.6 Adequate Planning 3.2 The Definition and Objective of Mass Literacy Civic Education 3.2.1 Definition of Literacy 3.2.2 General Objectives of Mass Literacy 3.2.3 Target Groups 3.2.4 Specific Objectives of Mass Literacy-Primary School-Age Children 3.2.5 Specific Objectives of Mass Literacy for Adults-15 Years and above 3.3.
Operating Non-Formal Education Programme Policies 3.3.1 The Legal Basis of NFBE Programme 3.4 Female and Girl Child Education 3.4.1 Government Intervention on Female/Girl-Child Education 3.4.2 Factors Affecting Female/Girl Child Education 3.4.3 Strategies for Promoting Female/Girl Child Education 3.5 The Role of Teaches in the UBE 3.5.1 Production of Primary School Teachers 3.5.2 Production of Junior Secondary School Teachers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 86PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION In the last unit you learnt about the philosophy and goals of education in Nigeria, measures taken by government to implement the policy, general objectives of primary education in Nigeria, curricular activities for primary education in Nigeria and ways government proposes to pursue the objectives of primary education in Nigeria.
In this unite you will study about the meaning and scope of Universal Basic Education, the definition and objectives of mass literacy and civic education, operating non-formal education, Female and Girl-child education in Nigeria.
The roles of teachers in the Universal Basic Education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain the meaning and the scope of universal Basic Education; • describe the production of teachers for the Universal Basic Education; • explain Non-Formal Basic Education; • describe the female and Girl child education in Nigeria; and • explain the factors effecting female and Girl child education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Scope of Universal Basic Education Basic Education is the foundation for sustainable life-long learning.
It provides reading, writing and numeracy skills.
It comprises a wide variety of formal and non-formal educational activities and programmes designed to enable learners to acquire functional literacy.
In the Nigerian context, basic education includes primary, junior secondary and nomadic education as well as adult literacy.
The Scope and Objectives are listed as Follows: 1 (a) SCOPE 1(b) OBJECTIVES (i) Programmes/initiatives for (i) Developing in the entire early childhood care citizenry a strong consciousness socialization; for and a commitment to its vigorous promotion; (ii) The provision of free, universal (ii) Education programmes for the basic education for every Nigeria acquisition of functional literacy, child of school-going age; 87PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION numeracy and life skills; especially for adults (persons aged 5 and above); (iii) Reducing drastically the (iii) Out-of-school, non-formal incidence of drop-out from the programmes for updating the formal school system (through knowledge and skill of persons improved relevance, quality, and who left school before acquiring efficiency); the basics needed for life-long learning; (iv) Catering for the learning needs (iv) Special programmes for of young persons who, of one nomadic populations; reason or another, have had to interrupt their schooling through approaches to the provision and promotion of basic education; (v) Ensuring the acquisition of the (v) Non-formal skills and appropriate levels of literacy, apprenticeship training for numeracy, manipulative, adolescents and youth who have communicative, and life skills as not had the benefit of formal well as the ethical, moral and civic education; values needed for laying a solid foundation for life-long learning.
(vi) The formal school system from the beginning of primary education to the end of the junior secondary school.
This new conception of basic education is likely to have the following implications for the management of UBE, especially in terms of articulation (i.e.)
having a holistic view of the entire basic education spectrum), in its vertical and horizontal dimensions iii.1.1 Aims of Basic Education Basic education is aimed at equipping individuals with such knowledge, skills and attitudes that will enable them to: a.
Live meaningful and fulfilling lives; b.
Contribute to the development of the society; c. Derive maximum social, economic and cultural benefits from the society; and d. Discharge their civic obligation competently.
iii.1.2 Rationale 88PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Nigeria is a signatory to the 1990 Jomtiem Declaration of Education for all by the year 2000 and also a member of the Group of E-9 nations committed to the total eradication of illiteracy.
In spite of this, the nation’s literacy rate is presently estimated to be 52%.
Education statistics for 1996 shows that only 14.1 million children are enrolled in primary schools out of the 21 million children of school-going age.
The completion rate was 64% while the rate of transition to Junior Secondary School was 43.5%.
There is overwhelming evidence that these vital literacy indicators have not improved.
3.1.3 Shortcomings There are substantial shortcomings in Nigeria’s institutional and personnel capacities for the delivery of a sound basic education for all citizens.
There are also widespread disparities both in quality and access across the nation.
Available infrastructural facilities, teaching and learning materials as well as qualified teachers are grossly inadequate.
For Nigeria to attain the desired 100% national literacy rate soon, it is imperative that provisions are made and actions taken to universalize basic education enthrone a conducive learning environment and improve quality and standards.
The Universal Basic Education (UBE) scheme is designed to address these challenges.
Goals and Objectives of the UBE Scheme: The goals of the UBE scheme are to universalize access to basic education, engender a conducive learning environment and eradicate illiteracy in Nigeria within the shortest possible time.
The specific objectives of the scheme are to: a.
Develop in the entire citizenry a strong consciousness for education and a strong commitment to its vigorous promotion; b.
Provide free, compulsory universal basic education for every Nigeria child of schooling-going age; c. Reduced drastically drop-out rate from the formal school system through improved relevance and efficiency; d. Cater for drop-outs and out-of school children/adolescents through various forms of complementary approaches to the provision and promotion of basic education; e. Ensure the acquisition of the appropriate level of literacy, numeracy, manipulative and life skills (as well as the ethical, moral and civic values) needed for laying the foundation for life- long learning.
89PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.1.4 Components of the Scheme There are three components of the UBE scheme, namely: a.
Formal basic education encompassing the first nine years of schooling (primary and Junior Secondary education) for all children; b. Nomadic education for school-age children of pastoral nomads and migrant fishermen; and c. Literacy and non-formal education for out-of-school children, youth illiterate adults.
3.1.5 Implementation Approaches and Strategies The following approaches and operational strategies will be adopted for the successful implementation of the UBE scheme: a.
Enactment of necessary legislation; b. Articulation of enabling policies; c. Sensitization and mobilization of the target groups and all stakeholders; d. Adequate funding; e. Optimal allocation and efficient utilization of resources; f. Adequate teacher training, recruitment and motivation; g. Effective co-ordination of activities; h. Encouragement and stimulation of the active participation of the private sector, non-governmental and voluntary organizations, as well as local communities in the scheme; i.
Establishment of working partnerships and collaboration with the international community and donor agencies; and j.
Regular supervision, monitoring and evaluating of the scheme.
3.1.6 Adequate Planning The initial planning for the implementation of the scheme was done on the basis of the data currently available as contained in this document.
For the year 2000/2001 the additional number of pupils to be accommodated for the UBE primary one class will be in the region of 1.2 million pupils.
At the rate of 40 pupils per class this will be the provision of 280,000 additional classrooms.
Assuming we have adequate teachers in the existing schools, these pupils will still require a minimum of 280,000 teachers, that is, at the ration of 1 teacher per 40 pupils.
Details of funding requirement are being worked out on the basis 90PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION of the available figure and the returns that are coming in from the State Government that regional distribution on the requirement will be arrived at.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
List the aims of Basic education ii.
Enumerate the component of the scheme 3.2 The Definition and Objective of Mass Literacy and Civic Education Basically, the objectives of mass literacy are consistent with the philosophy of life-long education as the basis for the nation’s educational policy.
The main thrust of the programme is liberalization of all citizens of Nigeria.
3.2.1 Definition of Literacy In the context of the Mass Literacy Policy, the operational definition of literacy entails the ability to possess the basic skills of reading, writing (at least in the mother tongue) and to calculate numbers for everyday use.
The mass nature of this endeavour makes it all-encompassing, involving all segments of our population (Adults and Children), and covers a wide range of activities and programmes that share a common objective of making this nation a completely literate society within the next decade.
3.2.2.1 General Objectives of Mass Literacy Within the spirit of mass literacy by the shortest time possible, the general objectives of the policy in Nigeria include: a.
Increase awareness of the importance literacy and soliciting the participation and cooperation of all persons in the task of literacy for all by the year 2010. b.
Developing literacy programmes for young people and adults with special attention to disadvantaged groups like women, the disabled, and rural settlers among others.
c. Mobilizing other social, economic and political sectors of our public life in the task of eradicating illiteracy within the shortest possible time.
91PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION d. Eliminating disparities in access to education and reducing wastages.
e. Highlighting the impediments to implementing the Universal Primary Education Scheme and mass expansion of literacy by sensitizing public opinion on the need to surmount these obstacles.
f. Marshalling new resources and providing less expensive forms of education through improvement in the planning and management of education.
g. Promoting post-literacy activities so as to help create conditions conducive to the general fulfillment of the potentials of individuals.
h. Developing resources materials suitable for the realization of the new goals.
Thus, the bedrock of the policy objective of mass literacy is to ensure universal enrolment for all school-age children and ate the same time; provide reading and writing skills to all adults and young people who missed the opportunity for effective schooling or formal education in their formative years.
3.2.3 Target Groups The notable groups for this policy objective include the following: a. School-age children 6-11 who are brought within the fold of formal schooling.
b.
Adults and young people who are beyond school age but never had the grasp of the rudiments of reading and writing.
c. Premature school dropout who never stayed to acquire permanent literacy for effective work.
3.2.4 Specific Objective of Mass Literacy-Primary School-Age Children The objectives of mass literacy for children age 6-11 years or over, are in consonance with the general objectives of primary education as enunciated in the National Policy on Education which include: a.
The inculcation of permanent literacy and numeracy, and the ability to communicate effectively.
92PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION b.
The laying of a sound basis for scientific and reflective thinking.
c. The promotion of citizenship education as a basis for effective participation and contribution to the life of the society.
d. Character and moral training and the development of sound attitudes.
e. Developing in the child the ability to adapt to his changing environment.
f. Giving the child opportunities for developing manipulative skills that would enable him to function effectively in the society within the limits of his capacity.
g. Providing basic tools to further educational advancement including preparation for trades and crafts of the locality.
These objectives will continue to guide the general policy of Basic Education in the spirit of the mass literacy plan, Universal Free and Compulsory Basic Education Scheme forms the basis for universal enrolment.
To ensure that educational opportunities are equitably distributed without prejudice, sex, religion, socio-economic status and geographic placement.
In pursuance of the objectives of the Universal Basic Education Scheme, all the three tiers of government are vested with responsibility for funding Basic Education.
The move is intended to remove the economic barriers that deter easy access to educational facilities.
3.2.5 Specific Objectives of Mass Literacy for Adults-15 Years and Above Literacy for adults falls within the broad spectrum of Ault and Non- Formal Education.
Its specific goal revolves round the acquisition of basic skills of reading, writing and computation, in the context of policy for mass literacy.
The following programmes forms the major areas of focus: a.
Basic Literacy This is an educational programme primarily designed to equip the recipients with the basic skills of reading, writing and computation.
The training at this level will be designed and carried out in local languages and as much as possible, in the mother tongue of the specific participants.
The idea here is to equip the recipients to have a grasp of the basic skills of communication with which to expand their knowledge and understanding of their environment.
93PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION b. Functional Literacy Programmes under this category combine teaching of literacy and training in some vocational skills.
The idea is to equip participants with skills that may provide them with some employment opportunities on completion of straining.
It is envisaged that the economic incentive may entice the adult participants to persevere and learn what is potentially useful to their socio-economic life.
c. Post Literacy This is an organized training in the basic subjects of education to prepare learners who may wish to enter the formal school system at Junior Secondary School or its equivalent.
d. Remedial Education The remedial education programmes are intended for people who prematurely terminate their education in the formal education system without acquiring skills that guarantee permanent literacy.
All these programmes will be intensively pursued through the sustained efforts of various centers for adult education.
However, in the context of mass literacy by this administration, the primary policy is to expose and ensure that all Nigeria adults have acquired at least basic literacy which guarantees ability to read, write and compute numbers and encouraged the learner perform his/her civic duties effectively.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Mention any three of the general objectives of mass literacy ii.
Enumerate the target group for the policy objective 3.3 Operating Non-Formal Education Programme Policies Non-formal education (NFBE) Programme The NFBE Programme is a community education programme providing basic education service equivalent to primary Education for learners who for one reason or another cannot enroll in the primary Education or its equivalent, drop-outs from primary education or its equivalent.
3.3.1 The Legal Basis of NFBE Programme 94PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION a.
The UNESCO declaration of human rights adopted by the United Nations in 1950 asserted that everyone has a right to basic Education.
b.
The 1979 Nigeria Constitution and the present draft constitution support the position of the United Nations.
The implementation NFBE Programme a. NFBE Programme is needed because there are so many school age children who are not going to school and primary education dropouts.
b.
There are primary school-age children who for one reason or another i.e.
geographic, economic, cultural etc.
find it impossible to enroll in the in the formal school system.
The targets of NFBE Programme The target of NFBE Programme are all Nigeria Community members w are 6-11 years old and who are considered as children and the 12-18 years old who form the bulk of the youth (Special attention is focused on girls, the boy-outs and the traditional Qurantic education students).
The objective of NFBE Programme a.
To support the successful implementation of Primary School Education, priority is given to 6-11 years old children.
b.
To provide education services to those 6 to 12 years and above who have not gone to schools and primary School drop-out, in order for them to have education equivalent to the Primary School leaving certificate.
The sources of funds needed are: a.
The Federal Government of Nigeria b.
State and Local Governments c. Grants from friendly international organizations.
d. Community-raised funds and contributions from individuals, organizations and companies within Nigeria.
What are the Policies for NFBE Programme Implementation?
a. NFBE Programme is implemented in a unit of learning group.
95PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION b.
Each group consists of 15 to 25 learners who are assisted by at least 1(one) facilitator preferably persons with minimum of secondary Education background or highly educated persons who have the capability of teaching in a Non-formal setting.
c. Education service is implemented on school basis i.e.
school situation is created with the purpose of facilitation on the account of learning achievement, learning teaching situation, and the formation of mental attitude and personality of the children.
d. The learning contents are based on the current Primary School Curriculum modified and will be delivered in the form of modules.
e. To learners, both formative and summative evaluations are made in order to guarantee that their graduates have the same quality as that of the Primary School graduates, have the same capability and right to continue with their education or to look for jobs.
f. Learning activity is organized minimally five times a week and four hours each time based on the consensus reached by the learners, facilitator, supervisor and the manager.
Subjects taught in the NFBE Programme a. English Language b.
One Nigeria Language c. Basic Mathematics d. Basic Science e. Social Studies f. Moral Education The deliverance of the lessons contents Subjects are delivered in the form of modules to encourage individual learning and tutorial activity is done to help learners who are not yet able to understand the NFBE contents.
The length of study depends on which grade a learner is from.
If a learner starts learning NFBE equal to first grade primary school than he or she has to finish all the learning materials in 4(four) years.
Those who had some basic literacy may have less number of years to graduate.
96PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
What are the legal basis of Non-formal Basic Education?
ii.
What kinds of subjects are taught in the NFBE Programme?
3.4 Female and Girl Child Education in Nigeria Pan African Conference on the Education of Girls with its Ouagadougou Declaration, 1993.
Conference of Organization of African Unity (OAU Ministers of Culture and Education and Development, the pan African Conference on Youth Development, 1995 etc.
The Conferences identified education of women ands girls as key factor necessary for socio-economic and political empowerment.
The Declarations, Resolutions and plans of Action adopted in these conferences are aimed at the removal of disparities in access to basic education by giving priority to the Girl-Child.
3.4.1 Government Intervention on Female/Girl-Child Education In Nigeria, successive governments have demonstrated commitment to issues and concerns of female and Girl-Child education.
Nigeria is actively involved in both the ratification and implementation of various international conventions and resolutions and has set in motion mechanisms for redressing the education imbalance between boys and girls.
Consequently, to achieve the goals of Nairobi Forward Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women which recognizes that education is the basic tool that should be given the Girl-Child/Women in order to fulfill their roles as full members of society, the government produced Blue print on Women Education in 1987.
The objectives of the Blue Print include: • Providing more educational opportunity for girls from Primary to Tertiary levels, • Re-orientating the attitude of all females irrespective of age towards education and promoting the education of girls and women in the fields of Science, Technology and Mathematics (SYM).
Sequel to the adoption of the Blue Print on Women Education, Women Education branches were established in the Federal, States and Federal Capital Territory (FCT) Ministries of Education.
Model Centres were established and equipped in the State and the FCT.
97PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION The centres provide training for women and girls in traditional skill and income generation activities.
Basic literacy classes were also provided for both the illiterates and those women and girls who dropped out of the formal schools system.
Free and Compulsory Primary Education for girls were adopted in many parts of Nigeria especially in the Northern States like Bauchi, Kano, Niger, Sokoto, Adamawa Yobe and Jigawa, Laws were enacted, preventing the withdrawal of girls from school.
Federal Government Girls Colleges have been established in all the State of the Federation including FCT to promote education of the Girl- Child.
The Girl-Child Education Clubs have also been launched in school to raise awareness about the Girl-Child and early marriage, sexual harassment and Harmful Traditional Practices.
The Better Life Programme founded in 1987 was aimed at: • Educating rural women on simple hygiene, family planning, the importance of child care and increase literacy rate • Inculcation the spirit of self-development, particularly, in the field of education, business, arts and crafts and agriculture.
One of the programme’s areas of emphasis is education.
Thus in realization of the fact that education is the starting point for women advancement in different field of human endeavour, the programme focuses on Women Education as a means of empowering women, thereby improving their living standard.
The strategies adopted include: Mobilization of rural women to take advantage of adult literacy programme, establishment of various integrated functional literacy programmes and campaigns to dispel beliefs that women do not need education.
Seminars/workshops were therefore organized to train women in various income generating skills and in providing political education.
Training programmes were also conducted for the acquisition of aesthetic skill in the production of arts and crafts.
In accordance with paragraph 25 of 1985 Nairobi Forward Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women, Government by Decree 30 of 1988, which was later, replaced by Decree 42 of 1992, established National Commission for Women.
The decree also provided for the establishment of the State Commissions for Women and Women Development Units at Local Government Areas to facilitate grassroot participation in all programmes.
The functions of the Commissions include: • Development of the child within the context of International Convention on the Rights of the Child and the National Policy on the Rights of the child.
98PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION • Promotion of the full Utilisation of Women in the development of women resources.
• Liaising with relevant establishments/educational institutions on matter affecting women education.
• Working towards total elimination of all practices tending to discriminate against and de-humanize womanhood.
The Commission thus embarked on political education for women, promoting skills for the improvement of arts, crafts, food processing and other vocational training relevant to women’s needs.
A National, Zonal and State Task Force on the education of the Girl- Child was inaugurated as a follow up action on the recommendations and resolutions reached at the pan-African Conference on the Education of the Girl-Child held in Burkina Faso in 11993.
The task force was to ensure that tradition norms and administrative practices that militate against the Girl-Child and her education are discouraged.
The National Child Rights Implementation Committee was also inaugurated.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Organization of African Unity Charter and the Declaration of the World Summit for Children.
The Committee develops and recommends to government specific programmes and projects that will enhance the child.
The implementation of the Right of the Child will go a long way in reducing gender disparity in the area of education.
The focus of the Family Support Programme, which was also founded in 1994, has been on promoting policies and programmes that strengthen the observance and protection of human rights and the advancement of social justice and human dignity.
The programmer’s action areas include education.
Some of its implementation strategies are: Promotion of vocational training programmes targeted especially at the disadvantaged women and girls, as well as intensifying literacy programme for adults and school drop out.
The establishment of Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Youth Development is a demonstration of Nigerian’s assent to the international treaties and conventions relating to women and children.
It further demonstrates the government’s resolve to implement these international Resolutions and World Plan of Action at the highest level of government.
99PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION The ministries functions include among other: • Ensuring increase in women’s literacy level.
• Providing facilities for adult education for women.
• Liaising with appropriate bodies in providing policies and legislations that will eliminate all forms of gender discrimination, including training and employment.
• Promoting, skills acquisition for the improvement of arts, food processing and other vocational training within the context of the needs and potentials of women.
• Promoting and protecting the right of the Girls-Child.
The Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Youth Development which is committed to enhance and ensure the education of the Girl-Child has embarked on advocacy visits and enlightenment campaigns through seminars, workshops, TV and radio programmes on the importance of girl education with a view to create awareness and sensitize the citizenry on the issues affecting the Girl-Child.
The Ministry in collaboration with UMICRF has also organized a policy dialogue on the Girl-Child.
The dialogue was “aimed at creating awareness on the Girl-Child issues at the policy level of government and also encouraging key government functionaries to saliently operate the modalities of the National policy on education with particular reference to the Girl-Child and related policies in the context of Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).” 3.4.1 Factors Affecting Female/Girl Child Education In spite of various programmes put in place to promote Girl-Child education, it is disheartening to note that disparity in access to education still exists in favour of the male children.
National Report on Situation and Policy Analysis of Basic Education in Nigeria, 1993 indicated that some of the obstacles to female/Girl-Child education are historically, socially and culturally rooted.
Thus discriminatory cultural practices, religious bias and socio-economic status of parents affects the Girl-Child.
Forced and early marriage is the most important single constraint on education of girls in Northern State while in Southern States cultural bias and socio-economic status are the bane of obstacles to the education of girls.
Other variable are sexual harassment, hawking, and domestic chores such as withdrawing the Girl-Child from school to take care of her siblings.
Distance from school affects enrolment and regular attendance of adult classes.
Wrong perception by the trainees who feel that female education is a waste of time and by the community who feel that it is pointless investing in 100PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION female education since the girl will eventually get married and go to her husband’s house.
The chance of illiterate women enrolling in adult literacy class depends on her husband’s disposition towards literacy education and the timing of classes.
Another reason is when the curriculum places more emphasis on reading and writing instead of functional literacy.
High handedness from instructors in handling female trainees lead to drop out in adult literacy classes too.
3.4.2 Strategies for Promoting Female/Girl Child Education Education is an important tool for knowledge, skills and the building of self-confidence.
Through education, women are able to contribute most effectively in transforming their environment and improving the economic status of her family, for instance the educational level of a woman determines the quality of health attained by her and the members of her family.
The social benefit to be derived by female and Girl-Child education cannot be over-emphasized.
There is therefore urgent need to be determined more than ever before to ensure the education of the Girl- Child.
The introduction of Universal Basic Education Scheme (UBE) at this point in time is appropriate.
Of particular interest are the scheme’s objectives viz: • “To provide free, compulsory universal basic education for every Nigerian child of school age; • To reduce drastically dropout rate from formal school system through improved relevance and efficiency to cater for dropouts and out of school children/adolescents through various forms of complementary approaches to the provision and promotion of basic education”.
The objectives if properly implemented, will address the issues of imbalance in access to education between boys and girls.
The first component of the scheme i.e.
“normal basic education encompassing the first nine years of school (Primary and junior Education) for all children”, if effectively monitored will ensure that the minimum qualification of the Girl-Child is Junior Secondary School Education.
It is very crucial too that the legislation of UBE scheme to be enacted and the articulation of enabling policies will be gender responsive and gender specific.
101PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Government is further called up on to: • Ensure that girls have equal opportunity to be exposed to science subjects as boys; • Identify and award scholarships and grants to female students who show outstanding performance in or make noticeable contributions to science and technological knowledge; • Intensify functional education in order to make the women self reliant and resourceful in gainful employment; • Organize massive enlightenment campaigns to sensitize the public on the plight of the Girl-Child through production of documentaries and jingles; • Encourage increased female participation in educational opportunities to serve as role models; • Intensify action on revision of school curriculum to discourage and eliminate gender stereotyping; and • Ensure the implementation of laws, prohibiting withdrawal of girls from school for marriage or for any reason before completion of Junior Secondary education.
Girls who drop out of school as a result of pregnancy should be encouraged and provided opportunity to continue with their education after delivery.
All and sundry should be sensitized and enabling environment created to enhance the Girl- Child education.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
What are the aims of better life programme ii.
Mention three of the functions of the federal ministry of women affairs and youth development 3.5 The Role of Teachers The Universal Basic Education Scheme, UBE, is partly aimed at providing opportunities to acquire the basic skills of reading, writing and numeracy by children of school age, the children will be taught those skills and be properly looked after by teachers who are adequately prepared for the task.
The estimated number of new or additional primary school teachers required in school year 2000/2001 is around three thousand 300,000.
102PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.5.1 Production of Primary School Teachers Some of the primary school teachers needed by the Universal Basic education Scheme can be produced by recruiting and training young people who have completed Senior Secondary School.
This teacher- training programme should be organized in association with Institutes and Faculties of Education of our Universities and will lead to the award of Diploma or certificate in primary teaching.
The training programme should cover academic teaching subjects, foundations of educations, education courses and primary teaching methods.
The programme can be organized at several centers in each state with the full participation of both the state and local governments.
The duration of the course is about one year while the estimated cost of running the programme for an enrolment of one Thousand, 1,000, students is put at twenty million naira.
3.5.2 Production of Junior Secondary School Teachers Teachers required for both the junior and Senior Secondary Schools can be produced through massive enrolment into specially organized post Graduate Education Diploma, PGDE Courses.
Thousands of young people who have graduated from Universities, Polytechnics and have completed their National Youth Service Programmes, where applicable, are currently un-employed.
They should be recruited into the various State and Federal Service and be immediately sponsored to undertake the PGDE programmes in various Nigerian Universities.
At the end of the usually one year progrmmes, there will be some qualified teachers to kick-off the Junior Secondary School, JSS, component of the Universal Basic Education.
The estimated cost of running the programme covering personal emolument of the newly recruited graduates, their course fees to the Universities and their training expenses per one thousand students is about forty million naira.
4.0 CONCLUSION Basic Education is the foundation for sustainable lifer-long learning it provides reading, writing and numeric skills.
It comprises a wide variety of formal and non-formal educational activities and programmes designed to enable learners to acquire functional literacy.
103PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learn about the meaning and scope of Universal basic education, the definition and objective of mass literacy and civic education, operating of non-formal basic education, female and Girl- Child Education in Nigeria and the Roles of teachers in UBE.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may include that the aims of basic education are as follows: Basic education is aimed at knowledge, skill and attitude that will enable them to: Live meaningful and fulfilling lives: - Contribute to the development of the society - Derive maximum social, economic and cultural benefits from the society.
- Discharge their civic obligations completely.
ii.
Your answer may include that there are three component of the Universal Basic Education scheme.
Namely: - Formal basic education encompassing the first nine years of schooling (primary and Junior Secondary education) for all children.
- Nomadic education for school age children of pastoral nomads and migrant fishermen; and - Literacy and non-formal education for out of school children, youth and illiterate adults.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that three of the general objective of mass literacy are: - Increasing awareness of the importance of literacy and soliciting the participation and cooperation of all persons in the task of literacy for all by the year 2010.
- Developing literacy programmes for young people and adult with special attention to disadvantaged groups like women, the disabled and rural settlers among others.
104PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION - Mobilizing other social, economic and political sectors of our public life in the task of eradicating illiteracy within the shortest possible time.
ii.
Your answer may include that the target groups are as follows: - School age 6-11 who are not brought within the fold of formal schooling.
- Adult and young people who are beyond school age but never had the grasp of the rudiments of reading and writing.
- Premature school drops out who never stayed to acquire permanent literacy for effective work.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Your answer may include that the legal basis of Non-Formal Basic Education are as follows: - The UNESCO declaration of human right adopted by the United Nations in 1950 asserted that everyone has a right to basic education.
- The 1979 Nigeria constitution and the present draft constitution supported the position of the United Nations.
ii.
Your answer may include that the kinds of subjects taught in the NFBE are as follows: - English Language; - One Nigerian Language; - Social Studies; and - Moral Education.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Your answer may include that the aims of better life programme are as follows: - Educating rural women on simple hygiene’s, family planning, the importance of child cares and increase literacy rate.
- Inculcating the spirit of self development, particular in the field of education, business, arts and crafts and agriculture.
ii.
Your answer may include that the three of the functions of federal ministry of women affairs and youth development are as follows: 105PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION - Ensuring increase in women’s literacy level - Providing facilities for adult education for women - Promoting and protecting the right of the Girl-child.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the aims of universal basic education 2.
Mention three objectives of mass literacy 3.
What are the legal basis of Non-Formal Basic Education 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Government of Nigeria/UNICEF: “Situation and Policy Analysis of Basic Education in Nigeria.” National Report.
September, 1993.
Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development: Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, China, 1995” – Nigeria Country Report.
Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development: ‘Country Report on the Implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action’, 1995-1997.
Federal Government of Nigeria – Official Gazette Act No.
42: National commission for Women Act, 1992.
Better Life Programme Department, National Commission for Women: ‘SAP and the Nigeria Women – The Better Life Programme Experience Blue Print on Family Support Programme’.
Reproduce by UNICEF Nigeria Country Office in Collaboration with the United Nations Information Centre, Lagos: The United Nations Convention and the OAU Rights of the Child.
106PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION MODULE 3 LEADING PHILOSOPERS OF EDUCATION Unit 1 Contribution of Plato to Primary Education Unit 2 Contribution of Jean.
Jaeques Rouseau and John Amos Commenius to Primary Education Unit 3 Contribution of John Heinrich Petalozzi and Maria Montessori Unit 4 Contribution of John Dewey to Primary Education Unit 5 Relevance of Philosophy of Education to the Primary School Teacher UNIT 1 CONTRIBUTION OF PLATO TO PRIMARY EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Education of the Child 3.2 The Child Social Stratification 3.2.1 Plato’s Educational Ladder 3.3 Plato Theses on Education of the Philosophy King 3.3.1 Plato’s Theses on Education of the Philosopher King 3.4 Plato’s Academy 3.4.1 Plato on Discipline 3.4.2 The Aims of Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learnt about the meaning and the scope of universal basic education, the definition and basic education, operation of non- formal basic education, female and Girl - Child education in Nigeria and the Roles of teachers in UBE.
In this unit you are going to study about Plato’s Contribution to the education of the child, Plato’s Social stratification, education ladder, Plato’s theses on Gymnastics and music, Plato on the education of the philosopher king, Plato’s Academy, Plato on discipline and his aims of education.
107PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this Unit you should be able to do the followings: • explain Plato’s Theses on the education of the child; • describe Plato’s Social stratifications; • explain Plato’s education ladder; • explain Plato’s Theses on Gymnastics and Music; • describe Plato’s theses on the education of the philosopher king; • explain Plato’s Academy; and • describe Plato’s aims of education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Education of the Child Plato, the founder of a famous school of philosophy known as the ACADEMY, father of idealism and philosophy of Education was born in Athens.
He was a pupil of Socrates.
Plato was interested in the problems of Metaphysics, Ethics, Mathematics and Epistemology.
His main works are Pantagoras, Republic and the Laws.
He became a great teacher who taught Aristotle.
Plato’s greatest contribution is in the area of education.
Education of the child starts from first year and ends at the time of death.
Plato explained in Pantagoras that mother, father and tutor naturally commenced the training of the child.
He maintained that the child, who shows sign of disobedience, should be punished no matter his age.
The child could now be sent to a teacher from whom he learned reading, music and writing (language).
He, thereafter, was given the work of the great poets not only for advance reading and excellence but also moral virtues.
Plato advocated for a system of education in which the State determines and plays a major role.
This demanded for the re-organization of the state into three strata each stratum placing its responsibility in the function of the State.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
List the main works of Plato.
ii.
Explain the education of the child.
108PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.2 Social Stratification Plato’s life was strongly influenced by events which informed his theory of ideal State.
These included the unexpected death of his master, teacher and bosom friend, Socrates who died as a victim of ignorance in the hands of the State and the victory of Oligarchy over democracy.
The death of Socrates to Plato was as a result of ignorance which forced the Spartan Oligarchy to triumph over the birth and the perfect human existence prompted the co-existence of which encourages reciprocal help.
Therefore, the existence of an ideal State becomes necessary due to the numerous human wants which cannot be satisfied by an individual.
The State should be founded on reason and self-control among the numerous members.
This ideal State according to Plato has the primary responsibility of educating the citizens to fit into three categories viz: the Masses (workers); The Guardians (auxiliaries) and the ruler class (Philosopher King) (Okoh 1998: 104).
1.
The Masses (Workers) This class is also known as the “bronze group” because the citizens were dominated and controlled by their appetite characterized by sensual desires, love for profit, food and wealth/luxury every duty was to look for and if possible provide the basic necessities of life.
They needed little or no formal education.
This group needed very importantly the initial education which parents give through learning by imitation.
They did not require citizenship training because they were not to make any contribution in government decision.
However, on a more civilized manner they required to have basic formal education.
To this.
Okoh (1990:104) discussing about Plato’s educational ladder said, “Education in music, basic lyrics, and gymnasium was free and compulsory for all the citizens…” 2.
The Guardians (Auxiliaries) The guardian’s class is referred to as the “silver group” which includes the military and civil servants, the spirited part of soul characterized by a little measure of the rational thinking, very courageous, ambitious and patriotic to the authority.
They execute the decision and project of the state while the military aim at expanding and protecting the state from external aggression as well as controlling and maintaining peace internally.
109PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.
The Philosopher Kings (The Ruler Class) This group was known as “Golden” who possessed full soul.
They were considered as highly rational in thinking; intelligent, and possessing and cultivating the virtue of co-operation, love, altruism, truth and excellence.
Therefore, they meant to rule the state.
Figure 2: The Illustration of the Division: THE STATE THE THE GUARDIANS THE PHILOSOPHER KINGS MASSES THE MILITARY THE CIVIL SERVANT Plato opined that golden parents might have silver or brass son/daughter and vice versa.
3.2.1 Plato’s Educational Ladder Plato in his social stratification, a kind of educational ladder explained thus: Basic Training: Step I (0 – 10 years): This training is given by parents at home and nursery schools.
110PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Primary Education: Step II (6 – 10 years): Education at this level is free and compulsory.
The child learns music, lyrics and gymnasium which serve as basic formal education.
Primary Education: Step III (10 – 18 years): Another round of training is given to both those selected for the military and philosopher kings classes.
Special Training: Step IV (19 – 20 years): A special training is organized for both the military and philosopher kings.
At the end of 20 years, the philosophers were selected to study of dialectics while the military are allowed to continue their career.
Secondary Education: Step V (20 – 30 years): special dialectics training was provided for both the military and rulers class.
They were separated on the bases of their examination performance.
Higher Education: Step VI (30 – 50 years): The stage involves the study of more dialectics, apprentice and the service to the State.
Special Function: Step VII (50 – above): At 50 years and above, one becomes a philosopher – king or ruler dedicated to a life of contemplation, search for excellent and seeking the best for all persons.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
List the categories in which the citizens can fit According to Plato.
ii.
Describe the category called the philosopher 3.3 Plato’s Theses on Gymnastics and Music Plato saw Gymnastic and music as necessarily required for harmonious living.
The individual’s mind and character development depended at a large extent on music and gymnastics.
Music involved literature and musical practices while gymnastics comprised Physical and Health Education.
Gymnastics were like medicines and diet for the building of the body.
On the other hand, music develops and trains the mind and character through sound, speech and other exercise.
Hence Plato (in the Republics) said: He who mingles music with gymnastics in the fairest proportions and best attempters than to the soul.
May be rightly called the true musician and harmonist for a far higher sense than the tuner of strings.
111PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.3.1 Plato’s Theses on Education of the Philosopher King The philosopher King was made to study elementary science by an amusement instead of compulsory presentation of the study.
At the latter stage, he was made to study Art, Education, Mathematics, Science and Metaphysics.
The study at the age of twenty (20 years) offers him life- long education which in turn promotes him to the next step of the ladder and latter to a finished stage (philosopher), Geometry, effective study of the Quadrivium - Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetic, and Music and Dialectics ushers the Philosophers and guardian into an examination that separate them.
At the age of 50 years, the philosopher ruler had grown enough to render required services to the State.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
What are the benefits of Gymnastic and music?
ii.
Describe the educational the education of the philosopher kings.
3.4 Plato’s Academy Plato returned from Italy and Sicily and immediately established his favourite Academy in about 387 B.C.
that is at forty years old and forty years, before he died.
The year 387 B.C is prime in the life of Plato.
He decided to provide a form of higher education to his people as contained in Plato’s Republic after rejecting politics as a career as a result of witnessing the brutal and unjust execution of his master Socrates.
In Academy, admission was offered to pupils/students of seventeen years for both sexes.
The organization of the Academy emphasizes Oneness “Brotherhood” with religious bias and accepts the admission of women who were not given the formal education before in Athens.
The Academy considered prime the study of philosophy which required the knowledge of Mathematics.
This might be clear reflection of Plato’s interest in both Philosophy and Mathematics.
However, the curriculum was extended to include the discovery and the study of solid Geometry, Exhaustion and Astronomy by Theatetus, Eudozos and Ponticus (heraclides) respectively.
Its curriculum also covered Natural Sciences especially Botany which was basically the study of Definitions.
Aristotle who was a student of the Academy expanded the work in the Natural Sciences.
3.4.1 Plato on Discipline Plato’s main objective was to make citizens disciplined in order to create an ideal society (State).
For instance, the Guardians according to Plato’s educational structure should maintain an automatic and habitual 112PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION discipline while the philosopher king required discipline to match his own insight into the good.
The child requires frequent instruction and advice and control to correct his unruly behaviour.
Even at play Plato urged that the child be guided.
Hence, Plato said (in the Laws): At daybreak it is time for the youth to go to their schools masters.
Of all animals the boy is the most unmanageable since he has the foundation of reason in him not yet regulated… when he gets away from mother and nurses, he must be under the management of tutors, on account of his childishness and foolishness.
Also, in the Protagoras, Plato said: Education and admonition commence in the first years of childhood and last to the very end of life.
Mother and nurse and father and tutor are vying with one another about the improvement of the child as soon as he is able to understand what is being said to him.
These views indicated Plato’s sermon on discipline to Athenian Youths.
However, unlike the Sophist, Plato did not recommend corporal punishment for the Athenian Youth except for the slaves.
3.4.2 Plato’s Aims of Education Plato maintained above all that education is a social process that could adjust the individual to his society.
This adjustment demands absolute truth from every individual in the society.
Education should project what is good and beautiful in its self not on the attainment of material gain.
The teacher should be transparently honest, truthful, with clear perception, vision and choice of right subjects and objects as to transfer same to the child.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
List the content of the curriculum in the Academy.
ii.
What are the aims of education according to Plato?
4.0 CONCLUSION Plato sees education as a continuous process in the life of an individual, hence education of the child starts from the time a child is born and ends at the time of death.
5.0 SUMMARY 113PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION In this unit you have learnt about Plato’s contribution to the education of the child, Plato’s Social Stratification, Plato’s Education Ladder, Plato’s theses on gymnastics and music, Plato’s theses on the education of the philosopher King, Plato’s Academy, Plato on discipline and Plato’s aim of education.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may include that the main works of Plato are the pantagoras, the Republic and the law.
ii.
Your answer may include that the education of the child should start from the birth of the child to his death.
The father, the mother and the Tutor naturally commenced the training of the child.
He was of the view that a child who shows sign of disobedient should be punished no matter his age.
The child could now be sent to a teacher from whom he learned reading, music and writing (language), He thereafter, was given the workers of the great poets not only for advance reading and excellence but also moral virtues.
He advocated for a system of education in which the state determines and played major role.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that the categories are as follows: - The Masses (workers) - The Guardians (Auxiliaries) - The Philosopher Kings (The Ruler Class) ii.
Your answer may include that the philosopher king are the Ruler class that they were known as “Golden” who possessed full soul.
They were considered as highly rational in thinking, intelligent and possessing and cultivating the virtue of co-operation, love, altruism, truth and excellence.
Therefore, they are meant to rule the state.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Your answer may include that the benefits of Gymnastics and music are as follows: 114PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Gymnastics were like medicines and diet for the building of the body.
Music on the other develops and trains the mined and character through sound, speech and other exercises.
ii.
Your answer may include that the education of the philosopher King is as follows: The philosopher king was made to study elementary science by an amusement instead of compulsory presentation of the study.
At the later stage, he was to study Art, Education, Mathematics, science and Metaphysics.
The study at the age of twenty (20 years) offers him life – long education which in turn promotes him to the next step of the ladder and latter to a finished stage (philosopher) the effective study of the Quadrium-Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmethic, the philosopher and guardians into an examination that separates them.
At the age of 50 years, the philopher – ruler had grown enough to render required services to the state.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Your answer may include that the content of the curriculum at the Academy includes the followings: Philosophy, Mathematics, Solid Geometry Exhaustion, and Astronomy, Natural Science.
ii.
Your answer may include that the aims of education according to Plato are as follows: Education is a social process that could adjust the individual to his society.
This adjustment demands absolute truth from every individual in the society.
Education should project what is good and beautiful in it self not on the attainment of natural gain.
The teacher should be transparently, honest, truthful, with clear perception, vision and choice of right subjects and objects as to transfer same to the child.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGMENT 1.
Explain the education of the child.
2.
Explain the education of Philosopher King.
7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READINGS Okoh.
J. D. (1998).
Philosophy of Education.
The Basics.
Owerri: Corporate Impression.
115PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Plato: The Republic by D. Less (1983).
Penguin Books GBWW.
UNIT 2 CUNTRIBUTION OF JEAN JAEQUES ROUSSAEU AND JOHN AMOS COMMENIUS TO PRIMARY EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Roussaeu’s Background and History Philosophy of Education 3.2 Educational Implication of Roussaeu’s Philosophy 3.3 John Amos Commenius Background and His Philosophy of Education 3.4 Commenius Guideline to Teachers 3.5 The Educational Implication of Commenius Philosophy.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt about Plato’s contribution to the education of the child, Plato’s social stratification, Plato’s educational ladder, Plato’s theses on the education of the philosopher king, Plato’s.
Academy, Plato’s discipline and Plato’s educational aim.
In this Unit, you are going to study about Rousseau’s background and His philosophy of education; educational implication of Rousseau’s Philosophy, John Amos Commenius background and his philosophy of education, Commenius background and his philosophy of education, Commenius’ 116PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION guideline to teachers; and the educational implication of Commenius’s philosophy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to do the followings: • explain Rousseau’s philosophy of education; • describe the educational implication of Rousseau’s philosophy of education; • explain Commenius of education; • describe the Commenius’s Guideline to teachers; and • describe the educational implication of commune’s philosophy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Roussaeu’s Background and his Philosophy of Education Rousseau was born in Geneva in the year 1712.
He was brought up by his father as a result of his mother’s early death after his birth.
He sent him to a tutor who taught him Latin and inspired his life as a philosopher at the age of ten.
At the age of twenty-five in the course of a serious illness he picked interest and studied literature and science from there he became acquainted with French writers like Montague, the port royalists and Fenelon and English writers like Addison, Pope and Locke.
A French advocate of philosophy of naturalism in education triggered off his writing in primary education.
His main contribution to educational theory are contained in his famous book called ‘Emile’ which stressed the importance of beginning education early.
The message of the book was based on three major assumptions: a.
That the child is naturally good and will develop along lines if left on his own; b.
That the adult society is bad and corrupt and therefore influences children who come into contact with it; and c. That the socio-political apparatuses in the society affect the educational system.
The book ‘Emile’ was the name of an imaginary boy, the boy, Emile, in other to avoid the corrupting influence of the society was taken away from society and made to grow up in a natural setting where the society would not contaminate him.
In this state of nature, the child, at infant and childhood stages was allowed freedom to romp and play at will with objects and things.
Through that he acquired knowledge of virtue and trust through his own experience, and developed habits, emotions, needs 117PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION and curiosities.
He stressed the need for starting Child’s education at birth and that children should be allowed to develop naturally rather than prepare them for life.
Rousseau’s fundamental concept was that self perception is the only true foundation of human knowledge, he postulated that children progressed through natural stages of growth and therefore their learning experience should be tailored to suit each stage.
He advocated child-centered education, that children should never be forced to learn anything, which is of no interest to him.
He was of the opinion that the child’s emotion should be appealed to and considered in all teaching process.
He therefore emphasized that children should be thought through amusement.
Rousseau believed that the child is an innocent being and should be encouraged to enjoy and learn by observation and play.
He advised primary school teachers to love their pupils, respect their individual nature guide and advise them sympathetically.
He stressed the need for the teacher to consider past experience before proceeding to the new lesson.
This is pertinent because of the individual differences among the learners.
A child readiness should determine the content of the lesson and teaching methods to be adopted in teaching the children.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Name the assumptions on which the book Emile was based on.
3.2 Educational Implication of Rousseau’s Philosophy The concern and interest in primary education have their root in the taught of early philosophy like Rousseau.
He was one of the early educators who initiated influences of the development of the child physically, socially, mentally and emotionally from birth.
He expressed sentiment on the importance of the child’s early education in character formation.
He was conscious of the young children’s susceptibility to environmental experiences and their influences on the course of development.
Rosseau therefore suggested that teaching should be child centered and the methods of teaching to be activity-oriented so as to create amusement and joy to the children.
His ideal are strictly adhered to in the Nigeria education system where proprietors of primary school are given the guidelines by ministry of education to provide sufficient teaching materials that are attuned to the natural tendencies of children, hence inclusion of teaching methods like play methods, activity method, experimental, story telling methods to mention but a few on primary school curriculum.
The play way he advocated makes learning easy and interesting because children learn by doing and at same time solve their problems.
Teachers are advised not to force the child to learn but rather teach every lesson with play activity.
118PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Rousseau also laid much emphasis on the freedom and liberty to pursue learning.
Children should not be forced to learn without their willing cooperation.
His principle is that normal child activities provide the natural means of development, that should the content and method of education which ought to be attuned to the child’s natural growth and that education should focus attention on, and be responsive to the changing needs, interest and ability of children as they develop.
To him, natural conditions have created unhappy results and man’s negligence of the way of the nature has left them or left him in chain.
Education therefore provided to the children should take cognizance of their rate of comprehension instead of stuffing the children with materials that are uninteresting and of no value to their age.
This may lead to the child’s alienation from school.
Instruction must be made to fit the child’s level of understanding and his stage of development, cognizance should also be taken of their immediate experience and group instruction should be preferred to private instruction because it exposes the children to other children ideas and promotes social learning Rousseau was credited with having identified and classified the values and attitudes which is still guiding and directing the thoughts and actions of human being past and present in the world, Nigeria inclusive.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List at least three principles of teaching as advocated by Rousseau 3.3 John-Amos Commenius Background and His Philosophy of Education Commenius was born at Nivinitz in Morovia Czechoslovakia in 1592.
He was an educational reformer and theologian.
He was bishop of the Morovian Church who showed interest in humanistic educational practices.
His poor educational background awakened his interest in education.
In 1616, he became the master of the school of the Monrovian brethren at Prerau and this gave him the opportunity to put his thought into practice.
In Poland he taught and reorganized the gymnasium if Lissa.
His principles for the guidance of education were explained in the book called “The Great Didact” which he translated to Latin and published in 1657.
John Commenius in the Great Didact advocated the “mother school” for the first 6 years of life.
He outlines four stages of education, namely, infancy, childhood, boyhood and youth, each with a duration of six years.
He also advocated for the establishments of four types of schools namely mother school, vernacular school gymnasium or Latin school and university.
The mother school should imparts to the child the 119PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION rudiments of knowledge necessary for life.
He believed that the acquisition of knowledge emanated from activities followed by reasoning; he strongly believed in the effectiveness of the effect of concrete objects and sensory training in educational activities.
He resented verbal teaching if true learning were to result, the mother school takes care of those years between the ages of 1-6 years.
The vernacular schools which are for children between the ages of 6-12 years should give instruction on those things that may be of use to them throughout out their life.
The curriculum for this stage should include; reading, writing, arithmetic, singing, history, geography, arts, morality and religion.
The school of gymnasium should expose the children to acquire knowledge of four languages and foundation be laid for the arts and sciences.
The University should teach or give instruction on all branches of human knowledge.
Commenius wrote his first picture book for children called the famous “Orbis pictus” meaning the word in pictures in 1658.
In it, he emphasized the importance of learning through experience.
He strongly believed in the effectiveness of the use of concrete objects and sensory training in educational services.
The book also provided a guide for teachers to prepare humanistic and appealing lessons rather than continuing with formal instruction methods of imparting knowledge.
Commenius made remarkable mark in childhood education by writing series of other graded textbooks for school use.
These books include “The school of infancy” a text for pre-primary school for ages (1-6 years), six books for the vernacular school (6-12 years) and a text on introduction to Latin called “The Janua Leriguarum Reserata”, (The door of the language unlocked).
These achievements made the Swedish government to honour him by commissioning him to prepare textbooks for their schools.
Commenius served as a link between the old and the new ideas in the contributions of leading philosophers to education.
His major contributions are summarized as follows: 1.
Human intellect to be developed so that man can study nature and God.
Education to be birth right not a privilege since it is an instrument for achieving one’s potentiality.
2.
Learning should be activity-oriented with use of concrete objects and sensory training in educational activities.
This will develop the child’s imagination and creativity.
3.
Medium of instruction should be mother tongue.
120PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 4.
Psychology of the child should be considered in determining the content and the purposes of education.
5.
The curriculum of primary to include reading, writing, arithmetic, singing, history, geography, arts, morality and religion-hence in the course of study presented in his “school of infancy” first published in German 1633, contained simple lessons in objects taught to know stones, plants and animals: the names and uses of members of the body; to distinguish between light and darkness; colour; the geography of the cradle; the room; the farm, the street, and the field; trained in moderation, purity and obedience, and taught to say the lord’s prayer.
He further emphasized that the pre-school curriculum should consist of elements of literacy and numeracy.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention two ideas of Commenius on development of primary education.
3.4 Commenius Guideline to Teachers 1.
Children are usually curious and willing to learn provided they see the immediate purpose by doing so.
2.
He advocated that the learning of children should be without tears, blows or concern.
3.
Children are to be exposed to learning through the senses.
All aids to learning are to be used, through drawing, painting, pictures etc.
4.
Memory work should be little, and even then the passage to be committed to the memory, must first be clearly understood.
5.
Instruction should be made to fit the child’s level of understanding and his stage of development 6.
Subjects should be graded according to progressive degree of newness and difficult.
Learning should be from known and go progressively to the unknown.
7.
Great attention has to be given to drawing up of syllabus of study to achieve “horizontal unity” and vertical unity”.
8.
Classroom should be lit, clean, pleasant and well furnished with education decorative, pictures and other learning aids – so that the atmosphere is attractive.
9.
The school should be made a house of joy, not a place of torture.
It should be located in beautiful surroundings with good scenery and quite atmosphere.
10.
The whole educational structure must be carefully graded so that the children grouped according to stage of development and 121PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION taught according to the method appropriate to the level of understanding.
(Akinpelu, J.
A 1984).
You have to understanding that applying the philosophical ideas of leading philosophers like Commenius on Primary education will go a long way to improving the education system.
Commenius guidelines for teachers will always remain relevant, valuable and a source of inspirations to any primary school teacher for the improvement of himself and the education system anywhere.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Mention two guiding principles of Commenius to teachers 3.5 The Educational Implication of Commenius Philosophy of Education Teaching at primary school level aims at including scientific culture in the child and laying a sound science foundation for intellectual development during the first twelve years.
Teachers in this level of education should be aware of this and in a very practical sense shift from a monopoly of knowledge to an organizer and orchestrator of learning opportunities.
Accordingly, the teacher should provide an optimally supportive environment for the child though many varied encounter with concrete materials like toys of different types and other familiar object that expose the child to rudimentary concept and phenomena as motions, equilibrium, sound, weight, colours, shapes to mention a few.
Worthy of note is the culture of the learner.
Studies (Ogunniyi, 1988, Maduabum 1995) assert that for education to be meaningful and functional for any society it must agree to the cultural needs and environment of the people since primary education takes care of children under 12 years of age, it implies that it prepares the pupils for smooth transition from primary school to secondary school.
Education at this level should be child centered.
The environment of the learner, the content or materials to be use in teaching and method of teaching should all be to the interest of the child.
As Commenius rightly advise “The school must be made a house of joy not a place of torture”.
This implies that the school should in all respect look like a home.
All members of the staff should show a lot of love, affection and concern to the children.
Such help to them would make them to learn naturally and in a relaxed mood.
The environment of the child should be educative and serve as a source of learning within the classroom and even on the play ground, there should be sufficient aids to generate curiosity which leads to learning.
Understand that the primary school stage falls within 122PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION the formative years of the child when good characters and morals together good habit and attitudes can be successfully planted in the children.
The discovery learning?
(heurtic) method is a very important attitude to be cultivated.
Enough materials should be provided for the children to generate exploration, creativity and self activity.
This would encourage “auto education” propounded by Maria Montessori.
4.0 CONCLUSION The study of leading philosophers and their contributions are of importance to the development of primary education.
Primary education as they postulated can be possible in the ideal state devoid of constant conflict and corruption.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you learnt about Rousseau’s philosophy of education, the education implication of Rousseau’s philosophy of education.
Commenius’ philosophy of education, Commenius’ guideline to teacher and the educational implication of Commenius’ philosophy of education.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Your answer may include that the assumptions on which Emile was based on are: • That the child is naturally good and will develop along good lines if left on his own • That the adult society is bad and corrupt and therefore influences children who come into contact with it and • That the social-political apparatus in the society affects the educational system.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Your answer may include that: Three principles of teaching advocate by Rousseau are i.Child centered education ii.Teachers to use play way method iii.Teachers to teach from children past experiences – known to unknown 123PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Two ideas of Commenius in the development of education are as follows: i.
Learning of children should be without tears rather amusement.
ii.
The child’s level of understanding must be considered in preparing a lesson.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Your answer may include the following: i.
Teachers in primary school should provide an optimally supportive environment for the child to learn through many varied encounter with concrete objects.
ii School environment should be made of joy, not a place of torture.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Name the assumptions on which the book Emile was based on 2.
List three principles of teaching advocated by Rousseau.
3.
List three guiding principles of Commenius to teachers.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adenokun, A and Alhaware P. (1996).
A Critical Assessment of pre- Primary Schools in Kontangora Local Government Area of Niger State.
The Beagle.
Bloom, B.S.
(1964).
Stability and Change in Human Characteristics.
New York: John Willey.
Brunner, J.S.
(1966).
Toward a Theory of Instruction.
Cambridge: Havard University Press.
Olantunji, K.M.
(1986).
A Comparative Study of the Academic Performance of Nigeria Primary School Pupils with and without 124PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Pre-school Education.
Unpublished Ph.D Thesis, University of Ibadan.
UNIT 3 CONTRIBUTION OF LEADING PHILOSOPHER TO PRIMARY EDUCATION – JOHN PESTALOZZI (1747-1827) MARIA MONTESSORI (1817-1952) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Background of John Heinrich Pestalozzi and His Philosophy of Education 3.2 Educational Implication of Pestalozzi’s Philosophy to Primary Education 3.3 The Background of Maria Montessori and her Philosophy of Education 3.4 Education Implication of Montessoris Philosophy to Primary Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you read about the back ground of John Rousseau and his philosophy of education, the implication of Rousseau’s philosophy to primary education, the back ground of Amos Commenius and his philosophy of education, Commenius guidelines to teachers and the implication of Commenius philosophy to primary education.
In this unit 125PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION you are going to study about the back ground of John Heinrich Pestalozzi and his philosophy of education, implication of Pestalozzi philosophy to primary education, the background of Maria Montessori and her philosophy of education and the implication of Montessori’s philosophy to primary education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to do the following: • explain the background of John Heinrich Peestalozzi; • describe the philosophy of education of Pestalozzi; • explain the implication of Pestalozzis philosophy to primary education; • explain the background of Maria Montessori; • describe the philosophy of education of Maria Montessori; and • explain the implication of the philosophy of Montessori to primary education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Background of John Heinrich Pestalozzi and His Philosophy of Education John Pestalozzi was a Swiss philosopher, an ardent admirer of Rousseau in his concept of natural Education.
Born in Zurich in 1946 he was the second son of the three children in a middle class family.
He was a prolific writer and wrote on the social, political and philosophical aspects of life.
In his efforts, he sought a way to make education more functional and meaningful to the children.
This was demonstrated in his important book Leonard and Getrude, where he showed how Getrude the wife of a village mason, taught her children through concrete things found in the home.
His methodology was based on the principles “I will”, “I can”.
He believed that his success was the result of his determination.
They learnt arithmetic by counting steps and things with motherly talks and discussions; she trained her minds and character.
Getrude encouraged the children to observe carefully all things around them like the action of fire, smoke and water.
Pestalozzi wanted to show in this way that the school should be like a home where learning and instruction have their foundation in parental love and that teaching and learning should start with things and not with words.
Pestalozzi criticized the teaching method that expects too much from the child, and emphasized the encouragement of the development of originality and imagination in children.
126PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Pestalozzi, like his admirer Rousseau, was a naturalist who strongly believed that every child has some hidden talents that unfold as he grows up to become an adult.
He advanced a new idea in the area of method to be adopted in the primary education.
In his view, the mind grows in three marked stages from infancy to adulthood viz: a.
The stage when sense impressions are vagues; b.
The stage when vague impressions get extinct; c. The stage when distinct impressions turn clear Pestalozzi believed that the child should be encouraged to gain knowledge through his own sensory experience, that is education of the child at this level should involve experiencing of things (i.e.
sense impression) in which the child sees, handles or makes direct acquaintance with objects.
To pestalozzi, a lesson is considered suitable to a primary class if it awakens interest and self-activity of the learner.
He views the right order of learning to that which proceeds by gradual steps from simple to complex, near to far and known to unknown.
The children begin with learning to count things around them and recognizing what each number means, from this learning of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division will be learnt easily.
Also in language, the fundamental things to do are the elementary sound (letters), syllabus words then sentences.
He contends that education must be harmonized with nature; any topic to be taught to primary children must be reduced to the minimum element and gradually built up step by step, as in the case of learning of numbers.
Pestalozzi advocated that children should receive from their parents and teachers both instruction and discipline for the development of their potentials.
The teacher should direct the process of natural growth and prepare the children for their roles in the society while the family should function as the model for the ideal school.
He also suggested that the society should aid the growth of the children by providing equal education opportunities for every child.
He emphasized the need for moral virtue, which is vital to the individual’s constructive role in the society.
He held the view that nature alone does not give social, moral or intellectual knowledge, skills and good behaviour.
Rather he advocated for a healthy and supportive environment to be created by both home and school for the development of young children.
Cognizance of the above contribution/suggestions of Pestalozzi, the philosophy of Nigerian education as specified “the integration of the individual into a sound and effective citizen and equal educational opportunities for all citizens of the nation at all levels, both inside and outside the formal school system.
127PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION The quality of instruction at all levels, the promotion of the emotional, physical and psychological health of all children.
Inculcation of such values and virtues cannot effectively be implemented without a conducive learning environment.” An important by-product of Pestalozzi’s reforms according to Esmonu (2005:39) was the acceptance of his ideas by the state and the gradual transfer of schools from church dominations to a Government supported institutions for the training of its future citizens.
Pestalozzi’s ideas and contributions have positive effects in the management of primary schools in the Global World and especially in Nigeria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
List the three stages of the growth of mind as postulated by Pestalozzi ii.
What are the contributions of the society to the growth of the child?
3.2 Educational Implication of Pestalozzi’s Philosophy to Primary Education Developmental educational psychologist the world over have made it clear that school years are the formative period in the life of an individual.
This implies that most concepts and basic principles of life are ingrained in the child during these early or primary school years.
Equally, behavioural scientists Bower (1978), Schaumberg and Smith (1982) have stressed the importance of a healthy and supportive environment on the all round development of the child.
Pestalozzi in his contribution emphasized that both home and school should endeavour to provide enriched environmet that will stimulate learning.
This is necessary because (Scarr-Salapalek, 1975; Skeels, 1966) confirmed that “1Q scores can be dramatically increased when young children are placed in enriched and safe environment”.
This implies that environment can promote or hamper growth and development.
The teacher should provide conducive physical environment consisting of objects with which the children interact with objects, (non-living elements), provision of enough space for play, learning materials such as books, toys and other resources that aid learning.
He should provide an enabling social environment where children will feel free to interact with peers and teachers since children form their habits, beliefs, attitudes 128PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION at this level, good interaction among them and their environment forms the basis of social environment.
The climate of the school should be based on controlled democracy, which produces children that are well-behaved and high achievers due to good teacher – pupils’ relationship evidenced by discussions, supervisions and exemplary leadership in the school.
Pestalozzi believed in considering the age of the learner in planning his programme, and those lessons should be sequential to enable children to learn from the known to the unknown.
This implies that the teacher should enhance his lesson by splitting into units his works in small bits for easy comprehension by the children.
Their past experience in the content area to be learnt should be known and revised before proceeding to new concepts.
When children learn from known to unknown and simple to complex, learning will be easy, but on the contrary, the children may be alienated from school.
To achieve this, teachers should provide concrete objects and make lesson practical.
Every child should receive equal opportunity in participating in the lesson.
Teacher should ask series of questions to lead the children to learn.
The government should ensure that education is free so that every child will enjoy education at this level.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention two of Pestalozzi’s philosophical ideas to primary school education 3.3 The Background of Maria Montessori and Her Philosophy of Education Maria Montessori was one of the earliest pioneers of nursery education she was born in Chiaravelle Ancona Province, Italy on August 31, 1817.
After graduating from the University of Rome as the first woman in Italy to obtain medical degree in 1896, she worked in the University psychiatric clinic.
There she became interested in the education of retarded children.
Montessori believed strongly that education rather than physical or mental treatment was the remedy for their ailment.
In 1906, she started work with children living in slum area in Rome.
She achieved initial successes in her educational work with mentally retarded children and consequently opened in 1907 “a case de Bambti” (Children’s House) in a slum district of Rom.
She enrolled neglected children aged 3 to 6 years.
The mental and social development of these children amazed 129PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION observers and soon attracted international attention.
She proceeded by writing many texts about her methods and conducted many courses and workshops in many countries.
The Italian physical educator, Maria Montessori, originated the method of education that bears her name “Montessori method” which many proprietors over the world use for their schools’ name.
Montessori’s apparent success in her kindergarten experiment, made her give up her medical practice and took to traveling, lecturing, establishing schools and teacher training colleges and conducting training courses.
Onibokun et al.
(1987:29) observed that Montessori felt that children did not learn because of bad teaching methods.
She felt that methods should arouse and sustain the interests of children, give them the opportunity to work alone and to experiment and practice whatever they learn in school in their activities at home.
Her method was a system of education and a philosophy of human development and learning.
In this method, Montessori believed that a child of three, four or five has one intuitive aim of self-development.
Because of this, she organized her classroom around a carefully prepared physical environment with child size furnishing and a variety of multi-sensory, manipulative and self-correcting learning materials.
Thus Lazerson in his comments on primary schools observed that “The Montessori classroom emphasized personal hygiene and good mannered children learn to keep themselves clean, set and serve a table and use knives and forks to foster this, Montessori radically altered the learning environmental.
She developed moveable child-sized furniture, desk, and wash-basins.
She developed her own tools for learning-didactic apparatus-which presented the child with problems to be solved.
The teaching aids, which she referred to as didactic materials include dressing frames, movable alphabet letters, commend cards, rough and smooth boards, finger and clay.
Teaching she believed should progress always from simple to complex and from the concrete to abstract.
Children should be involved in representative games like arranging and rearranging of sets of materials with freedom given for every child to find out what is of interest to him.
This method requires a professionally trained teacher to prepare the environment, observes carefully and subtly guides every child as he works with the material at his own pace.
This exposure gives the child the joy of discovering and learning on his own and also enshrine the spirit of self confidence and self-discipline that will help him to live well and adjust to his environment in the society.
Montessori also believed that parents have an important mission in the upbringing of their children.
They alone can and must save their children.
Their conscience must feel the force of the mission entrusted to them; for in their hands lies positively the future of humanity, life.
The 130PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION influence of Maria Montessori nursery education was very overwhelming in the continental countries of Europe.
It’s basic principles of self-motivated learning is applicable at any stage/level of education since the late 1950’s Private Montessori primary schools have increased greatly in the United Sates and this approach focused implied by such terms as open classroom, learning center, programme instruction upgraded schools etc.
took its root from Maria Montessori’s concepts.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention two of Maria Montessori ideologies towards the development of primary education.
3.4 Educational Implications of Montessori’s Philosophy to Primary Education Montessori believed that education rather than physical or mental treatment was the remedy for the mentally retarded children’s ailment.
She hence suggested child’s self-development by the provision of enriched educative environment.
This implies that school environment especially for school children should have a variety of equipment and learning materials that help children establish neuro-muscular co- ordination and gain control over their bodies.
A suitable school environment should consider the need and characteristics of the children.
School children are characterized by curiosity as such, the School environment must provide opportunities for children to explore and apply their natural curiosity.
The teacher should make every necessary effort to provide a variety of suitable equipment that will motivate the children to develop their hidden powers.
This must be properly guided and supervised.
According to Durojaioyi (1979), “failure to learn with some basic materials at an early age may prevent learning with more advanced materials which are built on them.
Therefore enriching the school with materials and basic concrete objects of prime importance, since these materials constitute the child’s environment and represent in a special way the child’s world, and how he perceives it.
From the point of view of Montessori, the school can be defined as a structured environment in which learning and growing occur naturally.
This implies that the school for children should be an environment, well programmed and primarily suited for the education and development 131PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION and should therefore be well enriched socially, emotionally, intellectually and physically.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Explain two educational implications of Montessori’s philosophy to primary schools education.
4.0 CONCLUSION Pestalozzi and Montessori believe that children should be guided to learn with concrete concepts to help them obtain all round development.
Both stressed the need for an enriched educative environment socially, physically and intellectually.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about: • The background of John Heinrich pestalozzi • Pestalozzi concepts of philosophy of education • The implication of Pestalozzi’s philosophy of education • The background of Maria Montessori • Maria Montessori’s philosophy of education • The implication of marina Montessori’s philosophy of education to primary school education ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Your answer may include the three stages of the growth of the mind are as follows: - The stage when sense impressions are vagues; - The stage when vague impressions get extinct; - The stage when distinct impressions turn clear.
ii.
You’re answer may include that Pestalozzi advocated that children should receive from their parents and teachers both instruction and discipline for the development of their potentials.
The teacher should direct the process of natural growth and prepare the children for their roles in the society while the family should furnish the model for the ideal school.
He also suggested that the society should aid the growth of the children by providing equal educational opportunities for every child.
He 132PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION emphasized the need for moral virtue, which is vital to the, individual’s construction role in the society.
He held the view that nature alone does not give social, moral or intellectual knowledge nor skills and good behaviour.
Rather he advocated for a healthy and supportive environment to be created by both home and school for the development of young children.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Your answer may include that Pestallozzi believe that every child has a hidden power that must be unfolded given a conducive learning environment.
ii.
He advocated the step-by-step method of teaching the child.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Your answer may include that Maria Montessori believed that education rather than physical or mental treatment was the best remedy for children’s ailment.
ii.
She also believed in the provision of enriched environment for children to learn on their own under the teacher’s guidance.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Your answer may include the teacher should provide variety of the equipment and learning materials that would help children to develop their intellectual capabilities.
ii.
Your answer may include that teachers should make school environment enjoyable like the home 6.0 TUTOR -MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the societal contribution to the growth of the child according to Pestalozzi 2.
Mention two of Pestalozzi’s philosophical ideas to primary school education 3.
Explain two educational implication’s of Montessori’s philosophy to primary school education 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 133PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Bower, T.G.R (1978).
Human Development.
San Francisco: W.H.
Freeman and Company.
Durojaiyi, M.O.E.
(1979) A New Instruction to Educational Psychology.
Ibadan: Evan Brothers.
Onibokun, O.M.
et all (1987.)
Nursery Education.
Nigeria: Heinemann Education Books Ltd. Scarr-Salapalek, S. (1975).
“Genetics and the Development of Intelligence” in: f.d.
Horoswitz (Ed.)
Review of child development Research Vol.
4 Chicago, University of Chicago.
Skeels, H.M. (1966).
“Adulst Status of Children with Children with Contrasting Early life Experience”.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 31 (Whole) No.
105.
UNIT 4 CONTRIBUTIONS OF JOHN DEWEY TO PRIMARY EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dewey’s Background and Factors that Influenced His Philosophy 3.2 Dewey and the Concept of Education 3.3 Dewey and the Concept of Philosophy of Education 3.4 Deweism and Education 3.4.1 Aims of Education 3.4.2 Methodology 3.4.3 The School 3.4.4 The Teacher 3.4.5 The Child 3.4.6 The Curriculum 3.4.7 Discipline 3.4.8 Values 3.4.9 A Critical Appraisal of Dewey’s Ideals 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 134PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION In this unit you are going to learn about John Dewey’s contribution to primary education, Dewey’s background, factors that influenced him, Dewey and the concept of education, of philosophy of education, Dewey’s aims of education and a critical appraisal of Dewey’s ideal.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this Unit you should be able to do the following: • explain the factors that influenced John Dewey’s Philosophy; • explain Dewey and the concept of education; and • describe Dewey’s aims of education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dewey’s Background and Factors that Influenced His Philosophy Among others, Dewey was influenced by the Hegelian Philosophy of Dialects which he, perhaps gradually abandoned for Darwinian naturalism which emphasizes concepts of adaptation and the struggle for survival.
Later, philosophical ideas of William James and other views on pragmatism, which required action-oriented life to things, attracted Dewey.
He (Dewey) emphasized the relativity of values and means to an ends to means.
Dewey did not accept the distinction between ends and means.
Education to him is endless activity for practical result.
Akinpelu (1981) claims that Dewey’s belief in progress through education was a direct influence of Darwin’s publication.
He (Akinpelu) succinctly said: The same theory assumes that man through his intelligence will continue to devise ways and means of improving his capacity for survival.
From here, Dewey derived his belief in the infinite progress of man through education.
Dewey used the findings from empirical psychology and child – growth to the child – centred theory of education which was earlier on developed by Rousseau, Pestalozzi and Froebbel.
In fact, the socio – political environment of the United State of America in Dewey’s days also influenced his thinking and theory.
He was noted for his ideas on growth, development, dynamism, nature of life, change and William James’ ideas of experience.
135PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION To him, everything is provisional and nothing is ultimate.
Knowledge is a means and not an end in itself.
It is purely instrumental on which experiment can be done, hence his philosophy of instrumentalism and experimentalism.
He rejected in its entirety the idea of unchanging, permanent or eternal and universal realities.
The several influences on Dewey perhaps make him master of all.
He accepted this view and said: Seem to be unstable, Chameleon – like yielding one after another, to many drivers and even incompatible influences, struggling to assimilate to something from each and yet striving to carry it forward in a way that is logical consistent with what has been learned from its predecessors (Dewey 1916).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List the names of philosophers who influence Dewey.
3.2 Dewey and the Concept of Education John Dewey first, looked at education as fundamental method of social progress and reform and lauded intelligently guided development that is inherent in ordinary experience.
Therefore, to Dewey (1966) education is “the reconstruction or re-organization of experience which adds meaning to experience and increase the ability to direct the course of subsequent experience.” The words such as experience, reconstruction, reorganization, growth, development, reform, progress, intelligence and others are key concepts in Dewey’s education.
He, therefore, sees education as a process of living.
It is life itself and not a preparation for future life.
It is a continuous process of growth with the purpose of developing the intellectual capacity of the individual.
Education is further defined severally as: 1.
All that proceeds by the participation of the individual in the social consciousness of the race.
2.
Education is a regulation of the process of coming to share in the social consciousness….the adjustment of individual activity on the basis of this social consciousness… 3.
Education must be conceived as a continuing reconstruction of experience.
4.
Education is an intelligently directed development of the possibilities inherent in ordinary experience (Dewey (1929, 1966).
136PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION He used a lot of attributes for education.
Hence, education for life, education for reconstruction.
Education for direction or purpose, etc are associated with John Dewey.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List three of Dewey’s definitions of education.
3.3 Dewey and the Conception of the Philosophy of Education John Dewey’s exploration on education is grounded in two important issues.
First, is the identification of philosophy with education and second, is the characteristic of what qualities as education.
For him philosophy has no practical import or meaning except it is associated with education.
They (Philosophy and education) are closely related.
Hence education is the “Laboratory” in which Philosophic distinctions become concrete and are tested.
Dewey (1916:383) explicitly said: Education offers a vantage group!
from which to penetrate to the technical significance of philosophic discussions.
The student of philosophy in itself is always in danger of taking as a so much nimble or severe intellectual exercise as something said by philosophers and concerning them alone.
But when philosophic issues are approached… they correspond to the check to the differences in educational practice they make when acted upon, the life-situations which they formulate… The education point of view enables one to envisage the philosophic problems where they arise and thrive, where they are at home, and where acceptance or rejection makes a difference in practice.
Dewey (1960) sees philosophy as the theory of education in its most general phases.
He proceeded to describe philosophy of education as: Philosophy of education is not an external application of ready-made ideas to a system of practice having a radically different origin and purpose.
It is only an explicit formation of right mental and moral habits in respect to the difficulties of contemporary social life.
Dewey sees philosophy of education as a practical way of solving the problems of education.
On the other hand, philosophical discussion of education tests/raises on the fundamental question: what characteristics qualify as indication of education?
It is the place of philosophy to help education, hence philosophy of education.
3.4 Deweyism and Education 137PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 3.4.1 Aims of Education Education is life and other such expressions demonstrate the goals or aims of education.
Bunyan (1994: 12) maintains that the aims of schooling according to Dewey are: a.
To grow out of existing conditions.
b.
To be tentative at least in the beginning and maintain flexibility.
c. To always be directed towards a set of activities with an end in view.
3.4.2 Methodology Dewey believes that an acceptable method should be activity-oriented as to help the child develop initiative, reflective/critical thinking and sense of problem solving.
He develops the following methods: Scientific or experimental method.
a. Play-way or Activity method b.
Object method c. Excursion method d. Projective method e. Inductive method 3.4.3 The School To Dewey, the school is both the germinal and cellular structure of society, a process by which society grows and reproduces itself.
Dewey (1938) clearly stated: The school is primarily a social institution.
Education being a social process the school is simply that form of community life in which all those agencies are concentrated that will be most effective in bringing the child to share in the inherited resources of the race, and to use his own powers for social ends.
The school organization should be home extension and playground ideal to the child’s real life situation.
3.4.4 The Teacher 138PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION The teacher should be a guidance, a director who carefully selects and constructs learning experiences of the child.
According to John Dewey (in Mortimer 1992:118) the teacher must: a.
Be intelligently aware of the capacities, needs and past experiences…, and b.
Allow the suggestion made to develop a plan… and organized into a whole by the members of the group.
3.4.5 The Child The ideal education should be child-centered since he is the most important element in education.
In Dewey’s view the child has four basic instincts or impulses namely: communication, inquiry, construction and artistic expression.
These can make the child an active individual in learning activities which education must take cognizance of.
3.4.6 The Curriculum The ideal curriculum should consider the interest and ability of the child so that it will be meaningful to him.
The curriculum should always change and be subjected to constant review to meet the current and prevailing demands of the times.
Education and curriculum should be child-centered considering the needs of the child above all.
3.4.7 Discipline Dewey believes that externally imposed discipline or a form of authoritarianism on the child is unhealthy and should be avoided.
That discipline should be self-imposed or internally imposed which the child will develop by cooperatively shared activity.
3.4.8 Values Dewey disagrees with the idea of any static or constant value.
That education is a value laden pursuit but all values are relative.
A subject matter is only valuable as far as it is educative and useful in problem solving.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Explain the aims of education according to Dewey.
ii.
Describe Dewey’s methodology of education.
3.5 A Critical Appraisal of Dewey’s Ideas 139PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Dewey was more interested in the means or instrumentality of attaining knowledge than in the evaluation of its validity.
Experiment as the method of knowing was over emphasized in the presence of other useful methods.
Rusk (1969:321) remarks that “on both counts, Dewey’s thesis is inadequate.
While necessity is the mother of invention, pure intellectual curiosity stimulates the extension of knowledge.” Dewey’s thesis lacks the evidence of operational thinking.
It is a case of reflection involving deductive inference based on previous knowledge.
To this, Whitehead in Rusk (1969) says that there are two kinds of logic ignored by Dewey.
The logic of discovery consists in weighing the possibilities in discarding irrelevant details, devising sequences and rules and testing hypotheses through properly devised experiments.
Really, the process of discarding irrelevant details, devising sequences, rules and hypothesis formulation are relevant for discovery and experimentation, which are not considered by Dewey.
Also, apart from the moral concept which is relevant to the individual and the society but overlooked by his thesis; the history of Science which Dewey favours does not really support him because advances in mathematical sciences have come about through deduction which he condemned.
In spite of these facts, Dewey still stands above many of his contemporaries in educational contributions.
To crown it all, education is growth leading to more growth; and individual interest, abilities, experiences and capabilities should be emphasized but group or interest of the society should be considered paramount or more emphasized in giving education.
4.0 CONCLUSION John Dewey sees education as a process of living.
To him education is life itself and not a preparation for future life.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about the factors that influenced Dewey’s philosophy, Dewey and the concept of education, Dewey and the concept of Philosophy of education, Dewey’s aims of education, and a critical appraisal of Dewey’s idea.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 140PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Your answer may include that they were Hegel, Darwin, William James, and Rousseau, Pestalozzi and Froebbel.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Your answer may include that: i.
Education is the reconstruction or re-organization of experience, which adds meaning to experiences and increases the ability to direct the course of subsequent experience.
ii.
Education is all that proceeds by the participation of the individual in the social consciousness of the race.
iii.
Education is a regulation of the process of coming to share in the social consciousness, the adjustment of basis of this social consciousness.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Your answer may include that the aims of education according to Dewey are as follows: i.
Education is life and other such expressions demonstrate the goals or aims of education such as to grow out of existing conditions.
To be tentative at least in the beginning and maintain flexibility.
To always be directed towards a set of activities, an end in view.
ii.
Your answer may include that Dewey’s Methodology of education includes that an acceptable method should be activity oriented as to help the child develop initiative, reflective/critical thinking and sense of problem solving.
He develops the following method: - Scientific or experimental method.
- Play way or activity method - Excursion method - Projective method - Inductive Method 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List three of Dewey’s definitions of education 2.
Describe Dewey’s methodology of Education.
141PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READINGS Akinpelu (1981).
An Introduction to Philosophy of Education.
Buenyen, I.I.
(1994).
Pragmatism: A Philosophy of Education for Nigeria (A Case Study.
Jos: Ehindero Press Nig.
Ltd. Dewey, John (1916).
Essays in Experimental Logic Chicago: University Press.
Dewey, John (1902).
The Child and the Curriculum.
Chicago: University Press.
Dewey, John (1920, 1929).
Reconstruction in Philosophy.
New York: Macmillian.
Dewey, John (1938).
Experience and Education.
New York: Horace Liveright.
Dewey, John (1939).
Experience and Education in Mortimer.
A.J.
(ed) 1992 Great Book of Western world Ency.
3rd.
Edition vol.55 Chicago.
Dienye.
N.E.
and Gbamanja, S.P.T.
(1994).
Science Education Theory and Practice.
Owerri: Totan Publishers.
Rusk, R.R.
(1969).
Doctrines of the Great Educators.
London: Macmillan Press.
Whitehead, A.N.
(1967).
In R.R Rusk (1969), Doctrines of the Great Educators.
London: Macmillan Press.
William, James (1907).
Pragmatism and Four Essays from the Meaning of Truth, New American Library.
142PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION UNIT 5 RELEVANCE OF PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION TO THE PRIMARY SCHOOL TEACHER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Importance of Philosophy to Primary School Teacher 3.2 Facts about the Importance of Philosophy of Education 3.3 Philosophical Roles in Teacher Effectiveness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0INTRODUCTION In the last unit you read about John Dewey’s concept of education, his philosophy of education, his philosophy and aims of education.
You also red about his curriculum and discipline, in this unit you are going to learn about the relevance of philosophy of education to the primary school teacher, the facts about the importance of philosophy of education and philosophical roles in teacher effectiveness.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to do the following: • explain the importance of philosophy of education to the primary school teacher; 143PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION • enumerate the facts about the importance of philosophy of education; and • explain philosophical roles in teacher effectiveness.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Importance of Philosophy of Education to Primary School Teacher Philosophy of education is an applied and practical philosophy not only for teachers but also for the administrators/educators.
To them, it is a continuous search or better methods of solving educational problems.
It is inevitable for the teacher/educator to have the know-how of thinking things through without childishly accepting issues.
The teacher\educator through philosophical hinting should be able to appreciate the implication and meanings of numerous educational issues.
Philosophy of education is a systematic and rational way of assessing facts, educational principles and theories and critically evaluating them.
A greater number of the great educationists such as Plato, Socrates, Thomas Aquinas, John Dewey, Pestallozzi, Rene Descartes, Francis Bacon etc, were great Philosophers.
Therefore, it is apparent that a good educator should acquire the knowledge of philosophy.
The teacher can make decisions, develop a critical attitude to analyze, compare and synthesize the consequences of his educational actions.
Above all, the teacher can competently scrutinize the principles, critique practice of different schools of thought especially on schools curriculum, pedagogy and administration by the knowledge of philosophy.
It enables the teacher acquire a balanced sense of judgment and good organization of classroom and enhances effective learning through the choice of acceptable methods.
Philosophy of education helps the teacher/educator to better understand the objectives of his national policies on education.
He can evaluate the worth whileness of his nation’s educational needs and achievement.
It improves the teacher’s level of maturity, adequate knowledge of the child and his environmental demands.
The teacher with the knowledge of philosophy engages in many forms of educational problems, issues, and discussion and offers alternative options of actions.
It enables the teacher relate theory to practice.
Nweke (1989:29) remarks “philosophy of education gives the teacher the professional tool and provides high quality performance in educational activities.
It gives the teacher a personal intellectual education which he greatly needs more than others since the job of a teacher is mainly to stimulate the intellectual anxiety of his students”.
144PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION For the teacher, philosophy is very important in developing meaning and conventional wisdom in educational issues.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List four reasons why a primary school teacher should acquire the knowledge of philosophy of education.
3.2 Facts about the Importance of Philosophy of Education 1.
The teacher needs to understand the terms and concepts he uses in the course of his teaching to avoid ambiguity.
He teaches what he himself had understood.
The knowledge of the philosophy of education helps the teacher to think clearly and to analyze every term or concept before teaching it.
A teacher who appeals very often to his knowledge of the philosophy of education is not likely to confuse one term with the other and therefore improves his teaching.
2.
One of the expectations of a teacher is that he must learn all the time.
If he must learn all the time he must then open his mind to the ideas of other people, past or present.
For instance, the ideas of such philosophers as Plato, Aristotle.
Quintilian.
Locke, Rouseau, Dewey, when constantly appealed to by the teacher will help develop his own ideas that should turn him in the practice of education.
3.
Teachers teach so that educational aims may be realized.
He can do this if he understands the nature of the education aims he is supposed to realize in the classroom.
The philosophy of educational aims as the guiding spirit of the educative process and so would pursue them vigorously.
4.
Teachers use a great deal of various forms of examinations in their teaching.
They can be guided by their knowledge of the philosophy of education so that they examine only what are contained in the aims and objectives of the level of education in which they operate.
Apart from paper-and-pencil examinations there are several other forms which require the assistance of philosophers of education.
Hence, we appeal very constanly in education to the ideas of such philosophers as Plato, Socrates, Comenius, Locke, Rouseau, Carr, Fafunwa, Majasan and many others.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 145PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION Enumerate two facts about the importance of philosophy of education.
3.3 Philosophical Roles in Teacher Effectiveness Philosophy can play the following roles in ensuring that the teacher performs his roles effectively.
Philosophy helps the teacher to develop a critical mind, sharpened to analyze, compare, contrast and synthesis the consequences and the result of his educational actions in an appropriate decision.
It gives the teacher the ability for a good scrutiny of the principles and practice various schools of thought especially on issues about the how and whys of school curriculum, methodology, administration and discipline.
Philosophy of education enables the teacher to posses a balanced sense of judgment and better organization of classroom situations where by he chooses appropriate teaching methods that enhance effective learning; it enables the teacher to understand better the aims of and objectives of his nation’s policies of education, evaluate his nation’s needs in educational actions to appreciate the worth whileness of philosophy of education in his nation’s policies.
4.0 CONCLUSION Philosophy of education is a continues search for better methods of solving educational problem.
It an applied and practical philosophy not only for teachers but also for the administration/educators.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about a.
The importance of philosophy of education to the primary school teacher.
b.
Facts about the importance of philosophy of education to the primary teacher.
c. Philosophical roles in teacher effectiveness.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Your answer may include that the reasons are as follows: i.
It helps professionalize the teaching job.
ii.
It clarifies values and aims of education.
iii.
It critically examines assumptions underlying all school and educational practice.
iv.
It enlightens the teacher as to the origin of educational difference.
146PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 - Your answer may include that he needs to understand the terms and concepts he uses in the course of his teaching to avoid ambiguity.
He teaches what he himself had understood.
The knowledge of philosophy of education helps the teacher to think clearly and to analyse every term or concept before teaching it.
A teacher who appeals very often to his knowledge of philosophy of education is not likely to confuse one term with the other and therefore improves his teaching.
- One of the expectations of a teacher is that he must learn all the time.
If he must learn all the time he must then open his mind to the ideas of other people past or present.
For instance, the ideas of such philosophers as Plato, Aristotle Quintillion, Locke Rousseau, Dewey, when constantly appealed to by the teacher will help him develop his own ideas that should turn him in the practice of education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List four reasons while a primary teacher should acquire the knowledge of philosophy of education 2.
List three roles philosophy of education can play in ensuring that the teacher performs his role effectively?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinpelu, J.A.
(1974).
“Conceptions of Philosophy of Education”, in West African Journal of Education.
Akinpelu, J.A.
(1981).
An Introduction to Philosophy of Education.
London: Macmillan Publishers.
Burns, H.W.
and Brunner, C.J.
(1976).
Problems in Education and Philosophy.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. Castle, E.B.
(1965).
Principles and Practice of Education.
East Africa: Longman.
Dewey, John (1956).
Democracy and Education.
New York: The Free Press.
147PED 110 PHILOSOPHY OF PRIMARY EDUCATION 148
