 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: PED 412 COURSE TITLE: ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY EDUCATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT PED 412 ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY EDUCATION COURSE GUIDE Course Developer: Dr.
I. O. Nwangu Faculty of Education, Enugu State University of Technology, Enugu.
Course Writer: Dr.
I. O. Nwangu Faculty of Education, Enugu State University of Technology, Enugu.
Course Editor: Prof. E. A. O. Ajayi Programme Leader: Dr. Uchenna S.A. Osuji School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Dr. Uchenna S.A. Osuji School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria.
It is a two credit unit course offered by fourth year students of undergraduate degree programme in Education.
We have fifteen study units in this course.
This Course Guide is for distance learners enrolled in the B.Ed programme of the National Open University of Nigeria.
This Guide is one of the many resource tools available to you to assist you successfully complete this course and by extension your programme.
In this Guide, you will find useful information about this course: aims, objectives, what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using, information on assignments and examination.
It also provides you with the guidelines on how to plan your time for study, the amount of time you are likely to spend on each study unit, your tutor-marked assignments.
I recommend that you go through this course guide before you begin your study of the course.
2.0 COURSE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES Here is the course aim for PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria.
This course aims at equipping you with the broad knowledge of the organization and administration of primary education in Nigeria.
This course stretches from primary education in historical perspective, the concept of administration, personnel administration, and decision-making to educational planning in Nigeria, financing education in Nigeria and finally the organization and administration of the Universal Basic Education Programme.
At the end of this course you will be very knowledgeable about issues that affect primary education in Nigeria.
Course Objectives The course objectives for PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education are stated below.
It is expected that on completion of this course, you should be able to: • Discuss the development of primary education in the three regions of Nigeria before 1960.
• Explain the concept of administration.
• Discussion educational planning in Nigeria.
• Discuss how education is financed in Nigeria.
• Discuss the organization and administration of Universal Basic Education.
3.0 COURSE MATERIALS AND STRUCTURE Study Units The table below is a presentation of the course and how long it should take you to complete each study unit and the accompanying assignments.
Unit Title Study Unit Weeks/Activities Assignment Course Guide Course Guide Form Module 1 Organization and Administration of Primary School 1 Meaning of School 1 Assignment 2 Nigerian Primary Education in Historical Perspective 2 Assignment 3 The National Policy on Education and TMA 1 to be submitted Primary Education in Nigeria 3 Module 2 The Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria 1 The Concept of Administration.
4 Assignment 2 Personnel Administration in Education 5 Assignment 3 Decision-Making in Education 6 TMA 2 to be submitted Module 3 Educational Planning in Nigeria 1 Educational Planning in Perspective 7 Assignment 2 Theories in Educational Planning 8 Assignment 3 Approaches to Educational Planning 9 TMA3 to be submitted Module 4 Financing Education in Nigeria 1 Overview of Financing Education in Nigeria 10 Assignment 2 School Budget 11 Assignment 3 Sources of Finance in Education in Nigeria 12 TMA 4 to be submitted Module 5 Organization and Administration of Universal Basic Education 1 What is Basic Education?
13 Assignment 2 The Evolution of UBE 14 Assignment 3 Functions of UBE Commission 15 TMA 5 to be submitted Revision 16 Examination 17 Total 17 Course Summary Module 1 introduces you to primary education sector, its history and the place of primary education in the National Policy on Education.
Module 2 examines the administration of primary education in Nigeria.
Module 3 deals with educational planning.
Module 4 discusses education finance, while Module 5 discusses organization and administration of universal basic education.
There are fifteen study units in this course.
Each study unit consists of one week’s work and should take you about three hours to complete.
It includes specific objectives, guidance for study, reading materials and tutor-marked assignment exercises.
Along with tutor-marked assignments, the course materials exercises will help you in realizing the stated learning objectives of the individual study units and of the course.
3.1 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the Study Units replace the conventional university lecturer.
The major advantage of distance learning programme is that you can read and work through the course material at your own pace, time and place that suits you best.
You should condition your mind in reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
Your tutor-marked assignments replace the in-class assignments that conventional lecturers give.
They are exercises meant for you and they are to be done at appropriate times.
Each of the Study Units have identical features that are designed to assist your learning.
The first feature is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a given unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
This is followed by a set of learning objectives.
These objectives help you in knowing what you are able to do on completion of the unit.
Endeavour to use these objectives to guide your study.
On completion of the unit, go back and check whether you have realized the stated objectives.
The tutor-marked assignments are designed to help you recall what you have learnt and to evaluate your learning by yourself.
You are advised to do each of them as you come across it in the study unit.
The summary at the end of each unit also helps you to recall all the major issues discussed in the main content of each unit.
It should take you about three hours to complete a study unit, and the tutor-marked assignments.
When you have completed the first study unit take note on how long it took you and use this information to draw up a time-table to guide your study for the rest of your course.
The wide margins on the left and right sides of the pages of your course book are meant for you to make notes of main ideas or key points which you can use when revising the course.
If you make use of all these features, you will greatly enhance your chances of passing the course.
3.2 Tutorial Sessions • There should be a total number of ten hour tutorial sessions.
In other words, each module should have two hours tutorial sessions.
• The learners are expected to gain from tutorial sessions definitions/explanations of various concepts, theories and educational processes.
• Tutorial sessions are optional.
However, you can not quantify the benefits you will derive by participating in them.
They provide you the forum for interaction and peer group discussions.
These activities will reduce the isolation you may experience as a distance learner.
3.3 Facilitation Facilitation is learning that occurs both within and outside of tutorial sessions.
You tutorial facilitator guides your learning by: • providing answers to your questions during tutorial questions, on phone or by e-mail; • co-ordinating group discussion; • providing feedback on your assignments; • posing questions to confirm learning outcomes; • co-ordinating, marking and recording your assignment/examination score, and • monitoring your progress.
The language of instruction for this course is English.
The course material is available in print.
You are, therefore, expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units, and writing your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from facilitation.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Time for facilitation is a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You are advised to contact your facilitator if: • you do not understand any part of the Study Units.
• you have difficulty with the Tutor-Marked Assignments.
• you have a question or a problem with an assignment, or with your tutorial facilitators’ comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Counselling Counselling forms part of your learning because it is offered to enhance your learning experience.
Counselling is available to you at two levels, academic and personal counselling.
Students’ counsellors are available at the study centre to provide guidance for personal issues that may affect your studies.
Your study centre manager and tutorial facilitators can help you with questions on academic matters such as course materials, facilitation, grades etc.
Endeavour to have the phone numbers and e- mail addresses of your study centre and the various individuals.
Assessment There are two components of assessment for this course.
These are Tutor-Marked Assignments and a written examination.
In doing the Tutor-Marked Assignments, you are expected to use the information gathered during your study of the course.
Below are detailed explanations on how to do the Tutor-Marked Assignments.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAS) There are four Tutor-Marked Assignments for this course.
The assignments are designed to cover all areas treated in the course.
You will be given your assignments and the dates for submission at your study centre.
You are required to attempt all the four Tutor-Marked Assignments.
You will be assessed on all four, but the best three performances will be used for your continuous assessment.
Each assignment carriers 10% and together will count for 30% of your total score for the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator for formal assessment on or before the stipulated dates for submission.
The work that you submit to your tutorial facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of your total course score.
Guidelines for Writing Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
On the cover page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMAI, TMA2) and date of submission, your name and matriculation number.
It should look like this: Course Title: Tutor-Marked Assignment: Date of Submission: School and Programme: Matriculation Number: 2.
Try as much as possible to be concise and to the point in your answers and adhere to word limit where applicable.
Your answer should be based on your course material, further readings and experience.
However, you are advised not to copy from any of these materials for you will be penalized if you do so.
Remember to provide relevant examples and illustrations where necessary.
3.
Use ruled foolscap sized paper for writing answers.
Make and keep copies of your assignment.
4.
Your answers should be hand-written by you.
Leave a margin of about 38.5metres of the left side and about 5 lines before the answer to the next question for your tutorial facilitator’s comments.
5.
When you have completed each assignment, make sure that it reaches your tutorial facilitator on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your study centre manager and tutorial facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading  The final examination for PED 412 will be of two hours duration, and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the kinds of Tutor-Marked Assignments which you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your answers to Tutor-Marked Assignments before the examination.
For you to be eligible to sit for the final examinations, you must have done the following: 1.
You should have submitted all the four Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course.
2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
The deadline for examination registration will be available at your study centre.
Failure to submit your assignments or to register for the examination (even if you sit for the examination) means that you will not have a score for the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out that marks that constitute the total course score.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 (four submitted, but the best three of all the Three assignments, each carrying 10%, assignments selected) totaling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, all the features of this Course Guide have been designed to facilitate and enhance your learning so as to enable you realize the aims and objectives of this course.
These features include the course aims and objectives, course summary course overview, and study questions.
You are advised to make use of them in your study to attain maximum results.
5.0 SUMMARY  PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria provides you the theoretical foundation of education in Nigeria.
Primary education is the base on which )other levels of education rest.
It is aimed at equipping you with the basic knowledge on the development of primary education in Nigeria, its administration, planning and financing.
The course also provides you the background of the nascent policy on primary education which is the Universal Basic Education programme.
Upon completion of this course, you should be able to discuss confidently the development of primary education in Nigeria, how primary education is planned, organized, administered and financed.
You should also be able to discuss what basic education is also about, its evolution and `the functions of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC).
I wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and rewarding.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Your course material is the main text for this course.
However, you are encouraged to consult other sources as provided for you in the list of references and further reading below.
References Adamu, A.U.
(2005).
Education: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow.
Leadership.
October 23.
Abuja Free Press.
Adamu, A.U.
(2007).
Financing Education Delivery in Nigeria: The Rhetoric and Realities.
In, Elizabeth Eke & Raphael, O. Olarinoye (eds.)
Politics of Nigerian Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Adesina, S. (1990).
Education Management.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd. Adesina, S. (1992).
Foreword and Keynote.
In Ndu, A.
(ed.)
Educational Policy and Implementation in Nigeria.
Awka: Mekslink Publishers (Nig.).
Adeyemi, K. (2004).
Stages in Educational Planning.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Agabi, O.G.
(2004).
Educational Planning: An Overview.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Aghenta, J.A.
(1993).
Principles and Practices of Educational Planning: Focus on the Developing Countries.
Benin City: Nigerian Society for Educational Planning.
Aina, W.A.
(1999, September 13).
So Far, So Silent.
Newswatch 22-24.
Akpan, S.W.
(1979).
Nigerian Chronicle, September 2.
Akubue, A.
(2006).
Managing, Funding and Supervising Mission Schools.
In, G.U.
Dine, A.C. Adani, L.O.
Ugwu (eds.)
Catholic Education in Nigeria within the 21st Century.
Enugu: Ndubest Production.
Akubue, F.N.
& Okolo, A.N.
(2008).
Sociology of Education.
Nsukka: Great AP Express Publishers Ltd. Alu, B.E., Eya, L.O., Odo, C.O., Ede, F.E., (2001).
Fundamentals of Educational Administration.
Nsukka: Chuka Educational Publishers.
Arieh, L.
(ed.)
(1977).
B. Paris: UNESCO.
Atuma, E.T.
& Peretomode, O.
(2004).
The Organization and Control of Education in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press.
Awowede, O.
(2000, February 21).
The President and His Enemies.
TellMagazine.
Ayeni, A.O.
(2003).
Educational Cost.
In, Joel B. Babalola (ed.)
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Babalola, J.B.
(ed.)
(2003).
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management.
Bolton, D.L.
(1973).
Selection and Evaluation of Teachers.
California: McCutcham Publishing Corporation.
Bozimo, G.O.
& Sanda, Y.Y.
(2007).
The Politics of Funding and Fiscal Management in Nigerian Education: An Assessment of the Implementation of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) Programme in Plateau State.
In Elizabeth Eke & Raphael O. Olarinonye (eds.)
Politics of Nigerian Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Dreeben, R. (1979).
The Contribution of Schooling to the Learning of Norms.
In, Jerome Karabel & A.H. Halsey (eds.)
Power and Ideology in Education.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Dunkin, M.J. (1997).
Assessing Teachers’ Effectiveness.
Issues in Educational Research 7(1).
Durkhein, E. (1995).
Educational Sociology.
International Review of Education.
Ekeocha, P.C.
& Fonta, W.M.
(2007).
Optimizing Primary Education Service Delivery in Nigeria: a Contingent Valuation Approach.
In, B.G.
Nworgu (ed.)
Optimization of Service Delivery in the Education Sector: Issues and Strategies.
Nsukka: University Trust Publishers.
Fafunwa, A.B.
(1994).
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
Implementation Guidelines for Universal Basic Education Programme.
Abuja: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
The 1999 Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Abuja: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
Universal Basic Education Programme: a Flagship Programme of the Federal Government of Nigeria.
Abuja: Universal Basic Education Commission.
Hoy, W.K.
& Miskel, C.G.
(1982).
Educational Administration, Theory, Research and Practice (2nd ed.)
New York: Random House.
Hu, X., Korllos, T.S (1995).
Development of Moral Character in the Peoples Republic of China: Some Implications For Education.
International Review of Education 41/95.
Ifedili, C.J.
(2004).
Theories and Process of Administration.
In, N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Igbo, R. (2002).
Fundamentals of School Management.
Enugu: Rainbow Paper Mill Ltd. Ikediugwu, N.P.
(2000).
Budgeting: a Tool for Educational Success.
Enugu: Rainbow Paper Mill Ltd. Isma’il, T. (2001).
The Financing of Primary Education in Nigeria.
In, Ebele J. Maduewesi (ed.)
Financing of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: XIM Technologies Press Ltd. Iyede, R.O.O.
(2004).
Managing Human Resources in Education.
In, V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Koontz, H.O., Daniel, C., Weihrich, N. (1980).
Management (7th ed.)
Japan: McGraw-Hill, Inc. Longe, R.S.
(2003).
Introduction to Educational Planning.
In, Joel B. Babalola (ed.
), Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management.
McIntyre, B.
(1981).
Are They in Roses?
Teachers and Staff Development.
Journal of Education.
3/2.
National Teachers’ Institute (n.d.) NCE/DLS Course Book on Education: Cycle 4.
Kaduna: National Teachers’ Institute.
Nwachukwu, C.C.
(1988).
Management Theory and Practice.
Onitsha: Africana-FEP Publishers Limited.
Nwadiani, M. (2004).
Issues and Problems in Educational Planning and Implementation in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos, Joja Press Limited.
Nwagwu, C.C.
(2004).
Decision-Making in Organizations.
In N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press.
Nwangwu, I.O.
(2003).
Educational Policies in Nigeria: Trends and Implementation.
Nsukka: Jobus International Press.
Nwangwu, I.O.
(2005).
Personnel Management in Education: Human Resources Administration and Development.
Enugu: His Glory Publications.
Nwangwu, I.O., Aguba, R.C., Mba, G.C.E., Eya, P.E.
(2005) (eds).
Issues and Concerns in Education and Life.
Enugu: Institute for Development Studies.
Ofegbu, F.I.
(2004).
Supervision and Inspection of Education.
In, N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Obanya, P. (2000).
Sustainability, Stability and Continuity: The UBE Response.
Paper presented at the Conference/Workshop on the UBE held at University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Ocho, L.O.
(2003).
Educational Policy Making, Implementation and Analysis (2nd ed.)
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Ogbodo, C.M.
(2004).
Financing Education in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Ogbonnaya, N.O.
(2005).
Foundations of Education Finance.
(2nd ed.)
Nsukka: Hallman Publishers.
Okunamiri, P.O.
(2002).
Resourcing and Guidelines for Educational Finance in Tertiary Institutions in Nigeria.
Owerri: Fasmen Communications.
Olowolabi, Y.
(2000, November 27).
Education Tax: Not ASUU Idea.
Tell Magazine 48/55.
Olubor, B.O.
(2004).
Planning in Education Systems.
In, N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Ozigi, A.O.
(1982).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
Ibadan: Macmillan Nigerian Publishers Limited.
Peretomode, V.F.
(2004).
General Principles of School Administration.
In, V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Prewitt, K. (1971).
Education and Political Values: An East African Case Study.
Kenya: East African Publishing House.
Ross, V.J.
(1981).
Here Is How Teachers Should Be Evaluated.
The American School Board Journal.
168/8.
Seldin, P. (1982).
Issues and Trends in American Education: Improving Faculty Education.
Peabody Journal of Education.
59/2 January.
Sergiovanni, J.J. & Starrat, R.J. (1979).
Supervision: Human Perspectives (2nd edition) New York: McGraw- Hill Book Company.
Swift, D.F.
(1970).
The Sociology of Education.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd. Taiwo, C.O.
(1982).
The Nigerian Educational System: Past, Present and Future.
Lagos: Thomas Nelson (Nig.)
Limited.
Thurstone, L.L.
(1938).
Primary Mental Abilities.
In, Nduka Oko (ed.)
Professional Education: A Book of Readings.
Benin City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Udeze, J.O.
(2000).
Human Resources in Nigeria.
Enugu: Joebest Books.
Ugwu, L.I & Onyeneje, E.C.
(2002).
Foundations of Industrial and Consumer Psychology.
Enugu: Our Saviour Press.
Ukeje, B.O., Akabogu, G.C.
& Ndu, A.
(1992).
Educational Administration.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd. Ukeje, B.O.
(1992).
Problems of Planning Educational Policies in Nigeria.
In, Ndu, A.
(ed.).
Educational Policy and Implementation in Nigeria.
Awka: Meslink Publishers (Nig.).
PED 412 – Organization and Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria By Nwangwu Ignatius Omaga, Ph.D. Department of EducationaFoundations Enugu State University of Science & Technology Enugu – Enugu State  Department of Educational Foundations, Enugu State University of Science & Technology, Enugu – Enugu State, October 12, 2009.
The Co-ordinator, Writers-in-Residence Project, National Open University of Nigeria.
Sir, SUBMISSION OF PROJECT Please find attached, my project on PED 412: Organization and Administration of Primary School.
Details: (a) Procedure in the organization of school.
(b) The Planning and Financing.
(c) The role of Government Agents – Local, State and Federal.
(d) Analysis of the Organization of the UBE and related reports etc.
SUGGESTION I want you to have another look at the Course Title of PED 412: It reads Organization and Administration of Primary School.
I suggest the Course Title should read: Organization and Administration of Primary Education.
This is because primary education includes organization of primary school.
Thanks.
Dr. I.O.
Nwangwu A/C No: 1131050004911 Diamond Bank, Nsukka Branch.
TABLE OF CONTENTS Page MODULE 1: Organization and Administration of Primary School UNIT 1: Meaning of School - - - - - - - 2-8 UNIT 2: Nigerian Primary Education in Historical Perspective - - 9-20 UNIT 3: The National Policy on Education and Primary Education in Nigeria 21-37 MODULE 2: The Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria UNIT 1: The Concept of Administration - - - - - 38-52 UNIT 2: Personnel Administration in Education - - - - 53-72 UNIT 3: Decision-Making in Education - - - - -73-91 MODULE 3: Educational Planning in Nigeria UNIT 1: Educational Planning in Perspective - - - - - 92-103 UNIT 2: Theories in Educational Planning - - - - - 104-114 UNIT 3: Approaches to Educational Planning - - - - - 115-130 MODULE 4: Financing Education in Nigeria UNIT 1: Overview of Financing Education in Nigeria - - - - 131-142 UNIT 2: School Budget - - - - - - - - 143-153 UNIT 3: Sources of Finance in Education in Nigeria - - - - 154-170 MODULE 5: Organization and Administration of Universal Basic Education UNIT 1: What is Basic Education?
- - - - - - 171-178 UNIT 2: The Evolution of UBE Programme - - - - - 179-184 UNIT 3: Functions of the UBE Commission - - - - - 185-194  MODULE I: ORGANIZATION AND DMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY SCHOOL  MODULE I: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY SCHOOL UNIT I: Meaning of School UNIT 2: Nigerian Primary Education in Historical Perspective UNIT 3: The National Policy on Education and Primary Education in Nigeria UNIT 1: MEANING OF SCHOOL 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.1 Definition of School 3.1.2 School as a Bureaucratic Institution 3.1.3 Types of Bureaucracy 3.1.4 Features of a School as a Bureaucratic Institution 3.1.5 Bureaucratic Structure in the School System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In our lecture today; we are going to discuss what school means.
We have heard or used the word very often but not many people have given deep thought to the meaning of school.
We cannot understand and appreciate the concept of organization and administration of primary school without first of all understanding the meaning of school.
This, therefore, explains why our point of departure in this lecture is the definition of school .Education and schooling are related.Education is an act that has a formative effect on the mind, character or physical ability of an individual.Teachers in educational institution direct the education of pupils and might draw on many subjects including reading, writing,mathematics, science and history.
This process is sometimes called schooling.
Schooling is therefore an integral part of education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define school in your own words.
• know why the school is regarded as a bureaucratic institution.
• understand the types of bureaucracy that exist.
• know the features of a school as a bureaucratic institution.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of School Schools are regarded as public service institutions.
These institutions are not profit oriented but service goal oriented as they work for the realization of common goals of society.
Such goals include transmitting of societal values and norms from one generation to another.
Every society as well as individuals depend on the services of schools.
In other words, schools are places where children learn and acquire traits, which among other things will enable them to discharge certain tasks independently and become useful, productive and contributing members of a given society.
These traits acquired by children confer on them some levels of confidence and independence.
Writing on independence, Dreeben (1979) noted that it is doing things on one’s own, being self-reliant, accepting personal responsibility for tasks with which under different circumstances, one can expect the assistance of others.
Traits such as integrity, honesty and ethical strength are expected to be generated through such processes as family socialization, schooling and contact with a morally proper community.
It is on this premise that Hu and Korllos (1995) opined that the most effective mechanism for actualizing social control in a population is the process of moral character.
In other words, the expectation are that schools provide a significant function in securing moral commitment within a given population.
This was again buttressed by Durkhein (1956:61) when he remarked that education rears the child for the country and secures in the children the essential condition for its own existence.
This explains the importance of schools and education in a nation.
No nation plays with the education of its citizens.
This is because any nation whose schools produce weak citizens is bound to have weak economic, social and political structures.
It has not been possible to arrive at a consensus on the role of schools as public service institutions.
However, the views of Counts, cited by Nwangwu (2007) on the goals of education which schools aspire to inculcate in the minds of children appear to represent a consensus of purposes of education in a democratic society.
These goals are: • Education for individual excellence.
• Education for society of equals.
• Education for a government of free men.
• Education for an economy, of security and plenty.
• Education for a civilization of beauty and grandeur.
• Education for an enduring civilization.
• Education for a world community Because schools are regarded as a social organization, it possesses some features of bureaucracy.
3.1.2 The School as a Bureaucratic Institution The management of a school is a difficult task.
It, therefore, demands a good knowledge of the interrelatedness of bureaucracy and the school system.
Bureaucracy is said to be a body of government officials and administrators responsible for policy formulation and implementation.
In a more concrete terms, Ocho (2003) noted that bureaucracy is a process of administration which is necessitated by the need for fairness in handling public problems and issues, the need for efficiency and effectiveness in organizing and controlling a large body of employees specializing in different and various areas of human endeavours, the need for accountability and the need for systematic keeping and retrieval of documents for purposes of policy analysis, direction and implementation.
Schools, colleges as well as universities are characterized by bureaucracy.
Max Weber, cited by Akubue and Okolo (2008:110) identified some of the characteristics of bureaucratic institutions thus: a.
Bureaucracy consists of a hierarchy of offices.
b.
A supreme chief with authority defined by higher competence.
c. A hierarchical staff structure, each of the offices has a clearly defined sphere of competence.
Selection into its office is based on technical qualification and the incumbent is remunerated by salary.
d. Tasks are performed according to written rules and detailed instruction for handling of different situations.
e. Officials perform their tasks in an impersonal manner.
3.1.3 Types of Bureaucracy Reacting to Weberian concept of bureaucracy, Gounldner in Swift (1970) argued that there are two types of bureaucracy: 1.
Representative bureaucracy 2.
Punishment centred bureaucracy.
Representative Bureaucracy: This refers to authority based upon knowledge and expertise.
Its rules are generally agreed upon by the participants who justify them as the most appropriate means to the desired ends.
Coercion to comply with the rules assumes the form of persuasion, education or non-violent brainstorming.
Punishment Centred Bureaucracy: This refers to authority which depends upon office holding.
In this case, rules are imposed in accordance with the status hierarchy and enforced by punishment of a more explicit or formal kind.
Whichever way the argument on bureaucratic concept sways, Max Weber’s concept of bureaucracy fits well into the Nigerian school system.
For instance, the teachers are office holders who are recruited based on certain criteria of merit and competence.
Their position is secured under the terms of permanent appointment and the requirements of their work schedule specified in their appointment letter.
There is division of labour among them and clear hierarchy of authority.
Administrative responsibilities are carried out in line with the laid down rules of procedures which define the limits to the discretionary powers of designated officials by specifying the aims and the modes of official action.
The punishment-centred bureaucracy fits the pupil-teacher relationship where the teacher punishes a pupil when the need arises while the representative type explains the justification for teachers to make rules for pupils and for headteachers to make rules for teachers.
3.1.4 Features of a School as a Bureaucratic Institution The school possesses certain features that identify it as a bureaucratic institution.
Such features as identified by Haralambos, cited by Igbo (2002:98-99) include: a. regular activities required for the purposes of the school are distributed in a fixed way as official duties of school officers.
Each personnel has a clearly defined area of responsibility.
b. the school offices follow the principles of hierarchy.
Every lower officer is under the control of and supervision of a higher one within the school system.
c. the operations of the school are governed by a consistent system of abstract rules.
These rules define the units of the authority held by respective officials in the hierarchy.
Obedience to the authority is based on the rationality of the rules and regulations.
d. the school administrator is the ideal official who performs his duties in a spirit of formalistic personality without hatred or passion.
e. the school personnel are appointed and employed on the basis of technical knowledge and expertise in specific areas of specialization.
3.1.5 Bureaucratic Structure in the School System Figure 1, below illustrates the bureaucratic structure in the school system.
The authority flows down from the headteacher through the assistant, sectional heads to the pupils.
Headteacher Assistant Headteacher Sectional Head Junior Primary Sectional Head Senior Primary Teachers Teachers Pupils Pupils Figure 1: Bureaucratic Structure in the School System 4.0 CONCLUSION To properly understand the concept of organization and administration of primary school in Nigeria, it is necessary that we understand what school is all about.
A good knowledge of how the school functions as a bureaucratic institution will help us as we go into details of the organization and administration of primary school.
This, therefore, explains the detailed discussion on the school as a bureaucratic institution.
With this background, we shall now proceed to find out why primary education is important in the nation’s educational system.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt the definition of school.
School as a bureaucratic institution was also discussed.
You also learnt the types of bureaucracy, the features of a school as a bureaucratic institution as well as the bureaucratic structure in the school system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define school in your own words 2.
Why is the school regarded as a bureaucratic institution?
3.
Examine in detail the types of bureaucracy that exist.
4.
What are the features of a school as a bureaucratic institution?
REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akubue, F.N.
& Okolo, A.N.
(2008).
Sociology of Education.
Nsukka: Great AP Express Publishers Ltd. Dreeben, R. (1979).
The Contribution of Schooling to the Learning of Norms.
In, Jerome Karabel and A.H. Halsey (eds.)
Power and Ideology in Education.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Durkhein, E. (1995).
Educational Sociology.
International Review of Education.
41/95.
Hu, X., Korllos, T.S.
(1995).
Development of Moral Character in the Peoples Republic of China: Some implication for Education.
International Review of Education, 41/95.
Igbo, R.O.
(2002).
Fundamentals of School Management.
Enugu: Rainbow Paper Mill Ltd. Nwangwu, I.O.
(2007).
Basic Issues in Education.
Enugu: Computer Edge Publishers.
Ocho, L.O.
(2003).
Educational Policy Making, Implementation and Analysis (2ed).
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Swift, D.F.
(1970).
The Sociology of Education.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd. UNIT 2: NIGERIAN PRIMARY EDUCATION IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Nigerian Primary Education in Historical Perspective 3.2 The Emergence of Universal Primary Education (Western Region) 3.3 Universal Primary Education in Eastern Region 3.4 Primary Education in Northern Region 3.5 Post-Independence Universal Primary Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In our last lecture, we discussed the school with particular reference to primary school as shown in Figure 1.
In today’s lecture, we are going to examine the emergence and growth of primary education in Nigeria.
Primary education in Nigeria has gone a long and tortuous way stretching from the days of the colonial masters to the present day.
Along the path of primary education, it has been confronted with a lot of problems.
We are going to examine some of these problems in the course of our lecture.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1. know the development of primary education in Nigeria.
2. know the various commissions/committee set up to review primary education in different regions of the country.
3. know the recommendations of these commissions/committee.
4. know the circumstances that led to the launching of the Universal Primary Education Scheme by the federal government in September 1976.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nigerian Primary Education in Historical Perspective At the end of Second World War in 1945, a new constitution was imposed on Nigeria.
This constitution was known as the Richards Constitution of 1945.
The constitution was named after the author who was Sir Arthur Richards.
He was then the Governor of Nigeria.
This constitution divided Nigeria into three regions – East, West and North.
These regions correspond with the three largest ethnic groups in the country, the Ibos in the East, the Yorubas in the West and the Hausa-Fulani in the North.
The Richards Constitution became effective in Nigeria in 1946.
In 1948, Governor Richards was succeeded by Sir John Macpherson as Governor of Nigeria.
At this time, Nigerian nationalists had intensified their efforts for self-governance.
This led to the formation of political parties.
These political parties were the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (N.C.N.C.)
led by Herbert Macaulay and Nnamdi Azikiwe, the Actiion Group (A.G.), led by Obafemi Awolowo of the West and the Northern People’s Congress (N.P.C.)
led by Ahmadu Bello, the Sardauna of Sokoto.
These three political parties contributed enormously to the emergence and growth of primary education in Nigeria between 1950 and 1964.
Each of these political parties won election in its ethnic region – the N.C.N.C.
won in the East, the A.G., in the West and the N.P.C.
in the North.
In 1951, the Macpherson constitution was introduced to replace the ineffective Richards constitution.
Fafunwa (1974) noted that this constitution provided for democratic election into the regional houses of assembly, empowered each region to raise and appropriate funds, and more importantly, had power to pass laws on education, health, agriculture and local government.
With the regionalization of education in 1951, both the Eastern and Western regional governments led by N.C.N.C.
and A.G. respectively made education their priority.
3.2 The Emergence of Universal Primary Education (UPE) Primary Education in Western Region At the inception of his administration in 1952 in the Western region, Chief Obafemi Awolowo made it clear to the public that he would give priority attention to health and education.
Consequent upon this, the then Minister of Education, Chief S.O.
Awokoya presented a comprehensive proposal for the introduction of a free, universal and compulsory education also referred to as Universal Primary Education (UPE) for the western region by January 1955.
According to Fafunwa (1974), the proposal included a massive teacher-training programme, the expansion of teacher-training facilities and secondary schools, the introduction of secondary technical education and secondary modern schools.
As proposed, by January 1955, universal free primary education was launched in the west for all the children in the region within school age of 6-12 years.
This was an exciting occasion and was celebrated throughout the region with parades, sports and feast to mark the achievement of free universal primary education.
According to Taiwo (1982:116), the Minister’s message summarized the mood of the region: I am happy that in our life-time primary education for all has begun.
We must not forget that debt we owe to those voluntary workers, educationary agencies, missionary bodies, district planning committees, building contractors, officials great and small, who have laboured so hard to bring about this historic event.
Fafunwa (1974) noted that in 1954, some 457,000 pupils were attending fee-paying primary schools in the West, but when the scheme was launched in January 1955, some 811,000 children enrolled.
These figures represented a jump from 35 percent to 61 percent of the 5-14 year olds.
By 1958, more than one million children were enrolled in primary schools.
The government, however, underestimated the figures expected at the initial stages; it was originally estimated that some 492,000 would be enrolled in 1955 rising by 100,000 annually, but more than 800,000 were registered.
The number of primary school teachers rose from 17,000 in 1954 to 27,000 in 1955.
The West government’s budget for education increased from ₤2.2 million in 1954 to ₤5.4 million in 1955 and nearly 90 percent of the budget was spent on primary education alone.
The capital expenditure for the construction of primary school buildings was ₤2.4 million for 1955, while a total of ₤5 million was committed to primary school buildings between 1954 and 1958.
By 1960, five years after the introduction of free primary education, over 1,100,000 children were enrolled.
This represented more than 90 percent of the children of school age in the Western region.
3.3 Universal Primary Education in Eastern Region The introduction of universal free primary education by the Action Group – led government in Western region was a big challenge and threat to the N.C.N.C.
– led government in Eastern region.
Consequent upon this, the Eastern region also hastily embarked on Universal Primary Education Scheme in 1957.
The provision of the scheme abolished fees in both junior and senior primary schools for all pupils in school and for all those eligible but outside the school.
As a result of inadequate planning, most of the new schools were staffed with untrained teachers.
Inadequate buildings, equipment, poor funding and poor management militated against the scheme in the Eastern region.
After one year of existence, the scheme collapsed due to population explosion without a corresponding increase in budget allocation to education, qualified teachers and school facilities.
3.4 Primary Education in Northern Nigeria The development of education in Northern Nigeria was very slow.
As the governments in the East and West aspired to provide universal free primary education to its citizens, the government in the North showed little or no interest in education.
Fafunwa (1974) noted that this was due to some reasons.
First, the resources were not there.
Second, the population of children of school age resident in the region was very high as half of Nigeria’s children of school age reside in the North.
Third, some Northern political and religious leaders were not eager to expose their children to western form of education.
Fourth, Islamic education was preferred to Western education.
As a result of all these, the idea of universal free primary education never bothered most Northern leaders.
However, Fafunwa observed that in the Northern region, the number of children enrolled in primary schools rose from 66,000 in 1947 to 205,769 in 1957; in the West, from 240,000 in 1947 to 982,755 in 1957; and in the East from 320,000 to 1,209,167 for the same period.
It was also observed that while the East and West had large numerical increases, the rate of increase in pupil population percentage-wise between 1947 and 1957 was slightly higher in the North than in the other two regions.
3.5 Post-Independence Primary Education in Nigeria So far, we have been discussing primary education in Nigeria before the attainment of independence in 1960.
We are now going to discuss primary education after independence.
The Ashby Commission’s recommendation was a major catalyst in the development of primary education in Nigeria.
In 1959, the federal government appointed a Commission to conduct an investigation into Nigeria’s needs in the field of post- secondary School Certificate and Higher Education over the next twenty years (1960- 1980).
The Commission which is usually referred to as the Ashby Commission had a Chairman whose name was Sir Eric Ashby.
According to Fafunwa (1974), the Commission noted that Nigeria had made tremendous progress in the field of education.
Specifically, it noted that in 1958 it had two and a half million children in primary schools and 25,000 teachers in training.
It noted a lack of balance between primary and secondary levels, and between secondary and post-secondary education.
The report observed that most of the 80,000 teachers in service were pitifully unprepared for their task, some three-quarters of them were uncertificated and from among those who were trained, two-thirds had no more than primary school education.
Thus, 90 percent of the teachers in the primary schools were not well trained for their work.
The Commission which started work on May 3, 1959, submitted its findings to the Federal Ministry of Education on September 2, 1960, just a month before Nigeria’s independence.
With the release of Ashby recommendations, the North started working towards the attainment of Ashby Report target of 25 percent children of the school age-group attending school by 1970.
Taiwo (1982:130) reported that the development programme was designed to advance the primary school system towards the ultimate aim of universal primary education as soon as possible, while at the same time providing for an increase of post-primary facilities in order to ensure a balanced system of education.
In both Eastern and Western regions, efforts were made to achieve quantity through their respective universal primary education programmes but were becoming apprehensive of the obvious problems of unqualified staff, automatic promotion, wastage on children who dropped out, falling standards, and the high cost of the programme (Taiwo, 1982).
In the Eastern-region, the major focus of the development programme in primary education was on teacher training with particular reference to quality of work in the schools.
In the Western region, the emphasis was also on quality.
The Banjo Commission In December 1960, the Government of Western Region appointed a Commission whose Chairman was S.A.
Banjo to review the educational system of the region.
The Commission’s terms of reference according to Taiwo (1982:131) were to review.
1. the existing structure and working of the primary and secondary (grammar and modern) school systems in the region, in particular, the future of secondary modern schools; 2. the adequacy or otherwise of the teacher training programme having regard to the present and future needs of the region; 3. the interrelationship between primary education and the various types of secondary education, with a view to making the pre-university education in the Western region dove-tail into an organic whole; and (ii) to make recommendations and report.
This Commission was launched by Chief Obafemi Awolowo, the Premier of the region who reiterated the high premium his government placed on education as a vital instrument for creating an educated and forward-looking democratic society and for providing the trained manpower needed to implement the development plan of the region.
Taiwo (1982:131) observed that the commission gained the general impression of a falling standard in primary education and examined critically the various causes suggested by witnesses: 1. preponderance of untrained teachers on the staff of the schools; 2. school headships being held by Grade II or uncertificated teachers; 3. untrained teachers teaching Primary I; 4. lack of continuity in staffing; 5. teachers’ private duties; 6. unprofessional behaviour of some primary school teachers; 7. the length of the course; 8. too large classes; 9. automatic promotion; 10. the presence of under-age children; 11. the backward child; 12. the sketchy nature of the syllabus; 13. cessation or restriction of corporal punishment; 14. lack of cooperation from parents and guardians; and, 15. inadequate supervision of schools either by the Inspectorate or the voluntary agency supervisors.
The Commission accepted the impression, but we consider it in part an evil inherent in the rapid expansion of primary education not preceded nor accompanied by a corresponding increase in facilities for teacher training (Taiwo 1982:132).
The Commission, however, rejected the suggestion to increase the length of the course or to lift the restriction on corporal punishment.
It accepted the syllabus but criticised the sketchiness owing to the inadequacy of many of the teachers who were untrained and needed detailed guidance.
The Commission noted that the standard of English was poor.
The recommendations focused on the need for more trained and better qualified teachers, strengthening the Local Education Authorities to perform their duties efficiently, enlarging the inspectorate to match the increasing number of schools, continuing efforts to improve the conditions of service of teachers and an appreciation by the public of their contribution.
The report was accepted by the Government and efforts were made to implement the recommendations.
The Oldman Commission In the same vein, the Government of the Northern Region appointed a Commission chaired by Mr. H. Oldman to advise on: a. the form which the local contribution to the cost of primary education should take; b. whether there would be advantages in delegating control of primary education to Local Education Authorities and on whether or not such Local Education Authorities should have powers of precept; c. whether the English system of aided and controlled schools, or the Scottish system of transferred schools, or some modification of either would have relevance to Northern Nigerian conditions; d. any amendment to the education law and to the grants-in-aid regulations that might be desirable; and, e. the future development of the Primary Schools’ Inspectorate and on the administrative machinery required by Universal Primary Education (Taiwo 1982:132).
The Commission which is commonly referred to as Oldman’s Commission in its report The Administration of Primary Education, recommended that a public system of primary education be developed which will establish a working partnership between the Government on the one hand and the native authorities and the voluntary agencies on the other.
According to Taiwo(1982:132), it recommended: 1. the establishment of Local Education Authorities and Local Education Committees; 2. the transfer of voluntary agency primary schools to the Local Education Authorities in the respective native authority areas, with the voluntary agencies retaining the right to inspect religious teaching and approve the names of teachers proposed for appointment to their schools; 3. a training course for education officers for service in the Local Education Authorities, the Ministry’s headquarters and the principal education offices; 4. amendments to the Education Law to give effect to the major recommendations; 5. an inspectorate organization for primary schools run by the government and not by the native or local authorities or by the voluntary agencies; and 6. the appointment to each Province, a Provincial Education Secretary trained on the course mentioned above, who would be responsible for the administrative work of the Ministry of Education in the province in which he worked.
The Government of Northern region accepted these recommendations.
Consequent upon this, the Education Law of 1956 was revised and enacted as the Education Law, 1964.
The one-year course recommended in the Oldman Report and run at the Institute of Administration , now at the Institute of Education, Ahmadu Bello University,Zaria, was commenced in October, 1962.
The foundation for the development of primary education in Northern Nigeria was thus firmly laid by the establishment of Local Education Authorities and the reorganization of the Ministry’s headquarters to administer education under the new relationship.
Voluntary agency primary schools were transferred under the law to the Local Education Authorities on the condition that every appointment to the teaching staff of a transferred school would be made from the list of teachers approved annually by the voluntary agency which transferred such a primary school, that religious instruction continues to be given in the school in accordance with the custom of the school; and that the voluntary agency might at any time inspect the school for the purpose of examining religious instruction at the school.
Primary schools which were not so transferred became private schools and obtained no grants from the government fund.
The Ikoku Committee The Government of the Eastern region equally appointed a committee in 1962 to review the progress of education in the region.
The Committee which had Mr. Alvan Ikoku as its chairman is commonly referred to as Ikoku Committee.
On primary education in the region, Taiwo(1982) observed that the Committee recommended: 1. consolidation of primary schools and discontinuation of non-viable schools; 2. complete government control of all primary schools; 3. setting up of local education boards and the involvement of local government councils in primary education.
4. reduction of the length of primary school education from seven to six years.
5. improvement of teachers’ conditions of service and the provision of in-service courses for teachers.
The Committee was concerned with ensuring quality of primary education.
The Government accepted and implemented the Ikoku report.
There was an overhauling and reorientation of primary school curriculum to include science, agriculture, woodwork and metalwork.
The length of primary school programme was reduced from seven to six years.
It is pertinent to mention here that by the Republican Constitution which became operational on October 1, 1963, the Mid-Western Region comprising Benin and the Delta Provinces was created out of the Western region.
Thus, Nigeria became a Federal Republic made up of four regions.
The Mid-Western region operated the policy and practices of education as it had done when it was under the Western Region.
The coup d’état of January 15, 1966 resulted in a change of Government from the civilian to the military.
There was another coup d’état on July 29, 1966 that led to a new military administration.
This new military administration by a decree on May 1967 divided Nigeria into twelve states.
On July 6, 1967, a civil war broke out in Nigeria.
The war lasted for three years.
Not until the end of the war on January 12, 1970, education generally was badly affected.
3.3 The Post -Independence Universal Primary Education in Nigeria The first major basic educational policy embarked upon by the Nigerian Government after the end of the civil war in 1970 was the Universal Primary Education (UPE) Scheme.
This was sequel to the assembly of Heads of States of the then Organization of African Unity (OAU) and now African Unity (AU) that met in Addis Ababa in 1961 (Avosch in Nwangwu 2003:43).
These Heads of State, realizing the importance of education in the development of Africa formulated explicit and specific educational goals.
The basic framework of educational development in Africa in respect of UPE as outlined by this assembly could be summarized thus: a. equal educational opportunity could only be realized through UPE.
b. economically, skill constraint tends to perpetuate African dependency on foreign technical and managerial personnel.
UPE will accelerate the pace of indigenization of high level manpower in Africa (Avosch in Nwangwu 2003:44).
The 1961 Addis Ababa Conference agreed on 1980 as a target year for all African countries to attain UPE.
In response to this conference, the then Head of State, Lt. General Olusegun Obasanjo, launched the Universal Primary Education on September 6, 1976.
Okpala cited by Nwangwu (2003:44) revealed that when the third national development plan which contained the UPE scheme was released, the Nigerian government outlined some educational objectives aimed at uplifting Nigeria’s educational system.
These included: a. to expand facilities for education aimed at equalizing individual access to education throughout the country.
b. to reform the content of general education to make it more responsive to socio- economic needs of the country.
c. to consolidate and develop the nation’s system of higher education in response to the economy’s manpower needs.
d. to streamline and strengthen the machinery for educational development in the country.
e. to rationalize the financing of education with a view to making the educational system more adequate and frequent.
f. to make an impact in the area of technological education so as to meet the growing needs of the country.
The launching of UPE in 1976 was very significant in the history of the country.
By 1970, Taiwo (1982) revealed that the overall primary enrollment was put at 35 percent of school age children.
In the northern states, the percentage enrolment ranged from 7 percent in the far north to 26.2 percent in the riverine states.
In the southern states, it ranged from 61.8 percent to almost 95 percent in Lagos.
The federal government came to the conclusion that only the introduction of universal primary education in the country could solve the educational imbalance and provide the needed numbers for full utilization of human resources in the country.
The then Federal Commissioner for Education, Colonel Ahmadu Ali, referred to the UPE as "the greatest social Scheme ever emberked upon by any African government".
4.0 CONCLUSION The history of primary education in Nigeria started with the Macpherson’s Constitution which empowered each region to raise and appropriate funds for purposes of education.
The constitution also empowered the regions to pass laws on education.
With this enabling environment, both the Western and Eastern regions embarked on universal free primary education.
The Northern region was reticent in embarking on universal free education because of Islamic education which reigned supreme in the north.
We also discussed primary education in post-independent Nigeria.
It was observed that primary education in post-independent Nigeria was characterized by the setting up of commissions/committees to review primary education and advise the government accordingly.
It is against this background that we have Banjo Commission in the Western region, Oldman Commission in the Northern region and Ikoku Committee in the Eastern region.
Finally, we discussed the circumstances leading to the launching of the Universal Primary Education in 1976 by the Federal Government.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit examined the growth and development of primary education in pre- and post-independent Nigeria.
It also discussed the various commissions/committee that were set-up to review primary education in various regions of the country.
The recommendations of these commissions/committee were discussed.
The circumstances that led to the launching of UPE in 1976 were equally appraised.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the development of primary education in the three regions of Nigeria before 1960.
2.
Examine the recommendations of the commission/committee set-up in each region to review primary education.
3.
What are the circumstances that led to the launching of Universal Primary Education by the Federal Government in 1976?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Fafunwa, A.B.
(1994).
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Nwangwu, I.O.
(2003).
Educational Policies in Nigeria: Trends and Implementation.
Nsukka: Jobus International Press.
Taiwo, C.O.
(1982).
The Nigerian Educational System: Past, Present and Future.
Lagos: Thomas Nelson (Nig.)
Limited.
UNIT 3: THE NATIONAL POLICY ON EDUCATION AND PRIMARY EDUCATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Policy 3.2 Importance of Policies 3.3 The Emergence of National Policy of Education in Nigeria 3.4 The Goals of Primary Education in Nigeria 3.5 United Nations Declaration of Human Rights on Free Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we are going to examine the emergence of the National Policy on Education (NPE) as it affects primary education.
This unit is very important because it is the National Policy on Education that determines the direction of all the levels of education in Nigeria.
It is, therefore, important that you have a background on how this important document was fashioned out.
We cannot discuss policy on education without first of all understanding what Policy generally means.
We shall, therefore, discuss the meaning of Policy and why it is important to our study in all aspects of education.
Finally, we shall examine the problems that affect the implementation of primary education policy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define policy.
2.
State the advantages of policies.
3.
Discuss the origin of the National Policy on Education.
4.
Discuss the goals of primary school education.
5.
Know the rights of a child as adopted by the United Nations.
6.
Know the problems that militate against the successful implementation of primary education programme in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Policy Policies could be said to be decisions of people in authority which convey the intentions of either the government or the organization to attain the goals of the government or the organization.
Ocho (2003), however defined policies as authoritative judgements which establish the bases for administrative actions.
When considered on the platform of education, a nation’s policy on education, represents procedures on which the affairs of the primary, secondary and tertiary levels of education should be managed.
Improvement of the educational system of any country is a function of the ability of authorities to effect necessary changes in the existing patterns of actions in classrooms, schools and other ancillary structures.
Authorities aspire to effect a change or retain those patterns of action through the formulation and the implementation of educational policies.
3.1.2 The Importance of Policies The importance of policies cannot be over-emphasized.
According to Nwangwu (2003:1) they include: a.
Policy statements are designed to guide the implementers of a given programme.
b.
Policies provide the forum and strategies on how the implementation of a given programme could be monitored and appraised to determine whether the desired results are being achieved for future development.
A programme devoid of policy statements is like a rudderless ship.
c. Policies determine the direction of future development of a programme.
d. Administration of a programme through policies confers confidence on the personnel.
e. Policies help management in decision-making and also assure continuity.
f. Policies give confidence to all stakeholders because there is something to guide decision-making.
From the above, it is clear that the staff of Local Education Authority responsible for primary school administration needs to be guided in the implementation of primary education programme.
The primary education programme has to be monitored and evaluated to ensure that the goals of the programme are attained.
This is the function of the inspectorate unit of Local Education Authority whose staff go for supervision of schools.
The future development of primary education has to be in focus.
This explains why after a period of time a commission/committee is appointed to review the primary education programme.
Recall that we have such commissions/committee as Oldman Commission, Banjo Commission and Ikoku Committee that reviewed primary education programme in Northern region, Western region and Eastern region respectively.
Because there are guidelines or procedures on how actions are taken, the personnel of the Local Education Authority are confident in their actions.
This is because they are focused by using the guidelines.
For continuity, the dissolution of Local Government Education Authority(LGEA) Secretary does not cripple the activities of primary education programme.
This is because the policy has guidelines on how to reconstitute the Board.
This stability in management enhances productivity and creativity.
The stakeholders in education – government, parents, teachers and students are assured of fair treatment because everyone knows the principles guiding education decision, procedures and rules as contained in the policy document.
According to Ukeje (1992), there are three major functional areas in educational management.
These are policies, resources and execution.
He noted that these areas are not mutually exclusive.
For a policy to be effective, its formulation must take into account the available resources for its implementation and the effectiveness of those who shall be responsible for its implementation.
While resources include people, materials, money, time and authority, execution is the action in integrating and synthesizing the resources and the policy for the achievement of the goals of the organization.
We shall later in this lecture examine how these three functional areas have been applied in the implementation of primary education programme in Nigeria.
3.1.3 The Emergence of the National Policy on Education in Nigeria The National Policy on Education in Nigeria emerged through the proceedings and recommendations of the 1969 National Conference on Curriculum Development that took place in Lagos from September 8-12.
This conference was sponsored by the Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC), now Nigeria Educational Research and Development Council.
Nwangwu (2003) noted that the conference was convened to deliberate on the objectives of Nigerian education, curriculum content, the methods, materials, equipment, aids and other relevant issues required for successful implementation of the curriculum in order to achieve the desired goals.
After the attainment of independence in 1960, Nigeria continued with the system of education left behind by Britain, her colonial master.
This system was 8-5-2-3 system of education, that is, eight years in primary school, five years in secondary school, two years in higher school and three years in the university.
With time, Nigerians were no longer comfortable with this system of education.
They started to criticize the system and agitated for a change of the system.
The criticism against this system of education includes: a. it laid too much emphasis on academic.
b. the educational opportunity was restricted on the upper level of the system.
In other words, many Nigerians were not gaining admission into the university as a result of the system.
A good number of Nigerians terminated their education at the primary and secondary school level with very small number gaining admission into the university.
c. The British grammar school system of education was transimposed in Nigeria without due consideration to the culture, environment, labour market, needs and aspirations of Nigeria as a country.
Addressing members of the 1969 National Conference on Curriculum Development, the then Federal Commissioner for Education, Chief A.Y.
Eke, remarked: No doubt that the educational system we inherited was a good one.
Good, that is, for the country and society for which it was planned, good for England and English society.
But it was not good for us, because it neglected to take into consideration our cultural and social background, because it has tended to produce an educated class of pen-pushers and because it failed to lay the foundation of economic freedom by providing the manual skills and expertise necessary for successful industrial and agricultural development (Adamu 2005:45) d. it laid emphasis on religion with bible and catechism forming the major substance of reading, writing and scripture.
e. examples in Arithmetic and English have no relationships with either Nigeria or Africa as a continent.
f. the medium of instruction was the colonial language – English.
g. the system encouraged rote learning which does not produce critical mind.
Arieh (1977:3) noted: Memorizing factual information contributes little to the intellectual development of the learner and does little to improve his ability to solve problems …, instead, modern views of education lay emphasis on inquiry, discovery, problem solving, high mental function, synthesis and creativity.
These criticisms culminated in the 1969 National Conference on Curriculum Development to fashion out a curriculum that responds to the needs and aspirations of Nigerian society.
This curriculum was expected to incorporate what Adamu (2005) referred to as the four basic pillars of education.
a.
Learning to know: this includes general knowledge and the will to learn.
b.
Learning to do: This is the acquisition of formal or informal occupational skills in the context of individual experience and community.
c. Learning to live together: This involves developing an understanding of other people and acquisition of inter-dependence.
d. Learning to be: This enables the individual to develop his/her personality and to act with great autonomy, judgement and personal responsibility.
After the 1969 National Curriculum Conference, a seminar of experts drawn from a wide range of interest groups within Nigeria was again convened in 1973 to deliberate on the recommendations of the conference.
The seminar which included voluntary agencies and external bodies deliberated on what a national policy on education for an independent and sovereign Nigeria should be.
The outcome of this seminar was a draft document which after due considerations of the observation and comments from the states and various stakeholders gave birth to what we now refer to as the National Policy on Education, first published in 1977.
This educational policy which addressed all the educational levels in the country was launched as 6-3-3-4 system of education after its review in 1981 and was to be implemented in 1982.
It is this document that outlines the goals of primary education in Nigeria.
3.4 The Goals of Primary Education in Nigeria The National Policy on Education (NPE) (2004:14) defined primary education as the education given in institutions for children aged 6-11 plus.
It went further to state that since the rest of the education system is built upon it, the primary level is the key to the success or failure of the whole system.
This underscores the importance the government attaches to primary education.
The duration of primary education is six years.
According to this policy, the goals of primary education are to: a. inculcate permanent literacy and numeracy, and ability to communicate effectively; b. lay a sound basis for scientific and reflective thinking; c. give citizenship education as a basis for effective participation in and contribution to the life of the society; d. mould the character and develop sound attitude and morals in the child; e. develop in the child the ability to adapt to the child’s changing environment; f. give the child opportunities for developing manipulative skills that will enable the child function effectively in the society within the limits of the child’s capacity; g. provide the child with basic tools for further educational advancement, including preparation for trades and crafts of the locality (NPE 2004:14).
In formulating the above goals for primary education, the Nigerian Government is complying with the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights as it affects primary education.
3.5 United Nations Declaration of Human Rights on Free Education The United Nations in 1948 adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights wherein it was declared that everyone has the right to education which shall be free at least in the elementary and primary stages.
The declaration further stated that primary education shall be compulsory while technical and professional education shall be made generally available.
For higher education, the United Nations declared that it shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.
In addition to this, the declaration went further, parents shall have a prior right to choose the kind of education that shall be given to their children.
Ocho in Nwangwu, Aguba, Mba and Eya (2005:69) noted that on November 29, 1959, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the following declarations, among others, of the rights of the child, which Nigeria endorsed in 1990.
1.
The right to special care of the handicapped; 2.
The right to free education; 3.
The right to learn to be a useful member of the society; 4.
The right to develop his abilities; 5.
The right to enjoy full opportunity for play and recreation.
This concept of free primary education was also reflected in the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, under the fundamental objectives and direct principles of state policy, Section 18, Sub-section 1-3, when it states that: 1.
Government shall direct its policy towards ensuring that there are equal and adequate educational opportunities at all levels; 2.
Government shall promote science and technology; 3.
Government shall strive to eradicate illiteracy; and to this end government shall as and when practicable provide; (a) free, compulsory and universal primary education; (b) free secondary education; (c) free universal education; and (d) free adult literacy programme.
Summarizing the reason behind everyone having right to education as presented by Olafson (1975) and Melden (1975), Ocho in Nwangwu et al.
(2005:69-70) stated thus: a.
The child is born helpless and has to rely entirely on his parents and other older members of society to survive and satisfy his growth needs in all its ramifications.
b.
It is the duty of every citizen to perform his political and other citizenship duties and exercise the right appertaining thereto, effectively.
The degree and quality of participation in the life of the society depends to a large extent on the degree and quality of his education.
c. Since every citizen benefits from the result of the education of his fellow citizen and since every generation receives its education from an older generation, every generation has a duty to reciprocate by educating the generation that comes after it.
Ocho(2005), went further to note that Melden(1975) believes that the basic reason for a right to education is the right to moral education.
Melden believes that humanity is threatened in the failure of moral education.
He affirms the right of children to an education designed to provide them with an understanding of their cultural and political heritage along with these skills necessary for their effective participation in the society into which they are born.
He believes that it is only through making it a right that there is hope that these benefits will be transmitted to succeeding generations.
In a nutshell, the above belief of Melden summarizes the goals of primary education in Nigeria as stated above.
The goals are designed not only to eradicate illiteracy in Nigeria but also to equip the children with the skills with which to become active and contributing members of the Nigerian society.
It is against this background that Section 17, Sub-section 3(a) of the 1999 Constitution of Nigeria states that: the State shall direct its policy towards ensuring that all citizens, without discrimination on any group whatsoever have the opportunity for securing adequate means of livelihood as well as adequate opportunity to secure suitable employment.
It is certainly not possible for a person to compete effectively and secure suitable means of livelihood if he has not acquired basic education that will equip him with skills.
It is against this background that the Nigerian government has been making concerted efforts to improve primary education programme which forms the bedrock of other levels of education.
In spite of governments' efforts, primary education has been bedevilled by a lot of problems which will be examined in our next section of this unit.
3.6 The Problems of Implementation of Primary Education Programme A lot of factors militate against the implementation of primary education programme in Nigeria.
UNICEF rightly observed that the problems confronting education in Nigeria are not different from those that had undermined economic and social advancements.
These problems include widespread poverty, lack of skilled personnel, top-down bureaucracies, gender discrimination, rapid population growth, skewed distribution of education funds, bloated military spending and onerous foreign debt burdens (Ugwu in Nwangwu 2003).
The agency summarized all these factors to be insufficient will.
On the other hand, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in its Nigerian Human Development Report of 1995 warned of a multiplying tribe of illiterates if education for all is not realized soon.
Ekeocha and Fonta (2007), citing Maja noted that the participation rates of children of primary school age (6-11 years) in 1994 were estimated to be 63.5 percent.
In 1999 it was estimated there were 19.5 million primary school age children in Nigeria.
Of the total numbers estimated, 15.7 million were reported to be in school presupposing that the remaining 3.8 million were on the streets begging.
It was also observed that there are regional disparities that exist between the Southern and Northern zones in terms of enrollment.
In the Southern zones, the enrollment were as high as 95 percent whereas for the Northern zones, it was as low as 19.91 percent.
There are also gender disparities between the two zones as similar patterns of enrollments exist.
In the Northern zone, female enrollments are low.
However, female enrollments are higher than male enrollments in the Southeast and are on the same level with male enrollments in the Southwest.
These disparities are problems that need to be addressed.
Other problems confronting the implementation of primary education programme include: 1.
Lack of Political Will: Nigerian politicians lack the political will and commitment to invest and promote education.
This lack of political will and commitment was clearly manifested during the Second Republic.
While the Unity Party of Nigeria (UPN) insisted on free education throughout the country, the National Party of Nigeria (UPN) that controlled the government at the centre resisted it.
The UPN went ahead and implemented free education in those states it controlled.
It recorded a reasonable success.
Throughout the regime of the former President, Alhaji Shehu Shagari in the Second Republic, there was absolute neglect and lack of interest in education.
Nwangwu (2003) quoted an editorial comment of the National Concord of May 11, 1983 thus: If teachers were not on strike for four months in Bendel State, schools were closed down indefinitely in Benue State for lack of payment of salary.
When teachers’ salaries were not paid in areas like Imo and Anambra States, they were on strike in Kano and Sokoto States.
Gongola State crowned it all by closing all primary and secondary schools and sending all pupils home; their simple reason was that the State Government no longer had enough funds to finance education.
This was the height of ignorance on the part of our political leaders on the importance of education in nation building.
2.
Funding: One of the major problems confronting primary education in Nigeria is poor funding.
UNESCO recommended that budgetary allocation to education should be 26 percent of the country’s annual budget.
Vision 2010 Committee made the same recommendation.
Ironically, no administration had got near to this recommendation.
The funding of education in Nigeria is at a very low ebb.
In 2007, only 8.19 percent was allocated to education (Bozimo and Sanda 2007:282).
In 2001, 7 percent was allocated to education while in 2008, education got 13 percent of the federal budget.
On comparative basis, Bozimo and Sanda went further to note that Nigeria spends the least amount on education in relation to other countries; for instance, South Africa 25.8 percent, Singapore 23.60 percent, Algeria 21.10 percent, Cuba 15.10 percent, and Ghana 30 percent.
As a result of poor funding, educational facilities are dilapidated.
Ugwu cited by Nwangwu (2003) reported that the survey conducted by the then National Primary Education Commission (NPEC), now Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) showed that out of 40,204 public primary schools in the country, over 30,000 were in very bad shape with collapsed infrastructure.
It was also noted that 81 billion naira was needed to rehabilitate the infrastructural facilities but the Commission received only 30 million naira as capital vote between 1993 and 1998.
Aina (1999:22) remarked that 68.9 percent of primary schools have no access to drinking water while 77 percent have no textbooks, with 36 percent lacking writing materials.
Education is a capital intensive project, yet very slow in yielding dividend because it involves human development.
Primary education, being the foundation on which other educational levels rest, should be adequately funded.
3.
Lack of Awareness: There is insufficient campaign on the importance of education.
This explains why a good number of youths are taking to business.
The 1976 UPE lacked aggressive enrollment drive and mobilization especially in the Northern zone and this accounted for poor enrollment figure in that zone.
Even in the year 2000, we still have poor school enrollment in the North.
The survey conducted by the then NPEC in 1995 and 1996 showed that nine states – Katsina, Sokoto, Kebbi, Zamfara, Niger, FCT, Kwara, Kogi and Kaduna representing 23.22 percent of the national population could only account for 10 percent of national enrollment figures in primary schools.
The survey showed that the zone had only 2,093,817 and 2,472,145 of the 16,962,123 and 14,796.074 national enrollment figures for 1995 and 1996 respectively (Ugwu in Nwangwu 2003:104).
In 1999, only two northern states – Kwara and Kogi had up to 44 percent of their children enrolled in primary schools (Awowede 2000).
It was reported that in the south-east, low rate of male enrollment is a source of concern while in the north girls have little access to education.
It is necessary to mention that poor primary school enrollment has multiplier effects on the ladder of education.
Awowede revealed that statistics show that in 1998, the entire nineteen states in the North had only 12 percent of national admission into tertiary institutions.
4.
The Teacher Factor: The Universal Basic Education (UBE) implementation guidelines underscore the importance of teachers when it asserted that no educational system can rise above the level of its teachers (FRN 2000:9).
In this respect, the teacher factor includes the quantity and quality of teachers available for the implementation of primary education programme.
It is in the same vein that Prewitt (1971:23) noted that: It is teachers more than any other single group of people who determine the attitudes of society and aspirations of the nation.
This is power itself.
One of the reasons why the 1976 UPE collapsed was inadequate supply of qualified teachers to cope with the population explosion in the primary schools.
Ocho, citing Ukeje (Nwangwu et al.
: 2005:73) noted that with the introduction of UPE in September 1976, Nigeria achieved, perhaps, the world’s highest rate of educational expansion but at the same time and, perhaps, unwittingly set in motion the greatest crisis ever witnessed in education in the country.
According to him, the impact of the unplanned expansion was disastrous on the quality and standard of education.
He noted that as a result of inadequate qualified teachers to implement UPE programme, whoever wished to teach was recruited into a crash programme of teacher education.
Writing on the character and quality of the teachers, he noted: In recruiting adults to bring up our children, no sensitivity was shown with regards to the growth and needs of children.
Illiterate and half-literate market women, men who failed to make it in any trade or work, motor-park touts who were no longer strong enough to keep their positions, crooks of all types flocked into the teacher training colleges and within one or two years crashed through to become teachers of our children and models to be imitated.
The result is a nation without scruple or morals.
We can now appreciate the fact that recruiting adequately qualified teachers in large numbers is a very important factor in the successful implementation of primary education programme in Nigeria.
5.
Instability in Education Sector: The long period of military rule in Nigeria affected adversely the implementation of primary school programme.
This led to instability in the education sector.
In a study carried out by Shelter Rights Initiative (SRI), Ugwu (in Nwangwu 2003), noted that incessant closure of schools due to strikes has a negative impact on education in the country.
The study identified over fifty strikes and closure of schools between 1994 and 1999.
In 2008, the Nigeria Union of Teachers (NUT) embarked on a nationwide strike demanding for Teachers Salary Structure (TSS).
This disruption in education sector is a major problem in the implementation of primary education programme.
6.
Lack of Facilities: Facilities refer to adequate classrooms, writing desks, recreational facilities and conducive teaching environment.
Most primary schools lack both teaching and learning facilities and this affect adversely primary education.
Adamu (2007) noted that approximately five percent of schools in the country have no school buildings.
According to him, most of the buildings where available were either without roofs, inadequate or in a terrible state.
He noted that a survey in 1993 showed that classroom are overcrowded with an average of 69 pupils per teacher in a regular 12m x 10m classroom.
He affirmed further that, in other cases, there was acute shortage of furniture for teachers (62.5 percent) and for pupils, the national average is 62.38 percent.
7.
Lack of Reliable Data: A major problem in primary education is the lack of reliable data for planning.
Adamu (2007) reported that though the Federal Government produces data on executed budgets annually, contributions from States and Local Government Areas are not collated into comprehensive Government accounts presenting global sectoral breakdown of expenditure.
According to him, this situation is complicated by the facts that funds expended on education by various bodies – grants and internally generated revenue are not reflected in the Federal, State and Local Government budgets.
Apart from the revenue aspect, no accurate data on the number of qualified teachers available, facilities etc exist.
All these affect the primary education programme.
8.
Financial Discipline: Many educational administrators are corrupt and dishonest in the disbursement of educational funds.
Allegation of corrupt practices had been levelled against the Education Tax Fund (ETF).
Olowolabi (2000) reported that the missing 40 billion naira education tax collected by the Federal Inland Revenue Service (FIRS) has not been located.
The ETF said the money never reached its office.
The ETF was established as trust fund under decree No.
7 of 1993 with the sole aim of funding education through project management.
This is to improve the quality of education offered to our youths.
The decree that established the fund mandated it to collect a 2 percent education tax on assessed tax payers in the country.
The decree also assigned the responsibility of assessing and collecting education tax from respective companies in Nigeria to the Federal Inland Revenue Service.
However, in 1998, as a result of some inadequacies detected in this decree, the Education Tax Fund (Amendment decree 40 was promulgated).
The National Primary Education Commission which supervised primary education in the country between 1988-1993 is said to be characterized by fraud.
Certain$fund released for promoting education was either misappropriated or used to provide inferior educational equipment which never withstood the test of time.
Aina (1999) noted that the police was asked to investigate the allegation of 1.2 billion contract deal given by Ali Adamu, the former Executive Secretary`of the Commission.
The outcome of the investigation was never made public.
One of the problems that confronted the implementation of 1976 UPE was fraudulent practice which led to many states inflating enrollment figures for purposes of collecting funds.
Unfortunately, such funds were never used to promote education, rather they were used to solve personal problems.
It was also on record that many contractors constructed school buildings of very poor quality which greatly affected the infrastructure of primary schools.
In summary, Adesina (1992:3-4) noted that policy implementation in educational sector has been very ineffective in Nigeria as a result of the following reasons: 1.
Lack of trained experience system managers; 2.
Politicization of educational decision-making alienates faithful implementation of the policies; 3.
Intra- and inter-organization and personality conflicts.
For example, there is the tendency to emphasize what bodies passed what policies rather than looking at the policies themselves.
Similarly, when educationalsuch ideas are floated, people tend to ignore the ideas themselves and concentrate on the individuals opposing the ideas; 4.
Inadequate monitoring and evaluation machineries at the local, state and federal levels; 5.
Underestimation of human and material resources for implementation of educational plans and policies; 6.
Political and societal instability which failed to provide a conducive atmosphere for policy implementation; 7.
Political patronage and indiscipline in the management of public institutions taking the form of ethnicity, nepotism and tribalism; 8.
Financial indiscipline in the management of financial resources in the public system, otherwise called corruption and fraud.
Such indiscipline results in high wastage not only on the material resources available but also of the human resources earmarked for implementation; 9.
Lack of exemplary leadership styles.
All that we have been discussing have been highlighted by the above points.
These constitute the problems that militate against the implementation of primary education programme in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION We shall conclude this lecture by stating that effective policy implementation is very essential for the success of primary education.
As noted above, any project that is devoid of policy guidelines is like a rudderless ship.
This, therefore, demands that primary education programme should be guided by a policy in order to realize its aims.
Primary education is the most important level of all the other levels of education.
All other levels of education depend on the foundation laid on primary level.
It is important to mention that the quality of primary education received determines to a very large extent the success or failure of a child at the other levels of education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt the meaning of policy, its importance and the emergence of National Policy on Education in Nigeria.
You also learnt what constitutes the goals of primary education in Nigeria.
We also discussed the stand the of United Nations on free education.
We finally discussed the problems of implementation of primary education programme in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define policy in your own words.
2.
What are the advantages of policies?
3.
Discuss the origin of the National Policy on Education.
4.
What are the goals of primary education?
5.
Discuss the rights of a child as adopted by the United Nations.
6.
Discuss the problems that militate against a successful implementation of primary education programme in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adamu, A.U.
(2005).
Education: yesterday, today, and tomorrow.
Leadership October 23.
Abuja Free Press.
Adamu, A.U.
(2007).
Financing education delivery in Nigeria: the rhetoric and realities.
In Elizabeth Eke & Raphael, O. Olarinoye (eds.)
Politics of Nigerian Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Adesina, S. (1992).
Foreword and Keynote.
In Ndu, A.
(ed.)
Educational Policy and Implementation in Nigeria.
Awka: Mekslink Publishers (Nig.).
Aina, W.A.
(1999, September 13).
So far, so silent.
Newswatch 22-24.
Arieh, L.
(Ed.)
(1977).
Handbook of Curriculum Evaluation.
Paris: UNESCO.
Awowede, O.
(2000, February 21).
The President and His Enemies.
Tell Bozimo, G.O.
& Sanda, Y.Y.
(2007).
The Politics of Funding and Fiscal Management in Nigerian Education: An Assessment of the Implementation of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) Programme in Plateau State.
In, Elizabeth Eke & Raphael D. Olarinonye (eds.).
Politics of Nigerian Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Ekeocha, P.C.
& Fonta, W.M.
(2007).
Optimizing Primary Education Service Delivery in Nigeria: a Contingent Valuation Approach.
In B.G.
Nworgu (ed.)
Optimization of Service Delivery in the Education Sector: Issues and Strategies.
Nsukka: University Trust Publishers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
Implementation Guidelines for Universal Basic Education Programme.
Abuja: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
The 1999 Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Abuja: Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
Nwangwu, I.O., Aguba, R.C., Mba, G.C.E., & Eya, P.E.
(2005).
Issues and Concerns in Education and Life.
Enugu: Institute for Development Studies.
Ocho, L.O.
(2003).
Educational Policy Making, Implementation & Analysis (2nd ed.)
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Olowolabi, Y.
(2000, November 27).
Education Tax, not ASUU Idea.
Tell 48/55.
Prewitt, K. (1971).
Education and Political Values: An East African Case Study.
Kenya: East African Publishing House.
Ukeje, B.O.
(1992).
Problems of Planning Educational Policies in Nigeria.
In Ndu, A.
(ed.)
Educational Policy and Implementation in Nigeria.
Awka: Mesklink Publishers (Nig.).
MODULE 2: THE ADMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY EDUCATION IN NIGERIA  MODULE 2: THE ADMINISTRATION OF PRIMARY EDUCATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1: The Concept of Administration Unit 2: Personnel Administration in Education Unit 3: Decision-making in Education Unit 1: The Concept of Administration CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of School Administration 3.1.2 Theories of Administration 3.1.3 The Administrative Process in Primary School 3.1.4 The Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The school, like any other formal organization has people such as teachers, pupils, non-teaching staff and parents (human resources).
The school also has facilities and materials with which to work (material resources).
All these human and material resources need to be brought together so as to create an enabling environment for both teaching and learning.
It is against this background that the study of administration of primary school is an important aspect of this programme In this unit, you will learn the concept of administration which has been broken down into three major areas: meaning of school administration; the purpose of school administration and the organizational structure of the school.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) define school administration in your own word.
(cid:1) know the various theories of administration.
(cid:1) know the activities associated with administrative process.
(cid:1) understand the functions of the defunct National Primary Education Commission (NPEC).
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of School Administration Administration is an aspect of management that focuses on facilitating the realization of the stated objectives of a given organization through a systematic management of problems and careful utilization of scarce resources which include human and material resources.
The human resources in educational system consist of both men and women, teaching and non-teaching staff.
The material resources on the other hand, include monetary and non-monetary resources such as facilities, supplies, finance, space and working strategies.
Peretomode (2004) drew a line of distinction between educational management and administration.
According to him, educational management is essentially concerned with the formulation of plans, programmes and policies while educational administration is basically the implementation or execution of these policies, plans and programmes.
Just like management, administration consists of such components like planning, organizing, programming, staffing, budgeting, co-ordinating, reporting and evaluating or appraisal.
However, these activities are carried out on a smaller scale when compared to management.
Administration occurs in every organization.
Whenever two or more people are gathered to work together, they must plan, organize and co-ordinate, take decision and evaluate or appraise their working strategies from time to time.
In the school or educational system, this process is referred to as school administration or educational administration respectively.
The school administrator or educational administrator, is thus that person who is charged with the responsibility of implementing educational plans, programmes or policies in the educational sector such as school.
A typical example of a school administrator is a principal or a headteacher of a school.
For a person to be an effective school administrator, a good knowledge in the areas of theories, techniques and principles of school administration is imperative.
This knowledge will guide him in his day-to-day running of the school.
The major preoccupation of a good administrator is always how to design strategies so as to reduce human problems, secure the co-operation of all his staff by volition and not by coercion.
Ocho in Nwangwu et al.
(2005:245-246) identified four basic principles that could assist a school administrator to avoid human complications in the school system.
These are: 1.
The purposes and policies of the school system should be understood by all staff.
2.
There must be clarity in the line of authority and responsibility.
Every member must know for what and to whom he/she is responsible.
3.
Authority to make decisions at the point of action must be granted to officers.
4.
Each individual in the school system should have a sense of security.
No staff should be retrenched or dismissed without following laid down procedures and processes.
The above principles are closely related to personnel administration which is an important aspect of administration.
This area will be treated at the later part of our lecture.
3.1.2 Theories of Administration Ifedili (2004:35) defined theory as the framework on which ideas are built.
It is a statement or a set of statements indicating how certain concepts or constructs are related.
It is a proposition and speculations that require proof in order to predict or establish meaning of events.
A lot of theories exist in the field of educational administration.
Some of these theories include, theory on motivation, theory of leadership and theory of job satisfaction to mention few.
However, Ifedili (2004:37-44) divided the theories of administration into three spanning from 1900 to the present day.
These three theories will be our focus in this lecture.
They are: 1.
The Classical Theory 1900-1930.
2.
The Human Relations Theory 1930-1950.
3.
The Modern Theory 1950-present.
The Classical Theory 1900-1930: This theory is made up of scientific theory and administrative theory.
The classic theory emerged during the early years of 19th century, which was the beginning of the industrial revolution.
The major thrust of classical theory was the search for universal – guidelines and principles that are applicable to all organizations.
The focus of management theory is on: (a) How to increase productivity.
(b) How to motivate the workers to adopt the new methods of production of goods and services prevalent during the period of industrial revolution.
As a result of this emphasis, the classical theory tends to be mechanical, inflexible and conservative.
The Scientific Theory: Fredrick W. Taylor is said to be the father of scientific management theory.
He was an American Industrial Engineer.
Based on his experience as a worker and as a manager, he found out that workers deliberately restricted their output or worked far less than they could as a result of scarcity of skilled labour.
If any worker wanted to work to the best of his ability, he was abused by other workers with a view to get him slow down his pace of work.
Based on his experiments, he developed a detailed system aimed at effecting maximum efficiency from both men and machines in the factory.
His main concern was productivity.
People were pretending to work while in actual fact they were not working.
Taylor felt that he should apply systematic method to change productivity.
Productivity had a problem because no standard way of production existed.
People were producing on the impulse of the moment.
In 1911, Taylor’s Principles of Management was published.
The main thrust of the principles of management includes: 1.
Close supervision of workers.
2.
Money was the main motivator.
It was used as a bait to make people work.
Piece rate principle was stressed.
The more that one works, the more money one is paid.
3.
There must be a certain number of people under the control of a supervisor.
This is related to chain of command.
4.
Job description and specialization should be detailed.
5.
Jobs should be structured for specialization or division of labour.
6.
Management should plan while the workers execute.
Planning should be separated from execution or performance but there should be co-operation between them.
7.
Time and motion study resulting in routinized way of doing things.
8.
Development of specialized tools to increase productivity.
9.
Scientific education and development of workers.
Workers should be trained to be skilled enough to use the modern method of production.
Some critics are of the opinion that scientific theorists are advocates of heartless exploitation of the individuals.
Administrative Theory: The theorists of Administrative Theory tried to abstract certain universal principles by which organization should be structured and operated.
Some of these theorists were Allan Reilly, Luther Gulick, Lyndall, Urwick, Henri Fayol, Max Weber etc.
Henri Fayol’s work was complementary to F.W.
Taylor’s scientific principles.
Fayol observed that all the activities that occur in an industrial undertaking could be grouped into technical, commercial, financial, security, accounting and management.
These were: division of labour, authority and responsibility, discipline, unity of command, unity of direction, subordination of individual interest, remuneration of personnel, centralization, scalar chain, order, equity, stability of tenure of personnel, initiative and esprit de corps.
Three principles were highly emphasized by these theorists.
They are: 1.
Division of Labour: Each employee performing a specialized function.
2.
Unity of Command: Each employee reporting to only one superior.
3.
Coordination: The harmonious integration of the different aspects of an organization.
Span of supervision - the number of subordinates reporting to one manager or supervisor, the hierarchical arrangement of functions and authority, and the subordination of individual to institutional authority.
It is important to state here that while the scientific management thought laid emphasis on increased productivity through the work of individual employees, administrative management focused on how the entire organization should be structured and managed to improve performance.
Human Relations Theory (1930-1950): The classical theory theorists were preoccupied with organizational structure and with the strategies in which the services of people can best be utilized.
While accepting and recognizing the value and neccessity of structure, the human relations movement introduced a real concern for the individual and the conviction that the value of people must not be sacrificed on the altar of organizational principles and objectives.
The Human Relations Theorists have argued that in addition to finding the best technological strategies to improve output, it was beneficial to management to consider the human elements in the organization.
These theorists, therefore, claimed that the real power in enhancing output and productivity lies in the working unit.
Among the pioneers of this theory who were mainly psychologists were Hugo Munsterberg, Mary Parker Follet, Walter Dill Scott, Chris Argyris, Chester Bernard, Abraham Maslow, Elton Mayo, Douglas Magcregor, Rensis Likert, Fredrick Herzberg etc.
While the scientific theorists laid emphasis on the task of increased productivity of the workers and the administrative theorists focused on the principles of administering organization, the human relations theorists stressed the concern for human feelings and attitudes in the organization.
The classical theorists cared less about the social and psychological needs of organizational members.
The belief by the Human Relations theorists is that if management cares for the workers, this would result to increased satisfaction which in turn would lead to better job performance.
Group work enhances productivity and morale of team-mates.
Group workers equally have impact on their team-mates.
Increasing financial reward was not a sufficient motivator.
The Modern Theory (1950-Present): The modern theory gives weight to the human relations theorists.
The two theories coexist, interact and, in most cases, are indistinguishable.
The modern theorists’ approach was aimed at studying the feelings and attitudes of workers as they relate to their various jobs in the organization.
The behavioural theorists carried out series of experiments which made their theories popular.
These theorists equally believed in social behaviour as the basis for administrative process.
Their theory and research were seen as a means of enhancing administration.
A very important aspect of this group is that their beliefs gave room for understanding the problems of organizations at different levels.
The System Theory: Ifedili (2004) citing Baher defined system as a set or elements which are actively interrelated and which operate in some way as a bounded unit.
In other words, a system could be seen as a set of interrelated and inter-dependents components designed to realize a set of goals.
There are two types of system - a closed and an open system.
A closed system does not interact with the outer environment.
It depends entirely on itself.
An open system, on the other hand, interacts with the outside environment.
The system theory brings together the ideas propounded in scientific management, administrative, human relations and behavioural scientists.
The system theory insists that all scientific phenomena can be evaluated as a system.
The modern theory perceives organization as a total system rather than focusing on a single aspect without regards for its relationship to the whole.
The system theorists are of the opinion that before the implementation of any decision, at any level, or concerning any segment of the organization, there is need to examine its ultimate impact on the objectives of the system.
It is a deliberate attempt to analyze a problem from its global perspective and then, determine a solution so as to maximize the system’s or organizational level of performance.
Some of the theorists that are associated with system theory include H.J.
Leavitt, Daniel Katz, Kahn Robert, Richard Johnson, James Rosenzweigh to mention a few.
Contingency Theory: The contingency theory relies on system theory.
The theory is based on the fact that whatever one wants is dependent on the organizational set up, the environment and the technology.
The theorists are of the opinion that what works in one situation might not work in another.
Contingency theory is said to be the most recent trend in understanding organizational behaviour.
It demands a diagnostic approach in an effort to isolate certain characteristics of the organizational environment and make if then statements: if a given characteristic is present, then a certain management practice will prevail.
Some of the contingency theorists were Joan Woodward, Burns and Stalker to mention a few.
We have devoted time in discussing theories of administration because of their centrality in educational administration.
The knowledge of these theories is very essential for school administration.
It helps an administrator to solve different organizational problems either scientifically or systematically instead of relying on the impulse of the moment.
3.1.3 The Administrative Process in Primary Education in Nigeria Having looked at theories of administration, we shall now look at the administrative process in primary school.
A process is said to be a series of activities that are involved in the realization of stated objectives.
Citing Ehiametalor, Ifedili (2004) noted that administrative process possesses a dual Classification-First-Order Abstraction and Second-Order Abstraction First-Order Abstraction Second-Order Abstraction Planning Goal Orienting Decision-Making Organizing  Executing or Operating Assembling and allocating resources, leadership.
Appraisal Performing ceremonial functions.
Mintzberg in Ifedili perceives administrative process as planning, organizing, staffing, influencing, controlling, coordinating, representing, decision-making, bargaining and negotiating and communicating.
Taking an educational institution as an example, the school administrator has a series of responsibilities to perform under the administrative process.
Olele in Peretomode (2004:109-112) categorized these responsibilities as Development and Implementation of the Educational Programme.
This broad function could be further broken into two major areas.
(a) Sructuring of the school for purpose of instruction.
(b) Curriculum development.
(cid:1) Structuring of the School for Purpose of Instruction: For effective teaching and learning to prevail in a school, a conducive atmosphere which is devoid of confusion and tension must be created.
One of the ways by which the school administrator can effect this is by identifying positions and roles and by acquainting the position occupants with their roles and the relationship that is supposed to exist between role occupants.
For instance, heads of section should be appointed to head junior and senior sections of primary schools.
The headteacher should assign responsibilities to these sectional heads and give them relevant powers to discharge such assigned responsibilities.
(cid:1) Curriculum Development: The school head should be seen to be playing the role of the team leader in relation to curriculum development.
He should do this by way of serving as a guide to the various teachers either directly or in conjunction with sectional heads in terms of helping to identify the relevant goals to the community, planning and selecting relevant teaching and learning materials, helping to implement programme improvement and evaluating changes.
(cid:1) Development of Teaching Staff: (a) This particular responsibility is discharged by identifying and indicating the staff needs of the school.
This concerns the qualifications and areas of specialization of existing vacancies and how the collated statistics can serve as a basis for their recruitment or making representations to relevant body in charge of recruitment matter.
(b) The headteacher can also execute staff development through the orientation of new members of staff and new pupils.
The essence is to help reduce the traumatic experience of new staff and pupils.
The pupils who will be leaving the comfort of their homes need to be reassured that they are in good hands.
(c) The headteacher either directly or indirectly assigns the new staff to other responsibilities other than teaching where there will be optimal utilization of his/her experience and talents.
(d) The headteacher can also conduct a programme of staff improvement through classroom observations and other forms of evaluation.
The essence of this is to identify areas of strengths and weaknesses on the part of the teachers.
(e) Based on the observations by the headteacher, activities such as in-service training can be recommended.
(f) The headteacher through the maintenance of good human relations with the staff could motivate them to improve their teaching performance.
(cid:1) Pupils’ Relations Responsibility: (a) Since the school cannot exist without pupils, the first relation the headteacher has with pupils is to ensure that those who are enrolled in his/her school are comfortable.
(b) The headteacher should endeavour to group them accordingly – different classes.
(c) The headteacher should also address the issue of students’ transfer, which could either be intra- or inter-state.
It is left for the headteacher to determine whether there is a vacancy in the class to which the transfer is being sought and what the reasons for the transfer could possibly be.
(d) The headteacher should through the sectional heads endeavour to see that students who are repeating are adequately catered for.
(d) The school head should take note of all the pupils who are withdrawing from the school for whatever reasons.
The pupil’s record should be subsequently updated to reflect such withdrawing.
(f) The headteacher should also ensure that the records of all those who have completed their programme in the school are safely and properly stored.
This is to make for easy retrieval when the need arises.
(cid:1) Community Relations Responsibility: (a) The headteacher should, based on his training and interaction find out and articulate the perceived educational needs and expectations of the community where his/her school is located.
These needs and expectations should be integrated in the school programme.
(b) For the development of good human relations, the school head should endeavour to participate in communal activities to which he/she is invited.
(c) The headteacher should maintain a good channel of communication with the Parent Teachers’ Association (PTA) for purposes of getting new ideas.
He/she should be sensitive to the feelings of parents and guardians in respect of the problems of the school.
(cid:1) Financial Responsibilities: (a) The school-head should in his preparation of the annual budget ensure that financial provisions are made for the running of his/her school.
(b) The headteacher should ensure that the school funds are spent according to the budget in a prudent manner.
(c) The headteacher should take steps to ensure that proper records of receipts and expenses are kept.
The above activities are the areas that come under administrative process which the headteacher are to grapple with in his position as the chief executive of the school.
3.1.4 The Administration of Primary Education in Nigeria The administration and control of education is vested by law in the Federal and State Governments.
Some responsibilities are, by delegation vested in the local governments.
In order to ensure effective administration of education and to see that educational objectives are attained, both the federal and state governments established a number of parastatals and institutions charged with the responsibility for various levels of educational institutions.
The administration of primary school is delegated to the local governments.
In 1989, the Federal Military Government inaugurated the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC).
As a result of this, the Primary Education Edict No.
31 of 1988 was amended in 1993 and renamed National Primary Education Commission Decree No.
96.
The functions of the Commission are to: a. prescribe the minimum standards of primary education throughout Nigeria; b. inquire into and advise the Federal Government on the funding of primary education in Nigeria; c. receive the National Primary Education Fund as established by this Decree from the Federal Government and allocate the fund to the Primary Education Board of each state and the Federal Territory, Abuja, and to any Agency responsible for the Federal Government sponsored Special Primary Education Projects in accordance with the formula prescribed in this Decree as the Transitional Council, may from time to time prescribe.
d. collate, after consultation with all the State Governments, periodic master plans for balanced and co-ordinated development of primary education in Nigeria and such plans shall include: (i) proposals to the Federal Government for equal and adequate Primary Education opportunity in Nigeria.
(ii) ensuring that the basic national curriculum and syllabus and other necessary instructional materials are in use in primary schools in Nigeria.
e. collate, analyze and publish information relating to primary education in Nigeria.
f. carry out a regular personal audit in each state of the federation.
g. carry out such other activities under this Decree and such other functions as the Secretary may, from time to time determine.
The National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) ensures that standards in primary schools are maintained and that teachers’ salaries are paid as and when due.
Any policy formulated by the NPEC is implemented in the primary schools through the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) and the Local Government Education Authority.
However, in 2004, an Act of the National Assembly known as the Compulsory, Free, Universal Basic Education Act, 2004 was passed.
This Act established the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) which replaced NPEC.
The UBE Act of 2004 provides for compulsory, free universal basic education for all children of primary and junior secondary school age in the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
This aspect will be treated in detail in the later part of our lecture.
Figure 2 below shows the administration of primary education under the then National Primary Education Commission.
Federal Ministry of Education National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) State Primary Education Board (SPEB)  Local Government Education Authority (LGEA) of Education Adult Education Primary Schools Figure 2:The Administration of Primary Education Under The National Primary Education Commission.
Figure 2 above shows that at the apex of primary school administration is the then National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) established by the Federal Government and supervised by the Federal Ministry of Education.
Below the Commission is the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) under which comes the Local Government Education Authority (LGEA).
The headteacher is under the LGEA and he/she is in charge of the individual primary school.
He/she works harmoniously with the Assistant headteacher and teachers in order to realize the objectives of primary education.
All the organs and personnel within the administrative structure work with the line and staff officers to attain the school purposes.
Those that are in the direct line of authority and responsibility within the administrative structure are referred to as line officers.
In other words, the chairman of NPEC, SPEB, Executive Secretary LGEA, the Headteacher and the Assistant Headteacher as well as the teachers are all line officers because they deal directly with the issues and problems of teaching.
It is important to mention that the LGEA supervises adult education programme.
The other ancillary staff who advise, control and service teaching and learning such as the Director of finance, Security officers, Supervisors, Clerical staff are staff officers.
In the later part of our lecture we shall learn the functions of UBEC which replaced NPEC in the administration of primary education in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, the study of administration of primary education in Nigeria is an important aspect of primary education programme.
For one to be an effective school administrator he must have a good knowledge of the meaning of school administration.
The theories of administration as well as the administrative process in a school are all important aspects to be learnt.
These will equip the school administrator with the necessary administrative skills with which to grapple with the day-to-day running of his/her school.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed in detail the meaning of school administration.
You also learnt about the theories of administration.
The administrative process in primary school was also discussed.
Finally, we also discussed the administration of primary education in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define in your own word school administration.
2.
Discuss the theories of administration.
3.
Discuss the activities that are associated with administrative process in the administration of a primary school.
4.
Examine the functions of the defunct National Primary Education Board (NPEC).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ifedili, C.J.
(2004).
Theories and Process of Administration.
In N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Peretomode, V.F.
(2004).
General Principles of School Administration.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
UNIT 2: PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION IN EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Personnel Administration 3.1.2 The Relevance of Personnel Administration in Education 3.1.3 Recruitment and Selection 3.1.4 Induction of Personnel 3.1.5 Appraisal of Education Personnel 3.1.6 Compensation of Personnel in Education 3.1.7 Personnel Development in Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Some authors refer to personnel administration as human resources management.
In this lecture, we are going to use the terms interchangeably.
This is because they convey the same meaning.
The administration of personnel is vital because of its roles in the attainment of educational objectives.
This demands good planning, leading, directing and various activities geared towards the realization of efficient utilization of human resources.
The realization of educational objectives depends to a large extent on the availability and management of human resources.
Human resources are described as one of the most important resources of any organization.
In other words, the proper management of personnel in the educational system helps in the attainment of both educational goals and retention of quality personnel.
In this unit, we are going to discuss the various components of personnel administration in education as they relate to the primary education system.
3.1 Meaning of Personnel Administration Glueck in Iyede (2004:26) defined personnel administration as that function of all enterprises which provides for effective utilization of all enterprises which provides for effective utilization of human resources to achieve both the objectives of the enterprise and the satisfaction and development of the employees.
Schuler and Zubritaky in Iyede (2004:26) also defined personnel administration as a set of functions and activities used in the management of human resources in a fair, affirmative and efficient manner for the benefit of the organization, the individual and the society in a given organization and even education.
We can summarize the above definitions by saying that personnel administration is the effective utilization of human resources, harnessing and development of their skills and potentials for the attainment of both the organizational goals and that of the individuals working in the organization.
3.1.2 The Relevance of Personnel Administration in Education Adesina (1990) is of the opinion that personnel administration is very relevant in the school system because it has the overall goal of: (a) recruiting adequate and qualified staff.
(b) developing and maintaining the staff so that they would be able and willing to render effective and efficient services to the students.
He considered these two areas as the major goals or relevance of personnel administration.
He further noted that when these major goals are broken into specifics, one finds a lot of activities embedded in personnel administration.
These activities include recruitment, selection, induction, compensation, appraisal, development, discipline, motivation, counselling and promotion of personnel in the school system.
However, Iyede (2004:27) was more elaborate on the relevance of personnel management in education.
According to him, personnel administration in education is important for several reasons which include: 1.
It is recognized by the laws of most countries as a functional area of management that must be practised.
For instance, apart from being enshrined in the National Policy on Education in Nigeria, it is also contained in the Civil Service decree No.
43 of 1988.
2.
It makes certain that those who graduate from different levels of the educational system receive the desired skills and knowledge.
3.
It identifies the current and future human resources requirements, so that there will be no shortage of human resources to work towards the realization of organizational goals.
4.
It makes certain that when there is vacancy, it is filled internally to boost workers morale.
It is only when this is not available that qualified personnel are appointed from outside the organization.
In addition it attracts qualified and experienced staff that will help to achieve educational objectives.
5.
It ensures that the staff regularly undergo development programmes to enable them carry out their present and future duties properly.
6.
It assists personnel in building up a good career.
7.
Its selection and placement of staff is based on laid down principles to avoid favouritism that may mar the realization of educational objectives.
8.
It assists in the formulation of staff policies.
9.
It ensures that organization and government policies, and educational objectives are communicated to employees and implemented to enhance the welfare of the employees, thus boosting their morale.
10.
It keeps records and biodata of all employees, which could be referred to easily, even when the staff has left the school or the educational system.
11.
It provides the grading and evaluation system of staff which enables the employee and the education authorities to know how far the employee has fared during a specific period.
12.
It rewards good performance to motivate employees and discipline poor performance as a corrective measure.
13.
It ensures that employee needs are recognized and integrated into the education enterprise needs.
14.
It also ensures justice, fair play and equity are held above all other things when dealing with educational staff.
15.
It creates and promotes esprit de corps among educational staff.
16.
It communicates the education laws to the employees.
17.
It liaises with the labour unions such as Nigeria Union of Teachers and Academic Staff Union of Universities for settling of trade disputes and union grievances, thus allowing tranquility to prevail in the educational enterprise.
18.
It provides the atmosphere for staff professional growth.
19.
It guides and counsels staff.
As we discuss the personnel administration as it affects works, we shall also remember that we have pupils whose welfare should also be protected.
In this case we have pupil-personnel administration.
Pupil-personnel administration is the involvement of pupils in the administration of schools.
This is done by appointing them to discharge some official responsibilities in the school so as to ensure law and order.
In the primary schools, we have class prefects or monitors.
In the primary schools, we have the following posts and functions assigned to pupils.
(cid:1) Headboy/Headgirl: This is the highest post given to students in school administration.
He/she presides over the meeting of other prefects in the school.
It is his/her responsibility to disseminate information from the principal or any organ of the school to the students.
He/she also passes students’ demands to the headteacher, and coordinates every activities that pupils are organizing.
In a nutshell, he/she acts as a liaison officer between the headteacher and the pupils.
(cid:1) Assistant Headboy/Headgirl: He/she assists the headboy/headgirl in the discharge of the above functions.
He/she may be assigned to definite functions to discharge.
(cid:1) House Prefect: He/she is responsible to the housemaster/house mistress.
He/she is in charge of all activities of his/her house.
Such activities include the maintenance and neatness of the house.
He/she also directs the games and sports activities of his/her house.
All the members of the house respect him/her and comply with his/her directives.
He/she reports any problem arising from the house to the headboy/headgirl.
(cid:1) Labour Prefect: The labour prefect reports to the duty master/mistress of the day.
He/she ensures that the school environment is clean.
(cid:1) Game Prefect: He/she is responsible to the games master.
He/she organizes games in collaboration with the games master.
He/she ensures that students are distributed to different games and sport groups.
He/she working in tandem with the games master ensures that student are selected into different sporting activities to represent the school.
Such sporting activities include school football team, basketball team, table tennis and boxing.
(cid:1) Social Prefect: Social prefect is responsible for all social activities is the school.
He/she organizes social activities such as debates, drama, quiz, dances to mention a few.
It is his/her responsibility to arrange for a debating or quiz competition among the various houses in the school and against the neighbouring schools.
(cid:1) Class Monitor: He/she is responsible to the class teacher.
He/she ensures the welfare of the members of his/her class.
It is his/her responsibility to see that the essential teaching and learning materials are available in the class for the class teacher.
He/she ensures that there is orderliness in the class and gives directives to his mates to stand up when a visitor enters the class.
He/she collects assignments from his mates when the need arises and hands them over to the teacher concerned.
We have been discussing why personnel administration is essential in the school system.
We can see that the pupil-personnel administration assists the headteacher in school administration.
This is because functions are decentralized and pupils are involved in the administration of the school.
This removes areas of conflict and ensures the smooth running of the school.
At this junction, we are going to examine the types of activities that are found in personnel administration.
These activities include: 3.1.3 Recruitment and Selection The importance of recruitment remains that without it, it will be impossible to attract the high quality staff which the school system requires for the attainment of educational objectives.
Flippo and Maringer, cited in Udeze (2000) defined recruitment as a process of searching for and encouraging prospective employees to apply for a given job.
In recruitment exercise, the focus is to have as many applicants as possible so as to have a large pool of candidates from which to select.
Koontz, O’Donnel and Weihrich (1980) defined selection as a process of choosing among the candidates the most suitable ones.
According to them, it is aimed at placing people in position where they can utilize their personal strength and possibly overcome their weaknesses to the benefit of the system.
In the same vein, Ugwu and Onyeneje (2000) argued that the purpose of personnel selection is to ensure that those that possess the required abilities, aptitudes and personality dispositions required for high performance are employed.
They went further to say that it is a process whereby the most qualified and suitable candidates in respect of adjudged job-performance potentials are selected from the available pool of applicants.
The major difference between recruitment and selection is that while recruitment encourages everybody to apply for a job, selection seeks to limit the exercise to only qualified candidates who are finally offered the job.
In other words, selection process starts where recruitment ends.
However, the headteacher has no power to recruit and appoint his/her own staff.
Different nomenclatures are used by different states for the organs responsible for recruitment.
Such names include the Teaching Service Commission, and the Primary School Management Board.
With the establishment of State Universal Basic Education Commission (SUBEC) such powers of recruitment is vested in it.
Many establishments use selection interview in the recruitment exercise.
This is because it is assumed to be the most trusted device, having the strongest influence on the employment decision.
Ugwu and Onyeneje (2002) identified two major devices that guide personnel selection.
These are job requirements and personnel specifications.
For a successful and effective selection interview, the personnel officer must be both familiar and knowledgeable in the job requirements which will help him/her provide effective utilization of human resources within the system.
The personnel officer has to provide adequate information about the job in question.
This information needed emanates from job analysis.
Job analysis is an important component of the selection process.
Nwachukwu (1988) defines job analysis as a process whereby the tasks, skills, abilities and responsibilities of a job are determined.
There are different ways of doing job analysis.
These include interview, observation, study, questionnaire or experimentation process.
According to Nwachukwu, it is an information gathering process.
When articulated into writing, it then becomes job description.
In other words job description is the summary of the tasks and responsibilities of a job.
The advantages of job description according to Nwachukwu (1998:103) include: 1.
It serves as the basis for performance rating and promotion .
2.
It makes the duties, tasks and responsibilities clear to the job holder.
3.
It is used in determining employee remuneration and consequently his status in the organization.
4.
It is very useful in designing training programmes.
5.
It is used in contract negotiation with labour unions.
The second variable that guides selection interview in personnel management according to Ugwu and Onyenje is personal specifications.
These are predictors of job related criteria for different jobs.
According to them, they are those acquired and/or inherited potentials that are related to the successful performance of a particular job.
McCormic and Ilegen cited in Ugwu and Onyeneje (2002) noted six individual variable predictors to job success as working experience, education, training, biographical data, physical data information on various abilities, personality interest and other characteristics.
Nwagwu (2005) also summarized job specification as the human qualification requirements which include education, experience, personal traits, physical requirements, mental ability and working conditions.
He went further to assert that a good job specification would contain educational requirements, experience requirements, responsibility, manual skill requirements, physical demands which will include such factors as working condition, physical exertion and hazards.
Writing on selection process, Castetter cited by Nwangwu (2005:22-23) warned that a good and reliable selection process is enhanced by a variety of reliable information, and that those who administer the selection process should be very familiar with the instrument for gathering, recording, storing, retrieving and interpreting information about candidates being interviewed.
He suggested the following position guide in Figure 3 below to be used in the selection process.
Position Guide: A Written Statement Containing Facts Pertaining to A.
Person Specification B.
Person Specifications A Written Statement A Written Statement containing containing facts about: facts about qualifications needed: (cid:1) Education (cid:1) Position Title.
(cid:1) Experience.
(cid:1) Primary Function (cid:1) Skills (cid:1) Major Responsibility.
(cid:1) Knowledge (cid:1) Summary of Key Duties (cid:1) Abilities.
(cid:1) Special Assignments (cid:1) Initiative.
(cid:1) Judgement (cid:1) Relationships (cid:1) Personal Characteristics (cid:1) Areas of Authority.
.
Figure 3: Elements of a Position Source: Castetter in Nwangwu I.O.
(2005).
Personnel Management in Education: Human Resources Administration and Development.
Enugu: His Glory Publication.
p.23.
Primary school teachers are recruited following the reqirements by the ministry of education.
They must have passed English language and Mathematics at credit level in their ''O'' level.
The National Policy on Education has prescibed that the new minimum qualification required for teaching in the Primary School is the National Certificates in Education.
The minimum qualification required for primary school teaching used to be Teachers Certificate Grade II(TCGDII) which was awarded by the National Teacher Institute.
The minimum entry qualification for any teacher training programme is WASC/GCE OLEVEL.
One year training in advance pedagogy and school administration qualified one as a Teacher Certificate GradeII(TC.GII) TC.GII still remains as teaching qualification, but the holders of these certificates are provided opportunities to upgrade their qualification to a National Certificate of Education before the expiration of the period when no teacher with a qualification below National Certification in Education will be allowed to teach in any school in Nigeria.
However the National Council on Education(NCE),which is the highest policy reference point in Education, as a first step, has ordered that the employment of gradeII Teachers be stoped in favour of the numerous unemployed NCE holders who are without job.
3.1.4 Induction of Personnel in the School System Induction and orientation are synonymous words used variously to describe the process by which the new employees are acquainted with the organization and facilitates their absorption so as to realize the educational goals.
It is a programme of activities designed by an organization such as a school system to assist new employees adjust easily and effectively to their new jobs.
This adjustment will assist them to contribute effectively to the goals of the system while at the same time realizing their individual and position satisfaction.
Not until the new employees are fully adjusted to the work to be performed, the environment in which the said work is performed and the colleagues with whom the work is performed, they cannot put-in their best to realize the goals of the system.
It is at this level that the importance of induction process lies.
In the educational system, induction process is done by either the principal, the headteacher or the head of department as the case may be.
A new staff needs to know the policies, the history of the school, the people with whom to work, and their function in the school.
They need to know where to get information and which section to consult in case of difficulties.
They need to know how to get about doing their work.
In primary schools, it involves introducing the staff to the pupils during morning assembly.
He is also introduced to the staff, classrooms, teaching and learning facilities in the school.
Nwachukwu, cited by Udeze (2000:85) outlined the following advantages of induction process.
a.
It assists the employee to overcome the initial shock, because during the first few days in any job position the employee tends to be anxious and uncertain, he has much to learn about the organization, his supervisor and his colleagues; b.
It satisfies the employee’s need for acceptance; c. It gives the employee the feeling of being wanted by the company irrespective of the degree of his contributions to the system; d. It acquaints the new employee with some of the key requirements of his new job, and such information carries strong meaning to the new employees.
They get data on their specific duties and on those they are to work with.
It is important to note that recruitment and selection processes of personnel administration is assumed to have ended when the new employees have effected the necessary personnel, systems, social and position adaptations that assist them perform fully and effectively as members of the system.
The major aim of induction process is to assist in utilizing fully the satisfactions and the abilities of the employees so as to attain the system's goals.
Castetter, cited by Nwangwu (2005:27-28) is of the opinion that before an induction process is initiated, its goals must be established, stressing that the purpose of the exercise is to enhance and facilitate the adjustment of new employees to the work environment in which they offer service to the system.
His proposed model for induction process is shown in Figure 4 below Step1 Determine Induction Objectives Step2 Organize Induction Process Step3 Order and Co-ordinate Induction Sequence Step4 Follow-up Inductee Adjustment Step5 Control Induction Process Figure 4: Model of the Induction Process Source: Castetter in Nwangwu, I.O.
(2005).
Personnel Management in Education: Human Resources Administration and Development.
Enugu: His Glory Publication.
In order to clarify the above model, he posed some questions that explained each of the steps in the model: 1.
What does the school intend to achieve through the induction process?
What should be the impact of the induction process on the institution?
What should be the impact of the induction process on the new employees?
2.
What types of activities are required to realize the expectations of the induction process?
How will induction activities be embedded into organizational assignments?
How will other assignments be integrated so as to realize purposeful action?
3.
Which aspect of the induction activities will be assigned to the central administration of the system?
Which ones are to be assigned to attendance units?
4.
How should induction activities be phased?
What steps should be taken prior to appointment, before the new employee assumes duty, before the commencement of work and during the period of probation, who does what during each of the phases of the induction cycle?
5.
What measures should be exercised to make the induction process conform to plan?
What types of appraisal are needed to determine the effectiveness of the induction process?
The next activity in personnel administration is appraisal of educational personnel.
3.1.5 Appraisal of Education Personnel Personnel performance appraisal in education refers to the process designed to arrive at judgements in respect of individual’s past and present performance taking into consideration his work environment as well as his future potential for the system.
It is a process designed to help staff attain both personal as well as system’s benefits (Nwangwu 2005).
There are two forms of appraisal with different goals.
These are formative and summative appraisals.
In formation appraisal, the strengths and weaknesses are identified.
The strengths are reinforced while the weaknesses are remedied.
Summative appraisal on the other hand, is a process whereby a decision to implement personnel action such as compensation, promotion, re-engagement or termination is taken after an appraisal exercise.
Scriven, cited in Dunkin (1972) made a distinction between formative and summative appraisals in an education enterprise.
According to him, if a school system institutes a system of appraisal in order to encourage the professional growth and development of its teachers, it is engaged in formative appraisal.
On the other hand, if the school establishes a system of appraisal in order to select teachers to license, hire, give tenure to, promote, demote or dismiss, then it is engaged in summative appraisal.
The focus of this discussion is on formative appraisal because it is tailored towards the professional growth of teachers and instructional improvement.
One of the reasons for the appraisal of education personnel is to improve teaching by identifying what action can be adopted to improve the teaching exercise, the teaching environment or teacher behaviour in classrooms.
Bolton (1973:24) is of the opinion that the goals of teacher appraisal should include the provision of information for assignment modification such as placement in another position, reduction of workload, promotion to leadership position or termination of appointment.
Other goals of teacher appraisal according to him include to: a. safeguard individuals as well as the school system from incompetence, including the protection of teachers against the whims and caprices of a new administrator and the protection of a school district and pupils from the hands of harmful teachers.
b. reward superior performance, to validate the selection processes, and finally to provide a platform for the teachers’ career planning, growth and development through professional degrees and in-service training programmes.
In a nutshell, the above goals of appraisal which to a large extent constitute the reason behind teachers’ job performance appraisal could be summarized as efforts to guarantee the growth of teachers, and to protect and improve the quality of instruction offered to pupils.
It has not been possible to arrive at a generally accepted aspect of teaching traits that should be appraised for instructional improvement and teachers’ professional growth.
However, there are basic areas in teaching where teachers should be held accountable.
They should, therefore, be appraised in these areas.
1.
Area of Specialization: Teachers’ knowledge of area of specialization is very important in the process of teacher appraisal.
The importance of determining how well prepared a teacher is in his area of specialization cannot be overstated.
Oko (1983), writing on the importance of knowledge competence of teachers in the areas of specialization noted that a good teacher should know his subject area well or else he will be teaching students wrong, inaccurate or outdated ideas and concepts.
Added to this, is the fact that the teacher may be scratching merely the surface of the subject and will fail to excite the deeper interest and stir the imagination of pupils for greater involvement and discovery in the subject.
2.
Motivation of Students: Thurstone (1938) discovered that motivation through praise enhances greater speed in the academic achievement of pupils.
According to him, praise seems to be of great importance to highly anxious pupils.
It is also very important for pupils with low self-confidence and equally very important for pupils with negative attitudes towards the teacher.
McIntyre (1982:165) identified some areas of responsibility to which teachers should be held accountable and be appraised.
These areas are: (cid:1) Teachers’ Personal Behaviour: The appraisal should attempt to answer such questions as: Is the teacher in question punctual?
Does the teacher attend classes?
Does the teacher abide by the rules and regulations of the school?
(cid:1) Students’-in-Class Behaviour: Do students listen attentively?
Do they behave in accordance with the rules of the school?
Do they initiate ideas and participate in class discussions?
Are their in-class time spent on the task?
(cid:1) Students’-in-Class Mental Activity: Are the students interested in what the teacher is teaching?
Do they understand what the teacher is saying?
Are they motivated to learn?
(cid:1) Students’-in-Class Learning: Have students mastered the goals of instructions?
Can they demonstrate at the end of class or the term that they have learnt what was meant for them to learn?
(cid:1) Students’-Out-Class Activity: Do students spell words correctly on job application?
Do they note and conduct themselves in the streets as good citizens?
Do they apply critical thinking skills acquired in schools to resolving practical problems.
Ross (1981-25) noted that the Bettendorf school district appraises its teachers on the following criteria: classroom management, communication skills, compliance with the school policies, empathy with students, knowledge of subject matter, instruction capabilities, motivation skills, planning and organization skills, staff relationships, professional preparation and scholarship.
Seldin (1982) proposed a four-dimensional approach in teachers’ appraisal.
According to him, the students will offer assessment of teaching skills, content and structure of the course materials and clarity of its presentation.
Peers will provide an overview of teaching materials such as subject matter, original research, professional recognition, participation in academic community, interest in and concern for teaching, service to non academic community, administrators, on their own part, will provide an appraisal of the workload and other teaching responsibilities, service to the institution and teaching improvements.
The teacher himself will provide self appraisal as a teacher, as a staff member with added academic responsibilities, illustrative course materials, evidence of professional accomplishments, committee membership, service to the institution as well as to the community.
The next step in the appraisal of education personnel is compensation of personnel.
3.1.6 Compensation of Personnel in Education Compensation is said to be the adequate and equitable remuneration of employees for their contributions to the system’s objective.
The personnel administrator is faced with the function of determining rates of monetary compensation of personnel in his system.
This function is important to both the system and the employee.
For the system, wages and salaries are the most important single cost of doing business, and for the employee, the salary is also an important influential index in determining status in the society.
Compensation in respect of employee is designed to achieve three major things: (a) To attract sufficient and efficient personnel to the system.
(b) To motivate them to optimal performance.
(c) To retain them in the system over a long period of time.
In the Nigerian school system, the headteacher has nothing to do with the development of a compensation plan.
The salary scales and the conditions of service are generally approved either by the federal or state governments.
Salaries and benefits in the school system are very important factors in attracting, motivating and retaining personnel.
Compensation is closely related to satisfaction of needs of employees.
The only way a personnel administrator or school system can attract and retain sufficient and efficient personnel is to ensure that personnel perceive the system’s compensation as being fair and equitable.
Equity in this respect is regarded as felt justice according to the law of principles of natural justice and equity.
Flippo (1983) noted that when an employee receives compensation from an employer, perceptions of equity are affected by two major indices.
First, the ratio of compensation of one’s input of effort, education, training, endurance of adverse working conditions.
Second, the comparison of this ratio with the perceive ratio of other people with whom direct contact is made.
An individual readily accepts that equity exists when he perceives that the ratio of outcomes to inputs is in equilibrium with respect to self both internally as well as in relation to others elsewhere.
The major purpose of compensation is to allocate resources for salaries, wages, benefits and rewards in such a way that will attract and retain sufficient and efficient school personnel with relevant skills.
Studies have shown that a compensation programme that is well conceived and administered can enhance the attainment of specific objectives of the system as well as individual satisfaction of the members of the system.
Teachers’ compensation has not been able to fulfil the objectives of compensation plan.
It has not been able to attract and retain over a long period of time competent career teachers.
This explains why there is constant large exodus of teachers in primary, secondary and tertiary institutions.
Some of the reasons why teachers leave teaching in droves include poor salaries, poor conditions of service, lack of promotion, low public image and lack of job satisfaction.
Teaching personnel in Nigeria are not motivated enough to sustain them in teaching for a long time.
The push factors in the Nigerian school system are many and frustrating that teachers bow out at the least opportunity.
This explains why strike is a common phenomenon in the Nigerian school system.
If the Nigerian Union of Teacher (NUT) is not striking for better conditions of service, the Academic Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) is striking for better teaching and learning conditions in tertiary institutions.
This affects the quality of education in Nigeria.
Mackibbin and Joyce, cited in McPherson (1981:121) summarized the solution to the problems of dissatisfaction in teaching profession when they said that we need to be attentive to: educational personnel as people, living and working under difficult conditions and it is a matter of utmost importance that environments be created within which they can renew themselves, feel integrated and connected to their children and society, feel proud and dignified and have a job they look forward to rather than dreading and waiting for each day to end.
We shall conclude this section of personnel administration by stating that it is difficult to attract and retain a person to a job that is devoid of recognition for excellent performance, a job that is uninteresting, a job that allows no sense of achievement, self-actualization and a job that is nothing but a child-rearing responsibility as teaching is meant to be.
In this circumstance, the profession will only act as a springboard for people to better job.
Until government evolves a teaching compensation plan that adequately remunerates teachers, teaching will continue to lack adequate and competent teaching personnel.
3.1.7 Personnel Development in Education Personnel development in education is a process designed for self-development, self-actualization and self-growth.
Personnel development programmes are measures geared towards the growth and improvement of skills, knowledge, abilities and attitudes of system personnel.
Iyede (2005:34), citing Adesina(1990) perceived personnel development as measures to improve the qualitative and quantitative contributions of human resources to the overall goals of the system.
He further noted that it helps the individuals to be more efficient in performing greater work or at preparing individuals for greater responsibility.
He went further to identify four types of development programmes in the educational system.
These are: 1. correction of deficiencies known at the time of appointment.
2. enabling teaching staff to face challenges arising from innovation in the school curriculum.
3. enables non-professionals to professionalize.
4. enables professionals to acquire higher qualification for greater responsibilities and status.
A well planned and systematic personnel development programmes will return immeasurable values to the system in terms of increased productivity, reduced costs, enhanced morale, greater stability in the system as well as flexibility to adapt to ever- changing technological society.
Such programmes will also facilitate the attainment and satisfaction of individual needs.
The Scope of Personnel Development: Personnel development occupies important position on the list of those processes designed by the system to attract, retain and improve the quality and number of personnel required in a system to solve its problems and attain its stated goals.
Personnel development process is closely linked to personnel planning and utilization.
Nwangwu (2005:48) noted that good personnel programmes have the following objectives to achieve: a.
Improving and consolidating of the performance of all current position holders in their present positions; b.
Developing major skills of selected personnel so as to occupy anticipated openings; c. Promoting the self-development of every personnel in the system so as to foster their influence as individuals and to facilitate and enhance their individual need satisfaction.
Professional occupations in recent times have laid premium on the provision of systematic strategies for the continuous development of skills, problem solving abilities, knowledge and positive attitudes of system personnel so as to cope with the volatile society orchestrated by modern technology.
Different scholars have different perceptions of what the term personnel development means in the field of education.
In some studies, it is referred to as in-service education, professional development, continuing education, higher degree studies, staff development and training.
However, Sergiovanni and Starrat (1979:290-291) drew a distinction between in-service education and personnel/staff development thus: Conceptually, staff development is not something the teacher does for himself or herself.
While staff development is basically growth oriented, in-service education assumes a deficiency in the teacher and presupposes a set of appropriate idea, skills and methods which need developing.
Staff development does not assume a deficiency in the teacher but rather assumes a need for people at work to grow and develop on the job.
Nigerian teachers need both in-service as well as staff development programmes.
Presently, little attention is being paid to the education and re-education of Nigerian teachers.
Observations have shown that teacher education today attempts to do much with too little and it is funded at the lowest level of any professional educational programme in Nigeria.
There as enormous unwillingness on the part of the government, companies and wealthy individuals to provide both time and money needed for adequate and effective training of teachers.
We cannot but agree with Nwangwu (2005:49) that in a society rocked with the explosion of knowledge, the government as well as the public must realize that the continually learning teacher is as important as the continually learning child.
There is urgent need for both in-service education as well as personnel development programmes for Nigerian teachers.
These activities will be a source of motivation for teachers already in the profession, they will also attract and retain outstanding scholars.
Educating and re-educating of teachers are vital to any nation bearing in mind that they influence the lives of the nation’s youths and the nation’s future.
A teacher who is not constantly abreast with modern knowledge is not only a liability to the school system but also dangerous.
This is because he will impart wrong knowledge on the children.
This belief is further buttressed by Akpan (1979:13) when he noted that: An untrained man in the modern world may … be a menace to the society.
He is a quack, he knows only the laws of things; he has no idea of (their) why.
Hence if there is any trouble anywhere – breakdown in a machine or a mistake in a ledger … all he can do is to fumble and punch up trouble anyhow, leading to a more serious breakdown or greater confusion.
Really there is no place for the untrained worker, or even the intelligent amateur, in these days of specialized work.
Any day that passes brings certain innovations in the field of education.
This is as a result of technological development.
This renders teachers’ knowledge constantly obsolete, especially those who are not trained and retrained.
The only way to keep teachers current with changes in the field of education is by making provision for staff development.
Personnel administration of primary school pupils lays majorly on the head teacher of our primary school.
Primary school administration in Nigeria has become a complex entity in recent years,due to the implimentation of the Universal Primary Education (UPE) scheme and the subsequent increase in enrolment of students.
Enrolment increase have led to the assignment of a large number of teachers under the supervision of the headteachers.
In the Primary school the headteacher is made accountable for providing the means of achieving curriculum objectives as specified in the primary school syllabus.
As the manager of the school, the headmaster is expected to provide teaching material and necessary equipment as well as to manage the limited resources for the utmost benefit of the pupils.
He is also expected to provide strong leadership in curriculum implementation.
Another critical area of responsibility is the administration of pupils personnel.
Here, the headteacher is required by the State School Board to maintain a system of pupil accountability.
He is also expected to initiate a system of pupil accounting and provide counseling and health services.
4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of personnel administration cannot be overemphasized.
It is the bedrock of efficiency for it integrates the overall goal of attracting, motivating and retention of quantitative and qualitative personnel in a system.
It will be difficult for Nigerian educational system to realize its objectives unless it evolves good personnel development programmes.
Such programmes will act as checks for those who use teaching profession as a springboard to other professions.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed personnel administration in education.
Its relevance to the field of education was also discussed.
We also learnt of the various activities that are found on the level of personnel administration.
Such activities as recruitment and selection, induction of personnel, appraisal of education personnel, compensation and personnel development were discussed in details.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is Personnel Administration?
2.
Discuss the importance of personnel administration in the field of education.
3.
Discuss in detail the various activities that operate at the level of personnel administration.
4.
Discuss some personnel administrative work of the headteacher of a primary school.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adesina, S. (1990).
Educational Management.
Enugu: fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd. Akpan, S.,W.
(1979).
Nigerian Chronicle, September 2.
Bolton, D.L.
(1973).
Selection and Evaluation of Teachers.
California: McCutcham Publishing Corporation.
Dunkin, M.J. (1997).
Assessing Teachers Effectiveness.
Issues in Educational Research, 7(1).
Iyede, R.O.O.
(2004).
Managing Human Resources in Education.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Koontz, H.O., Daniel, C., Weihrich, N. (1980).
Management.
(7th ed.).
Japan: McGraw- Hill, Inc. McIntyre, D. (1982).
What responsibilities should teachers accept?
In Harold E. Mitzel (ed.)
Encyclopedia of Educational Research (5th ed.)
Vol.
2, New York: The Free Press.
McPherson, B.
(1981).
Are they in Roses?
Teachers and Staff Development.
Journal of Education.
3/2.
Nwachukwu, C.C.
(1988).
Management Theory and Practice.
Onitsha: Africana-FEP Publishers Limited.
Nwangwu, I.O.
(2005).
Personnel Management in Education: Human Resources Administration and Development.
Enugu: His Glory Publications.
Ross, V.J.
(1981).
Here is How Teachers Should be Evaluated.
The American School Board Journals, 168/8.
Seldin, P. (1982).
Issues and Trends in American Education: Improving Faculty Education.
Peabody Journal of Education.
59(2) January.
Sergiovanni, T.J. & Starrat, R.J. (1979).
Supervision: Human Perspectives.
(2nd ed.)
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Thussuone, L.L.
(1938).
Primary Mental Abilities.
In Nduka Oko (ed>) Professional Education: A Book of Readings.
Benin City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Udeze, J.O.
(2000).
Human Resources in Nigeria.
Enugu: Joebert Books.
Ugwu, L.I.
& Onyeneje, E.C.
(2002).
Foundations of Industrial and Consumer Psychology.
Enugu: Our Saviour Press.
UNIT 3: DECISION-MAKING IN SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction.
2.0 Objectives.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Decision-Making.
3.2 Decision-Making Theory.
3.3 Decision-Making Process.
3.4 Strategies for Successful-Decision-Making.
3.5 Factors Influencing Decision-Making in Organization.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Decision-making is a very important responsibility of all administrators.
It is the nerve centre of all policies, programmes and activities of every organization School administrators usually take decisions that affect both human and material resources.
Not until decisions taken are converted into action, they are mere good intentions.
A good knowledge of the decision-making process is very important for school administrators.
This is because, the school just like any other formal organization is essentially a decision-making structure.
The focus of this lecture is decision-making in school administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: (cid:1) define decision-making and its process.
(cid:1) discuss the assumptions that are associated with decision-making theory.
(cid:1) know the various steps that are involved in the decision-making process.
(cid:1) discuss the strategies that can enhance successful decision-making.
(cid:1) know the factors that influence decision-making in organization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Meaning of Decision-Making Kevin, cited by Ukeje, Akabogu and Ndu (1992:163) stated that a decision is a conscious and deliberate resolve that binds the individual or group to taking action in a specific way.
According to them, it generates towards an envisaged course of action of some specificity and is, moreover, an act that is made in the light of and is consistent with at least some of the elements of an action scheme.
It is a conscious choice between two or more alternatives (Elzioni in Ukeje et al.
(1992).
Nwagwu (2004) citing Mbamba et al.
(1980), described decision-making as a behaviour which is exhibited in selecting and implementing an alternative course of action.
In other words, decision-making is a process of determining a course of action by adopting a more or less deliberate consideration of usually competing alternatives.
Decisions are expected to solve organizational problems and enable the organization to attain its goals and objectives.
This explains why, according to Nwagwu (2004:91) decision-making is very often described and equated as problem-solving process.
According to her, the success, value and usefulness of a decision are determined by the extent to which it has assisted the organization in solving its problems and realize its goals.
Ukeje et al.
(1992) further noted that a decision is the outcome of deliberation, calculation, thoughtful response to internal and external conditions of the environment.
They admonished that decision should not be erratic and haphazard for an administrator’s administrative decision is the centre of the behaviour of the members of the organization.
It, therefore, presupposes that all decisions are taken with special attention to the on-going activities within the organization.
Administrative decisions are expected to cover the organization’s objectives, policies and plans and the overall decisions provide the working direction to the organization itself.
Decision-making does not end at determining and articulating the preferred alternatives.
Rather, it ends with the prescription of the needed action that will translate the decision taken into practical operations and outcomes.
In decision-making, it is the implementation of the decision-taken that is of paramount importance.
3.2 DECISION-MAKING THEORY Hoy and Miskel (1982:264-268) identified six major assumptions that are closely associated with decision-making theory.
These assumptions which constitute the focus of our discussion in this section of our study are summarized below.
Assumption I The decision-making process is a cycle of events that includes the identification and diagnosis of a difficulty, the reflective development of a plan to alleviate the difficulty, the initiation of the plan, and the appraisal of its success.
A striking characteristic of this pattern of action is its cyclical nature.
This dynamic process solves some problems and creates others.
Specific improvements in certain situations that enhance the attainment of the organizational purpose frequently interfere with other conditions that are also important.
Consequently, administrators should not expect that an effective decision-making, structure is going to solve all problems.
At best, the process adopted by thoughtful and skillful executive and staff should result to more rational decision, but certainly it will not result in final decision.
In the process of decision-making, five sequential steps are imperative.
These steps are: 1. recognize and define the problem or issue.
2. analyze the difficulties in the existing situation.
3. establish criteria for resolving difficulties.
4. develop a plan of or strategy for action, including the specification of possible alternatives, the prediction of probable consequences for each alternative, deliberation, and the selection of an action alternative.
5. initiate a plan of action.
We shall discuss these steps in detail later in the course of our lecture.
Although the process is conceptualized as a sequential pattern because each step serves as a logical basis for the next, the process is equally cyclical in nature.
In other words, decision-making may be commenced at any stage.
Moreover, the steps are taken again and again in the process of administering organizations.
Assumption II Administration is the performance of the decision-making process by an individual or group in an organizational context.
The decision-making process is a set of interdependent phases that may be isolated and abstractly described.
Administrators charged with the responsibility for decision- making, possesses various important attributes: 1.
It tends to perpetuate itself.
2.
It attempts to protect itself from disruption and destruction from within and is thus concerned with the morale and satisfaction of its employees.
3.
It seeks to survive, and it is, therefore, competitive with other behaviour patterns; and 4.
It seeks to progress and grow.
The impetus for growth is carried out not only on behalf of the organization but also on behalf of a specifically identifiable administration.
From these characteristics of administration, it, therefore, follows that administrators are going to perform in a manner that will maximize efforts, perpetuate the decision-making process, maintain the administration’s internal integrity, preserve or enhance its position in relation to competing interests, and assist it develop and expand.
Assumption III Complete rationality in decision-making is virtually impossible; therefore, administrators seek to satisfy because they do not have the knowledge, ability or capacity to maximise the decision-making process.
Effective administration demands rational decision-making.
Decisions are rational when they are appropriate for realizing specific goals.
Administrative decisions, however, are usually extremely complex, and their rationality is limited for a number of reasons.
First, all the alternatives cannot be considered simply because there are too many options that do not come to mind.
In addition, all the probable consequences for each alternative cannot be anticipated because future events are extremely difficult to predict accurately and to evaluate realistically.
Rationality is limited not only by the extent of administrators’ knowledge but also by their unconscious skills, habits, and reflexes as well as their values and conceptions of purpose that may deviate from the goals of the organization.
Individuals are not capable of making completely rational decisions on complex matters.
Hence, most administrative decision-making is concerned with the selection and implementation of satisfactory alternatives rather than optimal alternatives.
In the words of Herbert A. Simon’s words, administrators satisfice rather than optimize.
Assumption IV The basic function of administration is to provide each subordinate with an internal environment of decision so that each person’s behaviour is rational from both individual and organizational perspectives.
As a result of the inability of individuals to make completely rationale decisions, administrators must limit the scope of the decisions so that rationality can be approached.
The administrative structure provides organizational members with an environment of goals, objectives, and purposes.
This environment narrows and defines roles, thereby limiting the number of alternatives.
Hoy and Miskel (1982), citing Simon (1980), noted that rational behaviour consists of a means-end chain.
Given certain ends, appropriate means are selected, but once those ends are realized, they in turn become means for further ends, and so on.
After organizational objectives are agreed upon, the administrative structure serves as a basis for the means-ends chains.
For instance, once the ends for organizational members are defined by the directive from a superior, the subordinate’s responsibility is primarily to determine the best means for accomplishing those ends.
That pattern, along with procedural regulations, narrows the alternatives.
An individual’s decision is said to be rational if it is consistent with the values, alternatives and information that were analyzed in arriving at it.
An organization’s decision is rational if it is consistent with its goals, objectives and information.
Therefore, the organization must be structured so that a decision that is rational for the individual remains rational for the organization when reappraised from the organizational point of view.
Assumption V The decision-making process is a general pattern of action found in the rational administration of all major functional and task areas.
The specific tasks of school administration can be categorized in diverse ways.
Essentially, school administrators are concerned with and responsible for: 1. curriculum and instruction; 2. negotiations; 3. physical facilities; 4. finance and business; 5. pupil-personnel; 6. evaluation and supervision; 7. recruitment, selection and retention of employees; 8. public relations.
The decision-making process is essential not only to each of the above task areas but also to the broader functional areas of administration-policy resources and execution.
A policy is defined as a statement of those objectives that guide the actions of a substantial portion of the total organization.
The resources of administration consist of people, money, authority and materials.
Execution consists of integrating and synthesizing the resources and policy necessary to attain a purposeful organization.
The decision-making process is the vehicle for dealing with questions of resource allocations.
In determining the need for personnel, supplies, physical facilities, and monies, the administrator is confronted with difficulties and problems that require both deliberate, reflective choice and implementation - the use of action cycle of the decision-making process.
The cycle is repeated in performing the executive function.
In order to allocate and integrate the resources consistent with policy mandates and to synthesize conflicting values and tendencies, the executive attempts to administer the system through a continuous series of the cyclical actions that make up the decision-making process.
Assumption VI The decision-making process occurs in substantially the same generalized form in most complex organizations The cyclical evolution of rational, deliberate, purposeful action - beginning with the development of a decision strategy and moving through implementation and appraisal of results occurs in all types of organizations.
The structure is the same in, for instance, military, industrial, educational, or health services organizations.
The universality of decision-making process calls attention to the fact that administration is essentially the same irrespective of the specific context in which it occurs.
Educational organizations are different, however, from industrial organizations in several substantive and important ways.
For instance, the technologies employed by each, as well as the products that result, are quite different.
Yet, the decision-making process in the areas of policy, resources, and execution is essentially similar, in fact substantively the same.
Therefore, the study of educational administration must concern itself with the general, abstract subject of the decision-making process.
Having examined the assumptions that are associated with decision-making theory, we are now going to discuss the processes that are involved in decision-making, in other words, decision-making process.
3.3 Decision-Making Process We have already discussed the specific steps that are involved in the decision- making process; remember that we said that there are six steps involved.
Hoy and Miskel (1982) referred to decision-making process as an action cycle.
This is because many decision-making action cycles may be occurring simultaneously.
According to them, one elaborate cycle about fundamental goals and objectives may be happening at the level of board of education, while smaller and related sequential cycles pertaining to curriculum and instruction, pupil-personnel services and finance and business management, and facilities planning, may be progressing at local government level.
They noted that Litchfield described the complex interaction of events in the process thus: There is … a series of wheels within wheels, tangent now at one point, now at another.
The totality is administrative action, the wheels are similar not in size but in the articulate and inarticulate uniformity of their components.
It is at this point that we shall analyze each of these stages in the action cycle as presented by Hoy and Miskel.
Figure 4 below will help us understand more the action that are involved in decision- making process.
Recognize and Define the Problem or Issue Initiate Action Plan - Program - Communicate - Monitor - Appraise Analzye the Difficulties - Classify the Problem Existing - Collect Data - Specify Problem Situation Develop a Plan or Strategy of Action - Possible Alternatives - Probable Consequences - Deliberation - Select Action Course Establish the Criteria of Adequacy for Resolution Figure 4: Decision-making Action Cycle Source: Hoy, W.K.
& Miskel, C.G.
(1982).
Educational Administration: Theory, Research, and Practice (2nd ed.)
New York: Random House.
P. 269.
Step I: Recognize and Define the Problem or Issue The first step in the decision-making process is the recognition and definition of an existing problem.
This very step is very important in the sense that the skill exhibited in the recognition and definition of the problem becomes the catalyst that propels the administrator into action.
At this stage, the administrator puts the problem into its proper perspective.
An accurate perception of the problem will help in determining the limit and scope of the existing problem.
Ukeje et al.
(1992) noted that a clear perception of the problem is usually affected by the administrator’s knowledge of the area in which the problem is situated and equally the administrator’s psychological balance especially his sense of security.
For instance, if he perceives a problem that will threaten his position, he may suppress it and refuse to perceive it accurately.
In the decision-making process, the administrator does not necessarily react to existing problems.
Effective administrators are usually alert to issues and situations that might generate problems in the system.
This approach will enable them to adopt courses of action that will prevent the problems from developing and enhance organizational health and development.
Step 2: Analyze the Difficulties in the Existing Situation This stage demands for an analysis and classification of the problem.
Is the problem unique or is it a new manifestation of a particular difficulty for which a pattern of action has already been developed.
Chester I. Barnard, cited in Hoy and Miskel (1982) identified three types of decisions based on where the need for them emanates.
These are intermediary decisions emanating from authoritative communications from superiors that relate to interpretation, application, or distribution of instruction; appellate decisions, arising from cases referred by subordinates, and creative decisions originating in the initiative of the administrator concerned.
The authors, however, noted that Peter F. Drucker proposed that there are basically only two types of decisions – generic and unique.
According to him, generic decisions arise from established principles, policies, or rules.
It was observed that recurring problems are routinely resolved by formulaic rules and regulations.
A good number of the intermediary or appellate decisions that confront school heads are generic.
That is, the organization has established mechanisms and procedures for resolving such problems.
This, however, does not mean that they are not important.
It rather means that they belong to a general group of organizational problems that usually reoccur and that the organization wants to be prepared to deal with.
Such decisions are required when the school head implements policies mandated by the board of education; monitors absenteeism among teachers, mediates student-teacher conflicts, and interprets disciplinary procedures.
All of these generic decisions can be intermediary or appellate (emanating from above or below the principal in the hierarchy).
In all cases, the school head should be able to handle the situation by applying the appropriate rule, principle or policy to the concrete circumstances of the case.
On the other hand, unique decisions, are probably creative decision that demand going beyond established procedures for a solution.
This may demand a modification of the organizational structure.
In this case, the decision-maker grapples with a strange problem that is not adequately addressed by a general principle or rule.
In most cases, creative decision changes the basic thrust or direction of an organization.
In order to seek a creative solution, decision makers are at liberty to explore all ideas that are relevant to the problem.
A unique decision may emanate when the school head and staff seek to resolve a curricular issue where there are no existing guidelines.
The inspector may specifically demand an innovative solution.
As soon as the problem has been classified as generic or unique, the administrator is in a position to address a number of other questions as he or she proceeds with the analysis.
Such questions include: How important is the problem?
Can the problem be more fully specified?
What information is needed to specify the problem further?
The initial definition of the problem is usually global and general.
After classifying and determining the relevance of the problem, the decision-maker now starts to define more precisely the problem and the issues that are involved.
This demands the need for information or data collection.
The quantity of information that should be collected depends on a number of factors, including the relevance of the problem, time constraints, and existing procedures and structure for data collection.
The more relevant the problem is to the organization, the more information the decision maker needs.
Time is certainly a constraining factor in data collection.
Finally, the prevailing procedures for data collection may greatly enhance or entirely mar the search for relevant information.
In a nutshell, decision makers require relevant facts.
What is involved?
Why is it involved?
Where is it involved?
When?
To what extent?
Answers to these questions should provide information to determine the scope of the problem.
Such information can be collected in formal, sophisticated means, using operation research and computer facilities, as well as informal ways through personal contacts, by telephone or in writing.
Step 3: Establish the Criteria for Problem Resolution When the problem has been analyzed and specified, the decision-maker now decides what constitutes an acceptable solution to the problem.
The answers to the following questions will help in arriving at an acceptable solution.
(a) What are the minimum objectives that are to be attained?
(b) What are the musts compared to the wants.
It is possible that a perfect solution becomes difficult to realize in terms of outcomes.
(c) What is good enough?
In other words, what are the criteria for a satisfactory decision?
At this stage, it is advisable to rank the possible outcomes along a continuum from the least satisfying to the best satisfying decision.
Criteria of adequacy need to be identified so that the decision-maker knows that the right decision is being made and not just one that will be accepted.
In actual fact, the criteria adopted in judging the decision should be in line with the organizational goals.
What is referred to as criteria of adequacy here, is what scientists usually refer to as boundary conditions.
Any final decision arrived at has to satisfy the boundary conditions that have been identified.
Step 4: Develop a Plan or Strategy for Action This step is very crucial in the decision-making process.
When a problem has been recognized, data collected, the problem specified and boundary conditions identified, it then becomes very necessary that the decision-maker develops a systematic and reflective plan of action.
This process involves: (a) specifying alternatives.
(b) predicting consequences.
(c) deliberating on and selecting the alternative for action.
Specifying Alternatives: The first step in formulating an intention to resolve a problem is to list all possible alternatives.
In real life, only some of the alternatives are specified because it is not feasible for people to think of all alternatives.
However, identifying a good number of choices increases, the possibility of finding satisfactory solution to a problem.
In this case, it is advisable to spend time in developing as many alternatives as possible.
Routine decisions are usually handled quickly and effectively.
Unique decisions, on the other hand requires more thoughtful and creative decision-making process.
Creative thinking is of paramount importance in developing the alternatives from which a decision-maker must make a deliberate choice.
Predicting Consequences: For each that is developed, the decision maker must propose possible consequences that might result from that alternative.
It is important to mention here that specifying alternatives and predicting consequences usually occur simultaneously.
The formulation of alternatives and probable consequences is a good forum to involve many experienced people, adopting brainstorming sessions so as to make accurate predictions.
Predicting consequences emphasizes the need for a good management information system.
Schools that have structures that possess built-in capacities to collect, codify, store and retrieve information have a distinct advantage in the decision-making process.
In addition, consulting with experienced people who are in a position to know equally enhances one’s predictive power.
For each decision alternative, the consequences can be predicted only in terms of probability rather than certainty in respect of outcomes.
Deliberating and Selecting the Course of Action: This is the final phase in the development of a strategy for problem resolution.
This stage involves a deliberate analysis of the alternatives and consequences.
Sometimes, it is advantageous and helpful to list all the alternatives with their accompanying probable consequences in a probability event chain as shown in Figure 5 below.
The figure is read thus: Alternative A has three possible consequences (C A, C A, C A), and the probability 1 2 2 of each of these consequences occurring is designated P(C A), P(C A) and P(C A).
1 2 3 Although, this approach may not be adopted for each problem-solving issue, every alternative has a number of consequences, each with a certain probability of occurring that must be given adequate attention.
C A---------------------P(C A) 1 1 A------------------------------ -- C A---------------------P(C A) 2 2 C A---------------------P(C A) 3 3 C B---------------------P(C B) 1 1 B---------------------------------- C B---------------------P(C B) 2 2 C B---------------------P(C B) 3 3 C C---------------------P(C C) 1 1 C------------------------------------- C C---------------------P(C C) 2 2 C C---------------------P(C C) 3 3 Figure 5: Example of a Probability Chain Source: Hoy, W.K.
& Miskel, C.G.
(1982).
Educational Administration: Theory, Research, and Practice.
(2nd Edition).
New York: Random House.
P.275.
In the deliberation, prior to selecting the appropriate alternatives, decision-makers carefully determine the probable consequences of each alternative in the light of criteria for a satisfactory solution.
They are then in a better position to choose the best alternative or to select a number of alternatives that a linked together in some sequential order, which will offer them a strategy or plan of action.
It is necessary to note that the more complex or problematic the issue, the more likely the later course of action.
At this point, illustration becomes necessary.
Alternative A may yield a positive and acceptable solution, however, if it fails, the decision-maker may go to alternative B and if need be, to alternative C and so on provided the alternative consequences are still satisfactory.
However, unenvisaged consequences may need a rethinking of alternatives.
We have to note that a number of factors influence the choice of a preferred alternative or alternatives.
These factors are: 1. the values of the administrator; 2. the cultural context in which the decision is made and implemented; 3. the perception of those that are involved in the process; 4. the importance of the situation; 5. the pressure on the decision-maker and, 6. the importance of the goal.
All these and other factors intervene in the selection of an alternative.
In any case, deliberate, rational and reflective decisions generally emanate from following a systematic sequence of steps.
Step 5: Initiate the Plan of Action As soon as a decision has been made and a plan of action formulated, the next step is to implement the decision.
This is the final element in the decision-making cycle.
The initiation of the plan of action demands at least four steps – programming, communicating, monitoring and appraising.
Programming: The decision arrived at must be translated into specific programmes.
In other words, the mechanics and specific details for implementing the plan must be specified.
For instance, the plan to change the school uniform contains a specific and detailed set of operations that requires the answers to a number of questions.
Who is in-charge of the implementation?
What colour will the uniform be?
When is the change going to take effect?
In a nutshell, such plan must be realistic and feasible to implement.
Communicating: As soon as the plan has been programmed, it is important that each of those that are going to be involved in the implementation must be aware of his/her responsibilities.
Channels of communication among the individuals as well as opportunities for communicating both horizontally and vertically must be established appropriately.
For an effective implementation of a programme, those involved in the implementation must know clearly not only their own roles but also the roles of others as they relate to the entire plan.
If this is not done, efforts may be wasted, counter- productive and ineffective.
The communication system developed to implement the plan will either enhance or mar the effective implementation of the plan.
Monitoring: This refers to the process of supervising the implementation of the plan so as to ensure that it is proceeding according to schedule.
There is need to have an inbuilt information monitoring and reporting mechanism into the action cycle of decision- making.
This is to provide continuous evaluation of actual events as compared to expectation.
The monitoring process acts as checks and balances using systematic feedback mechanisms.
Once the standard of performance is established, there is need to enforce it.
Enforcement does not however mean coercive control.
There are many strategies of control – including those that rely on rewards and incentives, punishment, persuasion and means of inducing identification with organizational goals.
Continuous feedback reports are important to evaluate the progress of implementing a reprogramming of the plan of action; a change in communication procedure, or new monitoring techniques.
Appraising: Once the decision has been programmed, communicated, and monitored, there is still need to appraise the outcomes to determine how successful the decision has been.
Has the decision been a satisfactory one?
What new issues or problems have arisen?
Decisions commonly are made where probabilities, not certainties are weighed.
Even the most carefully conceived and executed decision can fail or become obsolete.
Organizational decisions are made in the context of change – facts, values, circumstances change.
It therefore, follows that a well articulated decision – one that has been reflectively made, programmed, communicated and monitored – in itself brings about sufficient change to warrant its own further reevaluation and appraisal.
Thus, the appraisal stage is both an end as well as a new beginning of the action cycle of decision- making.
It is important to note that there are no ultimate solutions to problems, only satisfactory decisions and solutions for the moment.
It is important to note here that the above steps in decision-making process are not mutually exclusive.
Even though they are sequential in nature they are interactive and interdependent in the process of decision-making.
Decisions are made at all the phases and all these culminate in determining the final decision with particular reference to preferred solution to a given organizational problem.
3.4 Strategies for Successful Decision-Making There are certain decisions that are painful to take at times.
For instance decisions involving the dismissal or retrenchment of personnel.
Many administrators are scared by such decisions.
Igbo (2002) identified some strategies that will help administrators overcome such anxiety and make rational decisions.
These strategies include: 1.
Follow the established procedure guiding that particular situation for which decision is made.
2.
Decision should not be made under emotion.
Rather, spend time to think creatively through the problem before arriving at a decision.
3.
Consult experienced and superior individuals before taking a decision.
Avoid rushing into issues that demand rational decision-making.
4.
Do not expect to be right always.
5.
Fear of failure is the commonest cause of mental stress and poor decision- making.
6.
Firmness is an essential quality for rational decisions.
7.
Do not defer decision.
Implement policies and decisions once they have been rationally made.
8.
Provide alternative solutions to the same problem.
These will be back-up alternatives in case the originally selected alternative fails to resolve the problem.
9.
Delegate as many decisions as feasible to officials in the organization.
10.
As an administrator, do not be discouraged by the negative attitude of some employees especially when it is difficult to please everybody.
3.5 Factors Influencing Decision-Making in Organization Many factors influence decision-making in an organization.
We are going to discuss some of these factors as identified by Nwagwu (2004).
1.
The Nature and Purpose of the Organization: If we take the education system as an example of an organization, we find out that it is both complex and large.
It is a service-oriented organization and by extension not a profit-making organization.
Consequently, polices and decisions must take into considerations these characteristics in decision-making.
2.
Characteristics of Members of the Organization: In the education industry, participants come with various backgrounds, aspirations and expectations.
These participants include teachers, students, parents and administrators to mention a few.
Each group makes efforts to influence in one way or the other the decision-making procedures, policies and programmes of the system.
3.
The Environment of Decision-Making: An enlightened community with a developed economy is more likely to influence the decision-making process of a system differently as opposed to a community whose members are illiterate, poor, ignorant and with undeveloped economy.
4.
The Political Climate: Political considerations critically influence how decisions and what decisions are made.
Partisan leadership is usually forceful in requesting concessions and preferential treatment in policy and decision- making.
In education, fear of political intimidation and victimization is real.
Many administrators do not have the courage to make rational judgments and decisions.
Their defence is usually that he who pays the piper dictates the tune.
In other words, politicians and top government officials are in most cases allowed to both influence decisions and to determine what policies should prevail.
5.
Ethnic and Religious Considerations: These two factors often generate a lot of sentiments and controversies in the decision-making process.
In the education sector, ethnic and religious affiliations and interests in most cases stifle good judgement in the decision-making process.
The quota system in appointment and admission are good examples of policies based on ethnic considerations.
This type of consideration affects adversely the formulation and implementation of decision and policies.
This is because, under such situation it is difficult to arrive at rational decisions.
6.
Cultural and Ethical Values: Every organization exists and operates within a cultural milieu.
The traditional beliefs, values and ethics of organizations affect participation in the decision-making process.
This by extension affect the nature and quality of decision and policies that can be made and implemented by administrators working in such organization.
7.
Existing Laws and Regulations: Every country or organization has its constitution or a set of laws which prescribe fundamental human rights, duties and obligation of members.
At every stage of decision-making process, the administrator must ensure that he recognizes and respects the existing laws and regulations, especially of superior authorities.
Indeed, decision-making and problem-solving exercise should consider those existing laws and regulations as the springboard for proper and legitimate take-off.
They constitute excellent framework for evaluating the quality and validity of decision and policies.
4.0 CONCLUSION We shall conclude this lecture by stating that decision-making process is very central in administration.
An administrative decision must be rational and reflect the objectives, policies and plans of the organization.
Decision-making always has a cyclical life.
In other words, it goes round in circles thereby influencing and affecting both human and material resources on its way.
This explains why a good knowledge of the process of decision-making is very important for school administrators.
This is because they are usually confronted with difficult choices and decisions.
It is only when they have the skills and competences associated with decision-making that they can make rational decisions.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture you learnt what decision-making is all about.
You also studied theory of decision-making with its various assumptions.
We also discussed the strategies that enhance successful decision-making.
Finally, we studied the factors that influence decision-making in organizations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is decision-making?
2.
Discuss the various assumptions that are associated with decision- making theory.
3.
Explain the various steps involved in the decision-making process.
4.
Discuss the strategies that can enhance a successful decision-making.
5.
Examine the factors that influence decision-making in organizations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Hoy, W.K.
& Miskel, C.G.
(1982).
Education Administration: Theory, Research and Practice (2nd ed.)
New York: Random House.
Igbo, R.O.
(2002).
Fundamentals of School Management.
Enugu: Cheston Limited.
Nwagwu, C.C.
(2004).
Decision-making in Organizations.
In N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagu (eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press.
Ukeje, B.O.
; Akabogu, G.C.
& Ndu, A.
(1992).
Educational Administration.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd.  MODULE 3: EDUCATIONAL PLANNING IN NIGERIA MODULE 3: EDUCATIONAL PLANNING IN NIGERIA UNIT 1: Educational Planning in Perspective UNIT 2: Theories in Educational Planning UNIT 3: Parameters of Educational Planning UNIT 1: Educational Planning in Perspective CONTENTS I.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts of Educational Planning 3.2 Educational and Economic Planning 3.3 Purpose of Education Planning 3.4 Factors that Influence Educational Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Planning is said to be an intelligent preparation for action.
The various activities that occur in school demand intelligent planning.
Such activities as curriculum and teaching, funding of schools, management of both human and material resources, all demand conscious and deliberate planning.
Planning is a difficult process which involves many variables.
It is preformed by companies, ministries, parastatals, schools, groups of people and even individuals.
The end product of planning is to determine in advance what is to be done taking into consideration relevant information from the past and present and assessing the future so that the stated goals of an organization are attained.
It is against this background that our topic in this unit deals with the concepts of planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: 1.
Know the concepts of educational planning.
2.
Discuss the relationship between educational and economic planning.
3.
Know the purposes of educational planning.
4.
Know the factors that influence educational planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concepts of Educational Planning Educational planning is said to be an attempt to forecast the future of educational requirements with the intention of making them available.
It tries to predict the impact of future events thereby helping the organization to remove or reduce the difficulties of the present so as to meet the future with appreciable confidence and success.
In an attempt to do this, Aghenta (1993) noted that many factors are taking into consideration, For instance, policies are formulated, goals set, feasibility study carried out and forecasts made.
Educational planning involves governments, individuals and educational institutions in preparing a set of decisions for action.
It is on this premise that Dror, cited by Aghenta (1993) regards educational planning as the process of preparing a set of decisions for future action in respect of education.
Aghenta went further to state that the definition of educational planning by Combs (1970) appears more explicit thus; Education planning is the planning of rational systematic analysis to the process of educational development with the aim of making education more effective and efficient in responding to the needs and goals of the students and society.
According to Aghenta(1993), Comb’s definition emphasizes three major elements – 1. the method of educational planning, that is the application of a rational and systematic analysis; 2. objective of educational planning – to make education more efficient and effective in responding to needs; 3. the beneficiaries, that is, the students and society.
Adesina, in Agabi (2004:121) appears to agree with Combs when he perceives educational planning as the process of applying scientific or rational procedures to the process of educational growth and development so as to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of the educational system.
On the other hand, Beeby, cited by Aghenta (1993:8) defined educational planning as: The exercise of foresight in determining the policy, the priorities and cost of an educational system, having due regard to economic and political realities, for the systems potential for growth and for the needs of the country and of the pupils served by the system.
This definition, according to Aghenta(1993) is comprehensive for it covers the micro and macro aspects of educational planning with emphasis on priorities, costs, economic and political realities and stresses the needs of the country as well as the interest of the students.
We can synthesize the above definitions to mean that educational planning is a rational and scientific process by which a country deliberately and consciously channels its future actions in the education sector with the aim of maximizing available human and material resources in pursuit of desirable educational goals.
Educational planning transcends data collection in respect of students, teachers, teaching and learning facilities.
Educational data are only meaningful when they are used to determine educational trends, analyze present events to predict future needs.
It is the nerve centre of educational activities.
It coordinates and directs other elements in the system to ensure that both long and short term educational goals are handled objectively.
The objective in this case will result to a realistic appraisal of the nation’s means which include finance, human and material resources.
Aghenta (1993) observed that educational planning is a sort of a systems analysis to the problems of education with a view to resolving the problems in order to make the system efficient and effective.
The analysis usually involves the nation’s financial means, economic and political realities, employment problems, students interests and the needs of the society.
The discovery of defects in the system helps the educational administrators to formulate a set of alternatives that will solve the current problems, and enhance the systems future growth.
In educational planning, the collection of educational and related data is of great importance for effective planning.
It is these data that assist the policy makers in predicting future development taking into consideration the available human and material resources.
It is difficult to predict the future in planning without these data.
It is through the analysis of these data that policy makers will be able to know how well the educational system is realizing its goals, the cost effectiveness of educational programmes and how to enhance improvement in other areas of deficiency.
Hochleitner cited by Olubor (2004:178-179) discussed in detail the concept of educational planning in the following ways.
1.
Educational planning is the frame of references and point of departure of the interdisciplinary approach in education.
It is also the logical response to the universal trend towards planning overall development.
Planning is an instrument not a goal or an end in itself.
It is an attitude reflecting the desire for orderly change and the strategy by which this change can be brought about.
2.
Educational planning is a cohesive force that co-ordinates and directs the many different components of an education system and ensures that widely accepted long term goals are approached more objectively.
This implies a realistic appraisal of the country’s financial means, its human resources and institutional structures and other factors bearing upon the success of an educational plan.
3.
Educational planning is an instrument to channel all knowledge about education and related disciplines into the preparation and implementation of long-term and short-term educational development plans.
4.
Educational planning has the difficult task of ensuring that education fits harmoniously into the pattern of change, that it is sufficiently progressive to produce the kind of social and technical leadership and qualified manpower required while at the same time preserving the continuity and development of a society’s cultural identity.
From the foregoing, we have been discussing the concept of educational planning.
The question that arises at this point is whether there is a relationship between educational planning and economic planning.
3.2 Educational and Economic Planning To say that economic planning, just like educational planning is also a rational decision-making process is to state the obvious.
This is because it is designed to direct and control the limited resources towards the production of goods and offering services that will meet the needs of the society.
Citing Dickinson, Agabi (2004:121) noted that economic planning represents: the making of major economic decisions on what and how such is to be produced, how, when and where it is to be produced, to when it is to be allocated by the conscious decisions of a determinate authority, on the basis of a comprehensive survey of the economic system as a whole.
One can understand that while economic planning involves all sectors of the economy, educational planning efforts are limited to the education sector alone.
However, one important similarity between these two areas is that they are all geared towards attaining growth, development and judicious use of limited resources to meet human needs.
Agabi(2004), however, identified a link between educational and economic planning that is of particular interest to us in this lecture.
He noted that programmes and activities of economic planning are required to provide the resource (materials, finance and human) needed to implement educational plans.
In this regard, even the student’s input in education is provided by the national economy.
It is through that symbiotic way that educational planning is needed to attune the educational system to the production of the much needed skilled manpower and the inculcation in the citizenry, desirable habits and attitudes needed for the pursuance of the economic planning objectives.
As a result of the roles that education plays in the success of economic planning, educational development parameters like enrollment rates, literacy rates, ratio of qualified teachers to mention a few have even become indicators of socio-economic development which economic planning is designed to enhance.
3.3 Purpose of Educational Planning Various authors writing in various contexts have advanced various reasons why educational planning is necessary.
Ukeje, Akabogu and Ndu (1992:168) for instance identified the following as being the purpose of educational planning.
1.
As a result of limited time and resources available to man, planning becomes imperative for optimum utilization of scarce amenities to realize desired goals within a given period.
2.
Education deals with human beings who cannot be manipulated like inanimate objects.
In order to enlist their cooperation in the system, there is need for careful planning.
3.
The rapid change in the society demands for careful planning.
Changes in the educational environment can be political, sociological, economic or technological and for education to maintain an equilibrium in an ever- changing society, educational leaders must anticipate the future and plan for it.
4.
Lack of planning leads to loss of energy, time and resources and brings about inefficiency.
To optimize the effectiveness of the school system, educational leaders should plan adequately.
5.
Education is a very complex function with diffuse goals and numerous means.
The difficulties created by its complex nature as well as the inherent difficulty in translating its goals into action makes planning necessary.
This is because the details for action are mapped out and authority is delegated so that each member knows his role in advance.
Careful planning also reduces the number of emergencies as these are anticipated in time and taken care of.
Planning helps to avoid decision-random for all decisions are carefully related into a coordinated whole.
These lead to organizational growth and updatedness.
On the other hand, Olubor (2004:179-180) is of the opinion that the purpose of educational planning is to: 1. achieve universal basic education in developing countries like Nigeria where it has not yet been fully achieved and ensuring both entry to school and completion of basic schooling.
2. achieve equality of opportunity for groups deprived of the opportunity to enter and complete schooling.
3. achieve quality education that is cost-efficient and cost-effective.
Of all the purposes of education as discussed above, Aghenta (1999:17-18), appears to be more comprehensive in discussing the purposes of educational planning.
According to him, educational planning is aimed at providing: 1. adequate facilities for students at all levels of the education system.
2. quality and relevant education.
3. in-service training opportunities.
4. adequate facilities for non-formal education so as to make the entire society a learning and knowledgeable one.
5.
In addition to the above, it is equally aimed at: 1. preparing students for the world of work in technologically growing world without abandon, basic and general education in liberal arts and culture.
2. widening the scope of educational planning to include all relevant disciplines, to lay emphasis on research in education, economics, technology, sociology, statistics and population as they have a bearing on the success of educational planning.
Aghenta(1999), went further to elaborate that educational planning provides information from empirical basis to reveal the past, focus on the present and project the educational needs of the future and provide alternative courses of action with predicted consequences of each alternative to assist policy makers in the formulation and administration of educational objectives.
Other purposes according to him include: providing, through its scientific approach, basis for examination, re-examination and refinement of educational objectives and programmes by periodic review or rolling of the plan; offering guidelines for monitoring educational activities designed for attaining set goals,and clearly defining criteria of performance to determine the degree of success or failure.
In addition, it provides links between the various educational objectives and levels to ensure balance and in that position, it co-ordinates expansion of the different levels to ensure a reasonable educational pyramid and long range goals within long range framework.
Educational planning establishes an inventory of needs and determines educational priorities in respect of the dwindling resources for education.
It offers an opportunity to emphasize the aspects of education which can bring more benefits to the individuals and society in a continuously changing world.
Priorities can be made from primary and secondary education, between secondary and higher education, formal and non-formal education, boys and girls’ education, science/technology and liberal education, liberal and vocational education to mention a few.
It establishes the logical process for getting, evaluating and projecting information which helps in the analysis of problems and needs with a view to providing necessary solutions and needs fulfillment.
For instance, the level of expenditure and ways of reducing it; shortage of teachers, facilities and equipment and ways and means of solving such problems, external problems such as social, economic, political, demographic and administrative which impact heavily on education, are critically examined and necessary remedies prescribed.
3.4 Factors that Influence Educational Planning Many factors influence educational planning in diverse ways.
Some of these factors are discussed below.
1.
Political Factors: It is the political ideology of the government in power that determines the nature of the educational planning of a nation.
As we have discussed earlier, when the Action Group led by Chief Obafemi Awolowo won the election in the Western region in 1951, it made education a priority in the region by declaring free primary education.
The N.C.N.C.
in the Eastern region also gave education a priority and declared free education.
The N.P.C.
party in the Northern region did not accord education adequate attention because of its political ideology.
During the Second Republic, as discussed earlier, President Shehu Shagari did not consider education as top priority.
While the UPN in the west accorded education a priority, the N.P.N.
that controlled the government at the centre did not pay much priority on education.
This explained why education sector during that regime was characterized with strikes.
2.
Economic Factor: The economy of a nation equally influences educational planning.
A buoyant and stable economy will enhance educational planning and policy formulation.
This is because adequate fund will be made available to the education sector.
With the discovery of petroleum in the mid-70s, the Nigerian economy was buoyant and stable.
This led to the declaration of the Universal Primary Education in 1976.
During that time, various forms of scholarships and bursary awards were available to students.
The implementation of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) could also be traced to the oil boom that provided enough money for the programme.
Again, the economic orientation of a nation has also a tremendous influence on educational planning.
If the economy is agro-based or industrial based, the emphasis on educational planning will be on vocational and/or technical education.
It is against this background that Adamu (2005:45) citing A.Y.
Eke noted that the British grammar school system of education transimposed on Nigeria failed because it did not lay the foundation of economic freedom by providing the manual skills and expertise necessary for successful industrial and agricultural development.
In the same vein, Taiwo (1980:2) noted that it: …is the economic factor which determines the supply of schools, attendance of children at school, the quality and quantity of equipment, transportation and road, employment opportunities, and the supply and quality of teachers.
3.
Religious Factor: Educational planning is also influenced by religion especially in the area of curriculum.
A country with one religion will not have problems in integrating and incorporating religious concepts in its educational system.
This is because of the positive moderating influence that religion has on the youths.
In this case, the church and the government will have identical religious concepts that are expected to be emphasized by the school.
This enhances national integration.
On the other hand, a country with multi-religious background has limited moral instruction to incorporate in the school system.
This is to avoid a particular religious group imposing its belief on other religious groups.
In this case, students are allowed to practice their own religion and religious knowledge is taught as an academic discipline.
4.
Personnel Factor: The focus of personnel administration in the school system as we have studied is to attract, retain and develop personnel in the right quantity and quality.
Educational planning takes into cognizance the quality and quantity of personnel needed to implement educational policies.
This influences educational planning because it has financial implications.
It is the financial disposition of the school system that determines the quality and quantity of personnel to attract, retain and develop.
4.0 CONCLUSION We shall conclude this lecture by noting that educational planning is very important in the realization of educational objectives.
It is a process designed to determine which decisions and actions are to be taken to attain a given goal(s).
Its major concern is to conserve and ensure judicious utilization of scarce resources at the same time resolving problems of waste in terms of human and material resources.
Finally, it is a process for target setting and a tool for charting a desired course of action.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt things that are associated with concepts of educational planning.
We also discussed the relationship between educational and economic planning.
You also learnt of the purpose of educational planning.
Finally, the factors that influence educational planning were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the concept of educational planning.
2.
Discuss the relationship between educational and economic planning.
3.
What are the purposes of educational planning?
4.
Examine the factors that influence educational planning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING  Agabi, O.G.
(2004).
Educational planning: an overview.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed).
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press.
Aghenta, J.A.
(1993).
Principles and practices of educational planning: focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: Nigerian Society for Educational Planning.
Olubor, R.O.
(2004).
Planning in education systems.
In N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma, C.C.
Nwagwu (eds.).
Organization and Administration of Education.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Taiwo, C.O.
(1982).
The Nigerian education system: past, present, future.
Lagos: Thomas Nelson (Nigeria) Limited.
Ukeje, B.O., Akabogu, G.C., Ndu, A.
(1992).
Educational administration.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co., Ltd. UNIT 2: THEORIES IN EDUCATIONAL PLANNING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Theories in Educational Planning 3.2 Types of Educational Planning 3.3 The Educational Planning Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In educational planning, theories are very important because they offer explanations in response to the nature of tension emanating from an unanticipated events.
In other words, theories guide the growth and development of education while models provide the systems with the opportunity to analyze, project and predict future educational evolution.
The knowledge of theory in educational planning is very important because administrators select those theories that they feel would provide adequate explanations of a phenomenon in question as a guide to their actions.
Administrators who do not have adequate knowledge of theories depend on the impulse of the moment and experience in managing a complex phenomenon.
In Module 2, Unit 1, we discussed theories in administration.
In this lecture we are going to discuss theories with particular reference to educational planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: 1.
Define theory in their own words.
2.
Discuss at least five theories of educational planning.
3.
Know the types of educational planning.
4.
Know various processes involved in educational planning.
3.1 Theories in Educational Planning There is currently no consensus among scholars in the definition of theory as various scholars define it within their own context.
However, in the field of educational management, Hoy and Miskel (1982) argued that Herbet Feigl’s definition of theory is adequate starting point for students.
According to them, Feigl(1979) defined theory as a set of assumptions from which a large set of empirical laws can be derived by purely logicomathematical procedures.
They went further to state that Kerlinger’s more general definition of theory appears more useful to students of social sciences.
In his own definition, Kerlinger(1976) is of the opinion that a theory is a set of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and propositions that presents a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables, with the purpose of explaining and predicting phenomena.
In the study of educational management, Hoy and Miskel (1982:20) noted that the most useful definition of theory is that Theory is a set of interrelated concepts, assumptions, and generalizations that systematically describes and explains regularities in behaviour in educational organizations.
They further remarked that this definition suggests three things: 1. theory is logically comprised of concepts, assumptions and generalizations.
2. its major function is to describe, explain and predict regularities in behaviour.
3. theory is heuristic, that is, it stimulates and guides the further development of knowledge.
We can summarize this section of our lecture by saying that theories are by nature general and abstract.
Theories are said to be useful when they are internally consistent and generate accurate prediction about events.
In educational planning, a body of theories have been developed to guide the operators of educational planning.
Aghenta (1993:34- 35) identified some of the theories in educational planning to include blueprint mode, process mode, rational comprehensive, normative mode, system theories and others.
It is the circumstance that dictates their application.
These theories are discussed below: • Blueprint Mode of Planning: This theory involves one or more goal statements which are generally reduced to more specific educational policies, programmes and projects all spaced out over a limited period of time.
The policies and programmes and projects so enunciated are related to sets of educational priorities, standards, investment needs and financial arrangements.
In National Development Plans, for instance, goal statements about education are pronounced.
These goal statements are later translated into educational programmes Such was the case with U.P.E., 6- 3-3-4 and U.B.E.
structure in Nigeria.
In the application of this theory as a basis for planning education, there is need to exercise control to ensure success.
• Process Mode of Planning: This theory is the opposite of the blueprint mode of planning.
In this approach, the programmes are adopted during their implementation as and when incoming information dictates for such changes.
In the process of planning, the plan document is subjected to changes and modifications as vital information and feedback are received.
The advantage of this theory lies in its flexibility.
It allows changes to be effected in the original plan in the light of emerging factors in the educational environment.
• Rational Comprehensive Planning: The theory advocates a total view or the entire field of planning at once.
It does not limit the scope of planning.
For instance, planning the entire educational system of a nation for a period of five or more years.
The argument against this theory is that it fails to take into consideration man’s limited intellectual capacities.
Again, it is not adapted to the closeness or relationship between facts and values in policy formulation.
• Normative Mode of Planning: The focus of this theory is on the ends and means of planning.
It is a mode whereby the goals and objectives dictate the limit of the action and the space of a planning agency.
The goals and objectives are the rational choice and are reviewed whenever the need arises.
Changes are accepted as an integral part of planning unlike in the functional mode of planning where changes are unacceptable.
• Comprehensive Systems Theories: These are referred to as theories of the whole.
Their focus is generally on total or whole systems and their obvious component part along with their attributes.
The merit of this concept of system is the emphasis on totalities as opposed to selected parts.
In planning, the whole system is taken as one, the approach is through the aggregate method.
The demerit of this theory is its limited utility as it does not concern itself with certain vital aspects into detailed.
• Sub-System Theory: This theory is concerned with the detailed analysis of inputs through the system activity into system output.
This process theory provides analysis framework for dealing with action stimuli (inputs).
The sub-system structures and processes act on inputs and outputs of system action.
The approach for analyzing a system or its activity is detailed and extensive.
The application of this theory to education enables all important details of the educational system to be analyzed and adjusted.
• Theory of Open System Control: This theory is based on the thesis that all systems can best be understood through their communication and control activities, life, status and adaptation are all monitored and evaluated by information about the system and its effects, all of which may be generated either within or externally.
Through feedback, the system is able to plan and predict future action which essentially is the purpose of educational planning.
• Output Theory: The focus of this theory is on the products of the system action relative to its effect on the system.
This theory is based on the hypothesis that the best way to understanding a system is to look at its effects.
The outcome of a system is multi-dimensional in that there are internal and external, tangible and intangible, productive and effective results of its actions all of which offers the framework for the analysis of the system.
In educational planning, project evaluation or implementation evaluation is a vital aspect of the planning process.
• General Systems Theory: The general systems theory is a body of a systematic theoretical construct which explains the general relationship of the empirical world.
The theory is a doctrine of wholeness which uses the concept of a system in research for common properties among diverse systems.
It lays emphasis on the relationship between the parts, the manner they relate and interact with each other.
It possesses an important element which is the interaction of individual of some kind with his environment.
An open system interacts with its environment.
In education, the school is an open system.
This is because of the interplay between the school and its environment especially the labour market.
One of the primary functions of the school is the preparation of the individuals for the labour market.
The success with which the school achieves this is measured by the extent to which the products of the school system do not only secure jobs but also meet with the actual requirements for discharging the jobs.
Aghenta(1993) has argued that since the labour market has limited employment opportunities, there is the need to strike equilibrium in the demand and supply of labour.
To actualize this, the school and labour market must fruitfully interact closely hence planning involves data collection, information, manpower predicting and training in appropriate skills.
This theory is a major guide to educational planning.
3.2 Types of Educational Planning There are different types of educational planning as described by various authors.
However, the type of planning is dependent on the classificatory approach adopted by the author.
Agabi (2004:123-125) noted that the most popular approaches include those by time horizon, scope, time dynamism, level of government involvement and managerial level.
Time Horizon: Time horizon in educational planning can either be a short term, medium term or long term planning.
Although there is no serious rigidity in the duration between them, it is generally recognized that the implementation of short term planning activities are known to fall between two to five or even ten years.
Educational planning of long term perspective falls between 10 and 25 years or even beyond.
Scope of the Plan: Educational planning that involves scope of the plan has two level of planning: (a) micro-level planning; (b) macro-level planning; A micro-level planning is any planning activity that is carried out at the local government or the institutional level.
Such activities as local education authorities, school administration and teachers in the area of curriculum planning, facilities planning and time-tabling, all are classified under this type of planning.
Macro-planning on the other hand involves policy formulation and broad target setting at the state, regional, national or even international level.
Level of Government: If educational planning is classified by the level of government involvement, the planning includes imperative, incentive, indicative and laissez-faire.
Imperative planning is the extreme variant that is practised in the socialist states, where government is fully involved from goal setting to implementation or provision of educational services.
Incentive planning is where the government sets the targets and provides the incentive to encourage individuals and companies to invest in the socially desirable areas.
In the indicative type of planning, the government determines what is desirable neither engages in educational provision nor provide incentives for the private sector.
Laissez-faire approach can equally be regarded as a situation devoid of planning.
In this case, the government does not even set desirable target but leave everything to the market mechanism to regulate.
Time Dynamism: By time dynamism, we have fixed time and rolling term plans.
A fixed term planning is that where successive fixed time duration like 3, 4, or 5 years is defined for attaining a specified set of educational objectives.
For the rolling term planning, the time span rolls every year to shed each expired year and incorporate one year each time to replace it in terms of task to be accomplished.
It is necessary to mention here that while rolling plans are characterized by yearly revision, fixed term plans are rigid within the defined period.
Management Level: In some cases, educational planning is identified on the basis of the management level involved in the decision-making process.
In this case, educational planning is either strategic or management.
Strategic educational planning is the type of planning that involves the setting of broad targets and definition of policies at the executive level (Commissioner, Minister etc).
Management planning on the other hand involves operationalizing policy decisions and it takes place at the micro-level (local government and school).
What is apparent in the above discussion is that the categories within each classification are complementary to each other.
Moreover, some of the classifications have some similarities.
For instance, management planning is similar to micro-level planning, while strategic planning is the same as micro-level planning.
In what appears to be imperative approach to classification of types of educational planning, Aghenta (1993:28-29) classified educational planning into two broad types.
They are strategic and operational planning.
Strategic Planning: This is the process of deciding on the educational goals for the educational system, on the changes in the goals and the allocation of resources.
Strategic objectives are directed towards the long term survival, the future resources, the potential, the flexibility and adaptability to changing conditions in the system.
Strategic plan is future directed, client oriented and directed at external needs.
The plan determines the character and the direction of the system and is largely based on value system.
Strategic planning is important in the world of today where educational administrators, concerned with the dwindling resources for education are optimizing the utilization of institutional resources.
The strategy is to allocate available resources, which in most cases are in short of what is anticipated, in the line with long term objectives.
Strategic planning has been in use in business organization for a long time and it is being adopted now in academic institutions.
This is because its long term concern for organizations is vital to their well being.
Strategic plan is influenced by general systems theory which had earlier been discussed.
It focuses on the educational system and its environment as consisting of many sub- systems interacting between themselves and the environment, the main features being goals and strategies, size, structure, ownership, information and decision process of the educational system and its sub-systems.
In actual fact, in strategic planning, tasks, structures, process and people are emphasized.
Operational Planning: This is the process which administrators ensure that resources are obtained and utilized effectively and efficiently in the realization of the strategic objectives set in the strategic plans.
Operational planning focuses on the current resources and operational problems to ensure that the goal is realized.
It is concerned with measurable and verifiable objectives.
Operational objectives are usually programmes, projects and staff oriented and are directed to required internal activities and outcomes.
The plan is designed to obtain the desired ends with minimal use of the systems resources used within the framework of the policy constraints.
Strategic and operational plans are complementary.
For instance, while strategic planning ensures that the right timing is done, operational planning is to ensure that the system is doing things right.
Other types of planning as identified by Aghenta(1993) include: (cid:1) Academic Planning: This is not in the real sense the type of planning like strategic and operational plannings.
Rather it is a new form of planning specifically directed at analyzing the problems of higher education as a result of the continuing expansion and growing complexity.
Other reasons adduced for academic planning include to checkmate increased students’ activism and to ensure effectiveness and efficiency especially in respect of resources management.
(cid:1) Adaptative Educational Planning: This is the type of plan that emanates as a result of externally-induced development.
A situation arises where either as a result of what is happening in other parts of the country or across the globe or for specific reasons the government desires a particular programme to be developed for an area.
Plans are, therefore, designed to adapt to the new situation.
(cid:1) Contingency Educational Planning: This type of plan aims at creating conditions whose impacts can be absorbed at minimum cost of inconvenience.
Everything is done to minimize hardship which could result from a certain step taken in bringing about certain new situations.
(cid:1) Compulsive Educational Planning: The details of what should be done are identified before plan is designed.
It is similar to a systems approach to educational planning.
(cid:1) Manipulative Educational Planning: When situation develops a plan, and all of a sudden, the revenue dries up, various ways are devised to salvage the educational situation.
Such ways could include reduction of teacher-pupil ratio, increasing class size, freezing increase in personnel emolument etc.
All these are geared towards preventing wastage.
(cid:1) Ameliorative Educational Planning: This is a plan designed to restore a situation which was not considered originally or which was not considered what it could be in the light of the present experience.
(cid:1) Normative Educational Planning: This is a long range plan which could be between 25 and 40 years and because of its inherent nature, guidelines are established to guarantee success.
It is usually comprehensive and focuses on total plan.
(cid:1) Functional Educational Planning: The focus of this type of planning is on a particular aspects of the total problem, for instance, provision of physical facilities in free education programme.
It is important to note that the application of any or group of these types of educational plan is dependent on situations.
However, when any is accepted, the issue of strategic and operational plannings comes in to guarantee strong success.
It is also important to note that the types of educational planning discussed above are not exhaustive.
What we have so far done is within the limit of this lecture.
3.2 The Educational Planning Process The basic tasks defined under educational planning can be subdivided into six mutually inter-related and reinforcing stages that constitute educational planning process.
According to Agabi (2004:125) these stages include plan survey and deliberation, definition of goals and objectives; programmes design and specification; programme provision, implementation and control, plan evaluation and plan regeneration.
The first task to be determined and accomplished is a survey of the prevailing conditions, potentials and constraints.
The desired data and information must be collected and analyzed to reveal the prevailing state of educational development and area of needs.
Public opinion from different interest groups must be harnessed and properly deliberated upon to arrive at effective and meaningful determination of educational needs.
Immediately the prevailing conditions have been ascertained, the next stage is to define the new educational objectives to be pursued as well as specify the targets to be realized.
Educational objectives that are broadly stated by the political leadership must be made more specific by the technical planners to permit specific task definition.
The next task in the planning process is programme planning and design.
At this stage, the technical planner has to reduce the already defined educational objectives to specific task areas to be realized and alternative programmes that can be adopted must be designed.
The alternative programmes and/or techniques for realizing such educational tasks need to be quantitatively evaluated for efficacy so as to allow a rational choice among them.
For instance, an objective of attaining a desired level of adult literacy can be realized through either classroom instruction, public television viewing programme or out of class extension programme.
Each of these programmes have varying degree of efficacy.
Once the choice of the most effective and efficient programme and/or technique has been determined, the next stage is to implement.
This demands the provision of adequate resources, both human and material resources.
At this stage, adequate supervision of the projects or programmes is required.
At this implementation stage, commitment of the political leadership is needed to guarantee efficient flow of resources and the efficacy of the administrative machinery to ensure smooth implementation and supervision of educational plans.
The next stage in the educational planning process is the evaluation of educational plan implementation.
Evaluation at this level involves ascertaining the extent to which the already specified educational objectives have been realized.
The process also serves as a forum for appraising the flows in the plan projections and the problems encountered in the course of the implementation stage.
The last lap in the educational planning process is plan regeneration.
This demands linking subsequent plans with the previous plan in terms of feedback or learning experiences.
Plan regeneration or recycling is very essential so that unattained objectives or programmes from previous plans can be accommodated in subsequent ones.
It is important to note that for effective implementation of programmes or projects, the necessary resources- human and materials must be adequately provided in terms of both quantity and quality.
4.0 CONCLUSION We shall conclude our lecture by saying that school administrators need to have a good knowledge of the interrelatedness of theories in educational planning and types of educational planning and its planning process.
This knowledge will ensure effective and efficient managing of school programmes.
School administration is a complex task because it deals more with human beings.
This explains why this aspect of educational management is very important in our programme.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt the definition of theory with particular reference to educational administration.
We also discussed the various theories in educational planning.
The types of educational planning along with its planning process were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define theory with particular reference to educational administration.
2.
Discuss at least five theories of educational planning.
3.
Examine the types of educational planning as discussed.
4.
Discuss the various planning processes involved in educational planning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Agabi, O.G.
(2004).
Educational planning: an overview.
In V.F.
Peretomodo (ed).
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Aghenta, J.A.
(1993).
Principles and practices of educational planning: focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: Nigerian Society for Educational Planning.
Hoy, W.K., Miskel, C.G.
(1982).
Educational administration, theory, research and practice.
2nd edition.
New York: Random House.
UNIT 3: APPROACHES TO EDUCATIONAL PLANNING.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Approaches to Educational Planning.
3.2 Parameters in Educational Planning.
3.3 Data Collection for educational Planning.
3.4 Problems Facing Educational Planning in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Educational planning is designed to ensure that the production of education is discharged with efficiency and at a minimum cost.
At the centre of educational planning is determining the nature and level of education to provide to the citizens, who should provide such education when identified, for whom should such education be provided, who should be responsible for financing such education and finally what proportion of the resources available should be allocated to such education.
In developing countries such as Nigeria, the resources are limited as there are many competing developmental sectors.
As a result of this, it becomes difficult to educate every individual free to the level he would wish.
In an effort to reach a compromise, various approaches have been designed to plan education.
However, the application of any approach is a function of the stage of development, prevailing social, political and economic conditions of the nation in question.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1. discuss at least three approaches to educational planning.
2. know the parameters that are involved in educational planning.
3.
(a) discuss the areas in education from which data could be collected for planning.
(b) know the relevance of data collection in educational planning.
4. know the problems facing educational planning.
3.1 Approaches to Educational Planning The following approaches are common in educational planning.
Social Demand Approach: This approach in a nutshell is the sum total of individual demands for education at a given place and time under the prevailing cultural, political and economic circumstances (Coombs in Aghenta 1993).
The approach considers educational needs in relation to current demand for education at the various levels.
As a result of social and political pressures, more candidates than the facilities available can carry are admitted.
In most cases, the social demand exceeds supply for education.
Aghenta (1993) noted that the main objective in the application of this approach is to meet the social goals of the society such as the universal literacy, universal primary education, universal secondary education and higher education for all those who are qualified to undertake it.
The emphasis is upon education as a social infrastructure for development purposes.
Agabi (2004) identified the following merits and demerits of social demand approach in educational planning.
Merits 1.
In addition to its political appeal, it is less complex.
2.
Its implementation tends to increase the level of literacy.
3.
It enhances the realization of equality of educational opportunities.
4.
It reduces the level of social tension as well as income gaps in societies where education serves as a social ladder.
5.
It also facilitates the process of income redistribution.
Demerits 1.
Normally, timely, accurate and adequate demographic and educational data to help in the projection of demand for educational areas and facilities are lacking.
2.
The rates on which most projections are based (i.e.
progression and transition rates) are hardly constant as usually assumed.
3.
This approach has always resulted in surplus manpower and pent-up demand for education in excess of the available capacity in the planning and provision of all levels of education.
4.
The approach is insensitive to the usual resource constraints for providing all types of education for all who are qualified and are willing to acquire the various types or levels of education.
Nigerian educational system has faced some of these problems as a result of the adoption of this approach in the planning of different levels of education at different times.
Manpower Requirement Approach: The manpower approach to educational planning is concerned with educational output with particular reference to skills, talents, aptitude and attitudes which education offers.
This approach was developed in an answer to bad manpower problems usually resulting from the adoption of the social demand approach.
It is more useful in the planning of tertiary education and other skill-oriented educational training programmes.
The rational basis for this approach is explained by the human capital theory.
The protagonists of human capital theory had argued and established that there is a significant positive relationship between the growth of a nation’s human resources and the growth of national output.
Agabi (2004:14) identified the following steps that are involved in manpower planning approach.
1.
An estimation of the initial stock of manpower, and national output for a base year within a national economy; 2.
A projection of the growth rate in National income or output desired during the prospective plan period.
3.
A derivation of the growth in demand for manpower during the plan period to achieve the desired national output, making provision for manpower attrition.
4.
A translation of the desired additional manpower required into numerical quantities of educational output in various programmes, making the necessary adjustment for attritions; 5.
A determination of required future enrollment in different disciplines and programmes in education; 6.
A projection into the resource requirements needed to implement the desired and planned manpower training.
Agabi went further to identify the merits of manpower requirement approach.
Merits of Manpower Approach Planning: a. it is rational and ensures that the limited education resources are utilized in the training of only desirable manpower resources.
b.
It reduces the mismatch between higher educational training and labour market demands.
This helps in reducing the level of educated unemployables.
Aghenta (1993:25-26) expanded these merits by stating that manpower approach to educational planning is important because manpower itself is concerned with: (a) locating and recruiting persons for training to meet needed skills.
(b) providing and developing the necessary educational and training institutions.
(c) developing management and training techniques, labour policy, working conditions and industrial relations.
However, the following demerits of manpower approach to educational planning have been identified by Agabi (2004) (a) The approach completely ignores other levels or types of education that are not involved in the training of job-specific skills.
(b) Some of the models used in projecting manpower requirement are very sophisticated, demanding educational demographic data that are hardly available to most developing countries.
In a nutshell, the manpower requirement approach in educational planning is very necessary in the sense that it is used in determining and providing the quantity and quality of various types of manpower required to attain a specified level of socio-economic growth of a nation.
Cost-Benefit Approach to Educational Planning: This approach is also called the rate of return approach.
We shall recall that under the social demand approach, education was perceived as a service that should be made available to people so as to improve their standard of living.
Under the cost-benefit approach, education is considered to mean the provision of skills and knowledge to individuals so as to increase the national output of the nation.
When this view is accepted, it then means that the nation should invest in those identified educational programmes that would substantially increase the rate of economic growth of the nation.
In this circumstance, the educational investment ought to be weighed or compared with other investments in various sectors of the nation such as health, industry, communication.
This comparison could also be applied when allocating the educational system’s total resources among its different sub-sectors.
These different sub-sectors are primary education, secondary/vocational education, teacher education, polytechnic education and university education.
Longe (2003:16) stated that the cost- benefit analysis or the rate of return approach to educational planning involves four major steps: 1. the costs of various educational programmes are determined.
2. the expected benefits from the various educational programmes are estimated.
3. the costs are compared with the benefits to obtain the rates of return expected from the programmes, and 4. those rates are compared with alternative rates from other investments to determine the magnitude of resources allocated can be shared between the various educational programmes.
The three approaches discussed above could not be said to be perfect.
Each of the approaches has its strengths and weaknesses, but they however provide some basis for educational planning.
The choice of approach to be adopted depends on the nature of problem educational planning has been requested to solve.
It is important to mention that one or two of the approaches or a synthesis of the three may be employed depending on the prevailing situation of the nation’s economy.
What is of paramount importance is that adequate and reliable data should be made available.
This is because it is on the basis of data analysis that projections and predictions can be made.
3.2 Parameters in Educational Planning For effective educational planning to occur, it is important to have all the parameters or indicators which guide or direct the planning.
In educational planning, the parameters that are adopted include education law, goals, curriculum, facilities, staffing, student enrolment, financing educational materials, public enlightenment management and evaluation (Aghenta 1993).
In case of long-term planning, demographic factors are also important and must be included.
These parameters according to Aghenta are discussed below.
1.
Education Law: The purpose of education, organizational structure of the educational system, students’ enrolment, teacher-pupil ratio, methods of funding and related issues are clearly spelt out in clear legal terms.
The Education Law is much more than a document containing Government Policy on Education.
Its provision is designed to guide all aspects of the educational enterprise including school buildings, curriculum content and methodology, financing enrolment of students, teacher selection, development, retention and retirement, certification of students and others.
Educational planning should take cognizance of an existing education law.
If the National Policy on Education exists in a separate document, the two documents can be used to guide the planning.
2.
Goals: Educational goals are the expression of a variety of the society’s social, economic and political needs and they are the motivating factors for Government’s investments and interest in educational development.
They guide educational planning.
They could be as broad as education for the development of effective citizens, fostering individuality, providing understanding or as specific as bringing about literacy and son on.
3.
Curriculum: The school buildings, students enrollment, the number and type of teachers and the level of financing as well as the nature of management, all depend upon the nature of the curriculum.
Thus, educational planning does not only take into consideration the existing curriculum but also follows logically its planning, development and evaluation as all these stages have considerable impact on educational planning.
4.
Physical Facilities: These must be taken into consideration in the context of proposed curriculum or educational programme and at what level i.e.
whether it is primary, secondary grammar or technical/vocational or tertiary institutions.
At the primary school level, emphasis is laid on classroom spaces whereas at secondary education level, consideration is given to libraries, laboratories as much as classrooms.
At tertiary education level, the building becomes complex as a result of various requirements to meet the diversified curricular activities in such areas as humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, medical sciences, engineering and agriculture.
5.
Staffing: This is an important parameter in educational planning.
As soon as the curricula are considered, attention is shifted to selection and training of teachers with relevant skills for the implementation of the planned educational programme.
Teachers are recruited and trained for all levels particularly for the first and second levels of education.
The number and level of the teachers to be-recruited and/or trained depend on various variables such as the expected enrollment, teacher-pupil ratio as contained in the education law or the work load per teacher per the type of subject to be taught, the methodology to be used, the type of teaching aids etc.
The quality of education is a function of the type of teachers recruited.
This explains why staffing is an important parameter in educational planning.
6.
Students: These constitute the nerve centre of the educational system because their size determines the size of the staffing, the level of funding and in some cases the size of the building.
In the content of social demand approach to educational planning, enrolment is the prime mover of all the other components in the social system.
In countries where there is population explosion, students’ enrolments are high and resources for education are corresponding large, in that case, planning helps to determine the level of national resources to be allocated to education if the social, political and economic development of such countries are not to be stagnant.
7.
Funding: This is very crucial because it determines the quality and quantity of education to be provided.
The level of funding determines the quality of building, type of resources for education and the quality of the teaching staff.
The success of the implementation of educational planning is dependent on the level of funding of the school system.
There are usually issues to be resolved in educational funding such as who pays, how much, what subsidies, grants, levies etc.
The disbursement of money realized from various sources and the accountability of the money are other important issues to be considered in educational planning.
No educational system can function without funds.
8.
Manuals: The supply of educational materials such as books, science equipment, teaching aids such as audio-visual are important in education.
The level of supply is dependent on the level of funding.
The method of distribution has to be determined so as to ensure equity and that the materials reach their destination.
9.
Information: In most cases, many people are unaware of Government educational policies and programmes because of lack of information.
In order to enlist the support of the public in education sector, public enlightenment is necessary.
The public need to be informed in time and adequately for their understanding and support for educational policies.
10.
Management: This is an important parameter in educational planning as it affects the implementation of plans.
Poor management of educational system often leads to the collapse of educational programmes.
It is, therefore, imperative that the management of educational system be properly spelt out and experienced educational administrators appointed to administer or manage the nation’s education.
Management in this context encompasses curriculum development, school buildings, students’ admissions, financial disbursement, teacher placement and orientation, supply of educational materials and the day to day affairs of the schools.
Management, therefore, constitutes an important aspect of educational planning.
11.
Evaluation: This is a parameter in educational planning which deals with the feedback on the performance of planned educational system.
It monitors the system’s inputs and outputs as specified in the plan.
This is aimed at detecting if deviations occur, and if they occur, they should be rectified immediately.
The evaluation of plan implementation of education system’s performance is necessary for the healthy growth and survival of educational system.
3.3 Data Collection for Educational Planning In educational planning process, qualitative and quantitative data are indispensable.
This is because before free educational policy can be implemented, there must be adequate information on the existing resource situation such as facilities, manpower, finance or enrolment.
This is in a view to determine the areas of inadequacy that ought to be addressed.
Adeyemi (2004:148) citing Aghenta noted that … the success of educational planning rests on the availability of accurate data with respect to total population by sex and by level and by type of education, and the number of students by level, type and sex.
Others that are of vital importance for educational planning include number and type of graduates, school buildings and public expenditures on education.
Educational planning data, according to Adeyemi are collected on the following areas: 1.
Types of education which could be formal, informal and non-formal.
2.
Levels of education – primary, secondary and tertiary (College of Education, Polytechnic, Monotechnic and University).
3.
Government managed schools, Assisted schools and non-Assisted schools.
4.
Data on Institution: These include number and types of school, enrollment by sex, age, number of special students, size of school etc.
5.
Data on Teaching and non-Teaching Staff: This covers the number on roll, their age, sex, marital status, qualifications, area of specialization, year of first/second appointment, salary grade level.
6.
Data on quality control: this covers the number of school inspectors, the facilities at their disposal, and the ratio of inspector to school.
7.
Data on students: This covers the number of students, student-classroom ratio, student-teacher ratio, sex distribution as well as course distribution.
8.
Data on school cover the location, facilities available, number of classrooms, number of buildings, laboratories, workshop etc.
9.
Finance covers income (if any), current and capital expenditure on education.
10.
Head count.
The Relevance of Data Collection for Educational Planning Data collected assist educational planners and policy formulators to (cid:1) make adequate plans for students as regards allocation to schools at different levels of education,; (cid:1) ensure adequate assessment of teacher demand and supply in the school system; (cid:1) direct the flow of students into and out of the school system; (cid:1) make arrangement for the sufficient accommodation and equipment and their efficient use; (cid:1) provide an acceptable estimate of the necessary finance to execute the plan programmes; (cid:1) achieve the aims and objectives of the educational system through efficient and effective control; (cid:1) maintain standards; (cid:1) check and monitor the accounting and cost of maintenance of available buildings and facilities (Adeyemi 2004).
Adeyemi went further to note that apart from the above stated quantitative data, qualitative information are also required on the following for effective planning.
They include: (cid:1) curriculum development and its basic components over-time; (cid:1) expansion potentials; (cid:1) relevance to political, economic, social and cultural policies and objectives; (cid:1) legislation and community participation and assistance; (cid:1) the logistics of integrated implementation with other national plans; (cid:1) educational policy objectives; (cid:1) educational philosophy; and (cid:1) quality of education over time.
Data for educational planning are derived from different sources which include records of National Population Commission and related establishments; school records, records of State/Federal Ministries of Education and Local Education Authorities.
Other sources of data collection in educational planning include: 1.
Registration of important events demands a continuous recording of births, deaths and migration.
2.
The school records that are of relevance in data collection are admission register, attendance register, school account books, salary payment voucher etc.
3.
The records from the Ministry of Education would show the strength of personnel in each department/section, such as the Inspectorate, Planning and Research, Administration etc., the financial position of the Ministry, information on the levels of education etc.
Data collection for planning education is hindered in Nigeria.
This is because of the absence of reliable data bank.
The Management Information System (MIS) is ineffective.
In other words, storing and retrieval of information is still poorly managed in planning education.
Added to this is the official secrecy often attached to public official records which makes it difficult to obtain information from them on their own volition.
Respondents are in some cases ignorant of the importance of data and information on policy making.
3.4 Problems Facing Educational Planning in Nigeria Many authors have written and identified various factors that affect educational planning in Nigeria, Aghenta (1993), Alu et al (2001), Babalola (2003).
These authors have written extensively on the problems of educational planning in Nigeria.
However, Nwadiani (163-169) synthesized and articulated these problems and referred to them as recurrent problems of educational planning and implementation.
These problems, according to him include the cart before the horse syndrome, poor functional differentiation, weak data base, population explosion, inadequate resources, depressing economy, unprogressive administrative tradition, politics and lack of public support.
1.
The Cart before the Horse Syndrome: An important feature of educational management in Nigeria is process disorder.
For instance, in most cases, educational planning efforts usually commence after implementation.
National leaders make public pronouncements about educational policies or programmes without any regard to due process.
This they do in order to score political points.
In this circumstance, therefore, plans are never made for implementation resources.
The consequence in this case is failure.
The failure is reflected in three ways – the intended policy was never implemented in the first place; even if an attempt at implementation was made; it failed to be completed or achieved a minimum critical mass so as to leave an impact; although the policy was implemented, it did not have the desired effect.
2.
Poor Functional Differentiation: The functional differentiation of educational planning and implementation has been ineffective.
Normatively, the broad definition of educational objectives in Nigeria has been very vague.
It is never based on systematic needs assessment.
As a result of the central feature of its planning strategies, plan implementation resources constraints are not taken into cognizance.
In strategic terms, the level of participation in policy translation into programmes is restricted to government personnel.
There is poor integration of tiers of government in project planning hence there is ineffective implementation of plans in recent time.
3.
Weak Data Base: In Nigeria, the culture of educational planning has been without accurate data.
This has hindered the progress made in education.
The problem of inadequate, outdated and inaccurate data has been identified by Ashby (1960), Adesina (1981), Patwari (1981), Oguntoye (1987), Ajayi (1990) and Aghenta (1992).
Attempts at projection of educational resources have not been efficient as a result of inaccurate data.
The quality of educational decisions and their implementation outcomes shows that the weaknesses in methods of data collection are still very routine and unreliable.
The establishment of Educational Data Bank will help immensely in redressing the protracted problems of inaccurate and inadequate data in educational management in Nigeria.
4.
Population Explosion: The population of Nigeria has been on the increase.
The rapid growth of the population is attributed to improvement in the health sector.
Structurally, Nigeria’s population is more in favour of young people.
As a result of the large number of school age population more education burden is placed on society in terms of providing teaching and learning inputs (human, material and time).
The inability to cope with the population explosion in school system has affected implementation of programmes.
For instance, urban schools in Nigeria are overcrowded, thereby making teaching-learning very difficult and uninteresting.
In the final analysis, the system performance is adversely affected.
5.
Inadequate Resources: Resources (human, material, physical, time) in educational planning and implementation are in short supply.
There is an acute shortage of professionally trained educational planners.
Presently, educational planning divisions of Ministries and Boards of Education in Nigeria are staffed with non-educational planners.
This explains why education planning has not been effective.
In the school system where educational plans are eventually implemented, there is a dearth of teachers.
The existing stock of education personnel at all levels are poorly motivated hence the current wave of brain drain.
Classrooms, equipment, furniture and other instructional materials are very inadequate to promote effective teaching and learning.
There is over utilization of available physical facilities, yet they are poorly maintained.
At the center of resources constraint is finance.
Funds have never been enough for education business.
The finance future of education in Nigeria is gloomy because of the dwindling finance.
It is a fact that no amount of money will be enough for the education sector but the bane of educational plan implementation is misallocation of financial resources internally.
There is a growing culture of financial misappropriation in Nigeria.
In most cases, activities that do not promote teaching and learning are given priority attention resulting to educational finance wastage.
6.
Depressing Economy: Nigerian economy is in a serious distress.
The economy that was once buoyant is now a shadow of itself.
The mono-oil based resource has affected the nation’s economy coupled with the neglect of other sectors of the economy like agriculture.
Nwadiani (1992) noted that world economy has led to the adoption of harsh economic policies that adversely affected the education sector in general… With little or no money to fund education, education in Nigeria has remained undeveloped hence the growing mismatch between education and economy.
7.
Unprogressive Administrative Tradition: The administrative tradition in education in Nigeria is very rigid.
There is a tradition of administrative procedures which with the attendant bureaucratization has led to the inability of the system to respond to changes within and outside education.
The vestiges of colonial administrative system which leads to operating education as a civil activity distorts the desired advantages of decentralization of management relations.
Education decisions are delayed, conflict of power and authority are common place while managerial ignorance is openly manifested as a result of poor training.
The adoption of experience in promoting education sector personnel to administrative positions is unprogressive to educational development.
The resultant effect of hierarchical role relationships and accountability restricts the expert freedom of the professionally trained educational planner in the Ministry of education that is solely responsible for policy issues.
In the end, educational planning and implementation are reduced to ordinary administrative directives.
This is unprogressive in a dynamic society.
8.
Politics: If education in Nigeria will remain undeveloped and at variance with the economy tomorrow, it is as a result of politics of educational planning and implementation.
This is because in the end, educational planning is a political process of give and take hence it is a central polity issue.
The objectives of education, the control, production process variables, financial and accreditation system are tied closely and linked with politics.
Since the attainment of independence, education in Nigeria has been caught in the web of military and partisan politics.
Aghenta, cited by Nwadiani (2004:167) noted that Military interventions are common but in Nigeria whether it is during civilian or military regime, there is always a marked difference between the Federal and State policies and practices in education.
Any government in power makes education a political issue promising support and control.
It is used as a vote catching weapon with unrealistic promises.
Because education is a public good, governments of all ages in Nigeria perceive it as a gift to the people rather than an outgrowth from the needs and values of the people.
As a result of the distorted direction of education and the attendant unexpected consequences, some people strongly feel that education should be depoliticized.
Because of politics, educational policies and practices are different in many states of the country.
Between 1979 and 1983, UPN controlled states (Western region) operated a free education policy at all levels while the NPN states were fee paying.
The same pattern was enacted during the SDP and NRC political period.
While the SDP states practiced free education the NRC insisted on fee paying policy.
These educational practices are highly political without genuine commitment.
This has affected educational planning and implementation.
9.
Lack of Public Support: Education in Nigeria as it is practiced over the years is public imposed.
The plan is made on their behalf on the assumption that they know the needs of the people.
Need assessment is hardly undertaken.
According to policy formulators, the public will always support any educational services provided.
This has proved otherwise.
Those who plan are not the implementers.
The people are not involved at the stage of planning hence there is an alloyed support when it comes to implementation.
This is more serious when the values and expectations of the people are not reflected or best peripherally incorporated.
To enhance public support, all those stakeholders in education should be involved in its management.
This collaborative spirit will bring meaning to education delivery.
4.0 CONCLUSION Education is the life-wire of any nation.
It is the catalyst that propels national development.
This explains why governments make concerted efforts to provide educational facilities at all levels.
In order to meet the needs of the society, educational planning and effective policy implementation are of paramount importance.
It is against this background that there is need for collaborative effort by all stakeholders in education in planning and implementing educational policies.
5.0 SUMMMARY In this unit, you learnt about various approaches to educational planning.
Three different approaches were discussed – social demand, manpower requirement and cost- benefit approaches to educational planning.
We also learnt of different parameters in educational planning.
These parameters were discussed in detail.
You equally learnt of data collection and its relevance for educational planning.
Finally, we discussed the problems facing educational planning in Nigeria.
These problems were discussed in detail.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss three approaches to educational planning.
2.
What are the parameters that are involved in educational planning?
3.
(a) Discuss the areas in education that data could be collected for planning?
(b) What is the relevance of data collection in educational planning?
4.
Discuss at least five problems facing educational planning in Nigeria.
REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeyemi, K. (2004).
Stages in educational planning.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.).
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Toja Press Limited.
Agabi, O.G.
(2004).
Educational planning: an overview.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.).
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning, and Supervision.
Lagos: Toja Press Limited.
Aghenta, J.A.
(1993).
Principles and practices of educational planning: focus on the developing countries.
Benin City: Nigerian Society for Educational Planning.
Alu, B.E.
; Eya, L.O.
; Odo, C.O.
; Ede, F.E.
; Ugwu, J.C. (2001).
Fundamentals of educational administration.
Nsukka: Chuka Educational Publishers.
Babalola, J.B.
(ed.)
(2003).
Basic text in educational planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management.
Longe, R.S.
(2003).
Introduction to educational planning.
In Joel B. Babalola (ed.)
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Education Management.
Nwadiani, M. (2004).
Issues and problems in educational planning and implementation in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomde (ed).
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Toja Press Limited.
MODULE 4: FINANCING EDUCATION IN NIGERIA  MODULE 4: FINANCING EDUCATION IN NIGERIA UNIT 1 Overview of Financing Education in Nigeria UNIT 2 School Budget UNIT 3 Sources of Finance in Education in Nigeria UNIT 1 Overview of Financing Education in Nigeria 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Education Finance?
3.2 Historical Perspective on the Funding of Primary Education in Nigeria 3.3 Basic Concepts in Educational Cost 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The quality and quantity of education provided to citizens of a nation depends largely on the extent of availability and management of financial resources.
Education is a capital intensive project.
It therefore, requires a lot of financial resources for the payment of personnel salaries and allowances, for the building of physical facilities, purchase of required equipment and materials.
Educational financing is used as an instrument for the analysis of the financial aspects of education (diagnostic function) and instrument for predicting the trend an educational system is charting (prognostic function).
In our lecture today, we are going to discuss education finance, the funding of primary education in historical perspective and who actually funds education in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lecture, you will be able to: 1. define education finance.
2. know the various phases in the evolution and funding of primary education in Nigeria.
3. discuss the various types of educational costs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Education Financing?
Financing is a process by which the government provides and manages necessary resources for satisfying the needs of the people.
Education financing concerns the financing of education as a public enterprise (Adamu 2007).
It has been observed that education is not entirely public good provided by public schools.
In other words, educational financing should also involve both private education and non-formal education.
Most of the problems in Nigeria emanate from inadequate funding of education.
In financing, it is necessary to note that acquisition and allocation of resources are of paramount importance.
Adamu (2007), citing Benson noted that educational financing in a country is said to be properly established when the level of provision of educational services is adequate, when educational resources are efficiently and timely distributed, and when the distribution of educational resources is equitable.
On the other hand, Okunamiri (2002) defined education financing as a branch of knowledge dealing with important examination of cost versus expenditure in the provision of educational services.
He went further to state that the actual cost of an activity is not merely the money spent on it but the alternative opportunities that have to be foregone or sacrificed when a given choice is made.
According to him, education financing is a process by which tax revenues and other resources are obtained for the establishment and operation of educational services.
It also includes the process these financial resources are allocated to institutions in various geographical areas.
From the above two definition, we can infer that: a. education finance concerns financing education as a public enterprise.
b. there are criteria to be met before educational finance is said to be properly established.
c. education finance is a process by which tax revenue and other resources are obtained for the establishment and operation of educational institution.
d. education finance is a process by which financial resources are allocated to institutions in various geographical areas.
Two things are striking in these definitions.
First, funds and resources must be available for the operation of educational services.
Second, individuals must pay tax so that the government can obtain resources for the implementation of educational policies and programmes.
3.2 Historical Perspective on the Funding of Primary Education in Nigeria Historically, the funding of education in Nigeria has been accomplished through school fees, grants-in-aid from different governments and levies by cultural organizations and other types of voluntary contribution from both parents and guardians.
Bozimo and Sanda (2007) noted that the missionaries in the mid 19th century laid emphasis on primary education as a means for enhancing evangelization in the country.
According to them, teachers then were made to believe that their reward was in heaven and were simply living on charity and the free will offerings and gifts from the host community and the mission.
They further noted that even though teacher had no good income then, they had prestige and honour.
Isma’il (2001:75-87) noted that educational financing has not been uniform in practice from state to state and local government to local government.
This trend, according to him is rooted in the manner by which education was introduced, embraced and managed.
While western education was embraced with enthusiasm in the south, it was received with apathy in the north because of cultural, religious and geographical reasons.
It was reported that in the north, primary education was societal and managed by Native Authority.
According to Isma’il in the south, primary education was introduced and financed by three major missions: (a) The Sudan Interior Mission; (b) The Church Missionary Society and (c) The Roman Catholic Mission.
The unhealthy competition among these missions led to poor quality of infrastructure necessary for qualitative education.
However, the then government grudgingly made meager subventions in a bid to improve quality in education.
This government intervention led to a sort of dual control and funding of education.
It also resulted in some sort of quality control in the educational system.
We shall now discuss the evolution and funding of primary education in Nigeria under three phrases as reported by Isma’il (2001).
Phase I 1842-1954: During this period, the three missions established, funded and managed schools based on the pattern of their home governments.
Funds for the running of the schools were provided by wealthy merchants from Britain and from Sunday school collections.
By 1877, the impact of the government was felt financially on the educational scene.
With the emergence of 1903 Education Ordinance and its subsequent amendment in 1905, the pattern of funding schools was clearly spelt out.
This ordinance empowered the Commissioner to control and provide financial assistance to schools.
Consequently, they were categorized under three headings: 1.
Government School: The government-owned schools were few and adequately funded through public funds.
At the beginning, local communities were not required to pay, but later, fees were introduced though very low.
2.
Assisted Schools: These were schools established by the Missions and other Voluntary agencies.
They were classified under payment by results.
They were grant-aided on the basis of their performance during inspection, in terms of discipline, cleaniness, tone of the school and quality of teachers and teaching.
Pupils in this school equally paid fees except for those exempted for socio-economic reasons.
3.
Non-Assisted Schools: Schools under this category were established by and maintained by some Christian Missions, private bodies or individuals.
They were not subjected to any rules or regulations.
Fees charged in these schools were higher compared with those under the first two categories.
In the north, the funding of primary education also followed three patterns.
1.
The Government-owned Native Authority schools which were maintained by Native Authorities.
2.
Mission schools: These schools received no grants initially but were later grant-aided.
3.
Muslim schools which never received any grant.
It is important to note that the amalgamation of Northern and Southern Nigeria in 1914 did not bring about uniformity in the funding of primary education in Nigeria.
Under the 1947 constitution, the financing of education became more central than before.
In 1894, Sydney Phillipson was appointed to review the grants-in-aid for the country.
His review covered very wide and comprehensive grants-in-aid system as it affects teachers’ salaries, headteachers allowances, administrative expenses, salaries of supervisors and other expenses of school.
Schools which attained exceptional standard in efficiency, teaching, discipline and tone received special grants.
From 1950 onwards, the region gained greater autonomy and they took over the responsibility of financing education.
They were, however, subjected to an overall central thorough inspection to ensure standards as well as proper management of funds.
This phase ushered in the first phase of Universal Primary Education (UPE) in both Western and Eastern regions.
Phase 2: The Introduction of Regional Schools As a result of autonomy granted to the regions, the western region introduced U.P.E.
in its educational system in January 1955.
Though Voluntary Agencies and Government schools still continued with educational expansion, the Government still provided financial grants which covered pupils registered, construction work and expansion of school buildings.
This does not however mean government take-over of schools.
In the Eastern region, the U.P.E.
was introduced in 1957 but collapsed after two years.
We have in our earlier lecture treated the introduction of U.P.E.
in these regions.
In the north, the expansion of education along UPE line was very slow and more methodical.
This was because, by then they did not see the benefit of such education because of their religious inclination.
However, the Oldman report on education in the north resulted in the Northern Nigerian Education Law of 1962 which established the Local Education Authority with the following functions.
1.
Bearing the financial responsibility of the primary schools in respect of money collection and disbursement.
2.
Establishing an official Local Administration responsible for ensuring minimum standards for buildings, staffing and equipment in schools.
By 1970, the government took over the running of schools nation-wide.
This, therefore, means that the government is now responsible for full management and financing of schools in terms of recurrent and capital expenditure.
This take-over resulted to over-stretching resources thereby leading to poor management.
The much talked-about fall in the standards of education today, the lack of discipline and morality in our schools has been attributed to Government take-over of schools.
Phase 3: The Introduction of the Federal Government UPE in 1976 The Third National Development Plan (1975-1980) made education a priority of priorities.
This led to the introduction of U.P.E.
in 1976.
A total of N300 million naira was allocated as capital expenditure for 250,995 additional classrooms for all states during the plan period, in addition to 6,699 classrooms for Teacher Training and for Primary School Teachers.
Initially, the federal government had the intention of financing the project alone, it later found out that it was not feasible.
This led to the sharing of primary education funding between the federal government, the state and local governments.
While the federal and state governments always met their own financial obligations, local governments did not.
It was reported that some local governments diverted educational funds to other sectors.
This led to the non-employment of qualified teachers, lack of provision of equipment and modern teaching aids and textbooks that were either inadequate or unavailable.
The inefficiency and ineffectiveness in running primary schools by both the state and local governments led to mass strikes nation-wide owing to non-payment of teachers’ salaries for upward of six months in some states.
The UPE programme was meant to be free and compulsory from 1979, but such slogan has since been dropped due to unprecedented student enrolment and the enormous financial involvement.
The problems raised by UPE notwithstanding, the programme was expected to reduce the high rate of illiteracy and provide equal educational opportunities for all Nigerians.
It was also expected to bridge the educational gap between the various parts of the country.
The Current Funding Pattern of Primary Education In 1993, the Primary Education Edict No.
31 of 1988 was amended and renamed National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) Decree No.
96.
The NPEC is charged with the responsibility of receiving from the Federal Government funds meant for primary education and allocating the funds to the Primary Education Board of each state and any agency responsible for the Federal Government sponsored Special Primary Education Project in accordance with the formula presented in Decree 96 of 1993.
At the state level, the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) is responsible for the disbursement of fund provided to it from the Federal (National Fund) and State Government (State Fund).
At the local government level, the Local Government Education Authority (LGEA) utilizes the money received from the SPEB to pay salaries and personnel emolument of school staff, acquire and distribute materials and equipment to all primary schools in its area of jurisdiction, maintain school buildings and other infrastructures and use the funds to run the schools.
In a nutshell, the money for funding primary education comes from the federation account.
It is important to mention here that NPEC has been replaced by the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) at the federal level and by State Universal Basic Education Commission (SUBEC) at state level.
We shall discuss this commission later in our subsequent lectures.
3.3 Basic Concepts in Educational Cost Writing on educational cost, Ayeni (2003) citing Babalola argued that cost of education is what we give up in order to educate people in schools.
Consequently, cost is a sacrifice that is incurred in doing something.
This sacrifice could be monetary, tangible or psychic.
Educational Cost: Ayeni noted that educational cost is the sacrifice or denial incurred by individuals, nations, states and even institutions of learning in educating or producing a person or persons.
Different agencies utilize indicators of educational cost in arriving at decisions related to diagnostic use i.e.
analysis of financial aspects of education and prognostic or evaluative use i.e.
projection of the trend of the educational system.
According to Ayeni, there are two major levels of analysis – (a) Detailed analysis and (b) Overall analysis.
(a) Detailed Analysis Type: This identifies the differences that exist between the private expenditure on education (expenses by parents etc) and public expenditure on education (expenses by government(s).
This detailed analysis responds to the questions on what the unit cost of education is level by level, the purpose for incurring such costs and what nature is such incurred expenses?
(b) Overall Analysis Types: This guarantees that necessary information about how the provided educational monetary resources will be utilized are made available.
It takes into consideration the time trend of educational expenditure in line with the nation’s available population, Gross Domestic Product etc.
The following according to Ayeni constitute the various types of educational costs: 1.
Accounting Costs: This is the direct financial expenses that is incurred on education.
Invariably, it is the expenses that go into producing or educating an individual in the varied school setting.
This includes the financial costs of labour services, raw materials, costs of the laboratory equipment and machinery and so on.
2.
Capital Costs of Education: These are the cost incurred on fixed items such as buildings, vehicles, equipment which usually have long life span of usage in the process of producing a student.
On the long run, the cost on the capital or fixed items become variable.
3.
Current or Recurrent Costs of Education: These are expenditures on goods and services that bring short-lived benefits in the process of educating the students.
The current expenditures are the prices paid on the various educational inputs, such as teaching personnel, non-teaching personnel and materials in the process of educating an individual.
4.
Private Costs of Education: These are the direct expenses incurred by individual(s), families in the process of getting somebody educated.
It includes costs of books, uniforms, entertainment etc.
5.
Institutional Costs of Education: These are costs that various institutions of learning incur as a result of fulfilling the objective of provision of educational services to the public.
The institutional cost consists both capital and recurrent costs.
The capital cost is made up of costs of building, furniture and equipment, while recurrent costs consist of costs on salaries, scholarship and other consumables.
6.
Social Cost of Education: This is defined as those borne by the public through the government.
It is made up of the private and institutional costs excluding scholarships and tuition fees.
In other words, social cost is made up of earnings foregone, expenditures on books, uniform, transport, furniture and equipment, buildings, salaries and other consumables.
7.
Explicit Costs of Education: The explicit cost of education involves the actual payment to other educational transactors which is receipted.
It often reflects in the statement of accounts.
8.
Implicit Costs of Education: This cost is hidden and represent the value of the foregone opportunities.
It does not involve any actual cash payment to other educational transactors, and therefore, not receipted.
It does not reflect in the statement of accounts.
9.
Opportunity Costs of Education: This is the alternative foregone, in order to acquire some levels of education.
The opportunity cost of any educational level is the income that students have given up while undergoing their education.
The opportunity cost of education has been described by various authors as being very important.
Being very important, the opportunity cost does not need actual expenditure on education.
Rather it represents the real charges emanating from the operation of education systems, that do not require actual expenditure.
10.
Sunk Costs of Education: These are costs that are related to the determination to having a change in either the level or the nature of any educational activity.
These costs are the expenditures that have been made in the past or that must be paid in the future, as part of contractual agreement.
If one has paid or is having to pay a given contractual amount of money, it does not affect one’s decision to change the level or nature of the said educational activity.
11.
Incremental Costs of Education: These are the costs that are incurred in the process of effecting a change in the nature of a given activity.
Incremental costs involve all various costs that are liable to change or vary; for instance variable costs, marginal costs etc.
It does not include overhead costs that would not be affected by a particular change in decision.
12.
Factor Costs: The factors of production in education are land, labour, capital and entrepreneur.
These factors must be adequately present before any meaningful productive activities can occur.
School structures must be erected while the labour consisting of both teaching and non-teaching personnel must equally be present in the school.
Capital must be present so that the educational productivity activities will not be adversely affected.
The entrepreneur is sometimes referred to as the organizer.
He is expected to integrate and harness all other factors – land, labour, capital and ensure that they are put to their optimal use for the attainment of identified objectives of the organizations.
There are prices paid for varied resource factors used for educational production.
For the land, rent is paid on it, while for the labour comprising teaching and non-teaching staff, salaried and wages are paid.
While interest is paid on capital and the entrepreneur realizes profit.
4.0 CONCLUSION We can conclude this lecture by saying that educational development in a particular country is the responsibility of the individual, society and the government.
This is because education is a capital intensive enterprise.
Governments, parents and students sacrifice a lot for the purpose of education.
In every country, education attracts high level of attention as a result of its position as a social service with direct economic impact.
As a result of population explosion in the school system, the cost of financing education has been on the increase.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, you learnt the meaning of education finance.
Education finance was defined in various ways.
We also discussed the funding of primary education stretching from colonial days to the present day.
You also learnt about the basic concepts in educational cost.
Also discussed in this lecture were the various types of educational costs.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
(a) Define Education finance in your own words.
(b) Explain the criteria that are required for the establishment of properly educational financing 2.
Describe the various phases in the evolution and funding of primary education in Nigeria.
3.
Discuss at least five types of educational costs.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adamu, A.U.
(2007).
Financing education delivery in Nigeria: the rhetoric and realities.
In Elizabeth Eke & Raphael, O. Olarinoye (eds).
Politics of Nigerian Education.
Bauchi: The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Ayeni, A.O.
(2003).
Educational cost.
In Joel B. Babalola (ed.)
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Bozimo, G.O.
& Sanda, Y.Y.
(2007).
The politics of funding and fiscal management in Nigerian education: an assessment of the implementation of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme in Plateau State.
In Elizabeth Eke & Rephael O. Olarinoye (ed).
Politics of Nigerian Education.
Bauchi: The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Isma’il T. (2001).
The financing of primary education in Nigeria.
In Ebele J. Maduewesi (ed.)
Financing of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: XIM Technologies Press Ltd. Okunaniri, P.O.
(2002).
Resourcing and guidelines for educational finance in tertiary institutions in Nigeria.
Owerri: Fasmen Communications.
UNIT 2: SCHOOL BUDGET 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is School Budget?
3.1.1 Definition 3.1.2 The Relevance of Educational Budget 3.1.3 The Framework of Educational Budget 3.1.4 Budgetary Process in Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The demand for education has over the years increased astronomically.
The problem in education enterprise in Nigeria is that decisions that affect educational programmes are always made in a haphazard manner.
In most cases, accurate statistics are either not available or inadequate.
Most of our educational projections are always faulty.
These flaws have always resulted in the collapse of most of the educational policies in this country.
It is axiomatic that rational decision-making system is very important for any purposeful, meaningful and comprehensive planning.
This rational decision-making is hinged on adequate system of budgeting.
It is important to mention that government educational budgets are the major administrative instruments through which public investments in education are translated into tangible achievements.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lecture, you will be able to: 1. define school budget.
2. know the relevance of educational budget in school administration.
3. understand the framework of educational budget.
4. know the budgetary process in education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.1 What is School Budget?
Various authors have defined school budget in different ways.
Adesina (1990:142) defined school budget as a plan for financing a school system for a given period.
He went further to state that budgetary procedures is used to describe the steps that the school administrators as well as school boards take in planning and administering the budget from the beginning to the end.
According to him, the final product, the budget document is the entire paper which shows the details of both the school budget and the budgetary procedure.
Ozigi (1982) noted that budget simply means the anticipated total revenue and expenditure for each year based on the estimates of the income accruing to the institution or organization in question.
In this case, the estimated expenditure is based on the anticipated revenue.
However, the actual revenue may be more or less than the amount originally estimated.
When this happens, it will certainly affect expenditure.
This situation will necessitate a review of the budget in order to either increase or reduce the expenditure on different items.
Writing on budgeting, Ogbodo (2004) noted that school finance involves planning and budgeting about financial plans.
He argued that a budget is a plan but all plans are not budgets.
According to him, even a highly detailed plan about a project in the future is not a budget until how much money that will be committed to such a project is specified.
A budget, in his own opinion, is a special type of plan because it is concerned with money.
It deals with how much government, school board or an individual school plans to spend and how the expenditure is to be financed.
Budget deals with expenditure and revenue questions for a given future time period.
The given time period is normally one fiscal year.
The fiscal year is any consecutive twelve months period that is chosen by any organization as its budget year.
In Nigeria, the fiscal year starts in January and ends in December.
Schick, cited by Ogbodo (2004:103) identified three major uses of budget.
According to him, these are: 1.
Control 2.
Management 3.
Planning.
A budget tries to tie the operating officials to the stated policies and objectives formulated by top administrators.
Control is enforced by accounting practices and reporting procedures that restrict the transfer of funds from one account to another.
Budget also regulates the number of positions available to a system or organization.
The control aspects of the budget are important to discourage misappropriation of public funds.
The management aspects of a budget involve efforts to discharge efficiently and effectively the plans and policies that have been approved while the planning aspect involves the determination of objectives, the evaluation of alternative courses of action and the authorization of selected programmes.
3.1.2 The Relevance of Educational Budget Educational budget is very relevant in school system because it serves as a rudder of a ship or a compass that controls the direction in which school projects move.
In the absence of school budget, the school is managed on the impulse of the moment.
In this case, the management of the school is directioness and implementation of school projects is done haphazardly.
Ikediugwu (2000:6-8) identified the importance of the school budget thus: 1.
It is a tool for the allocation of resources among competitive projects and interest groups within the communities.
2.
It is an organizational forecast of its income and expenditure over a given period.
3.
It indicates the projects or items on which the organization will spend its revenue for the period and also the sources from which the organization expects to raise the revenue to spend.
4.
Budgeting is a mechanism for achieving economic stability.
5.
It is an important process by which accountability and responsibility can be provided in a political system.
6.
It is a catalyst for the provision of variety of information.
7.
It is viewed as a process of detailed decision-making on the use of resources available.
8.
It is the making of financial plan of what money may be received over a certain period of time or in connection with a certain project and how money will be spent.
9.
It is also a plan of target in quantitative end or money value prepared for a future period of time.
10.
Budgeting is an instrument used for financial and project decision making at all levels of public and private administration.
We cannot but agree with Ezeocha that: Good budgeting attracts the support of tax payers whose money is being made use of, and whose children are likely to benefit from the budget.
For instance, they are likely to approve a budget that is neither ambiguous nor wasteful in its allocation to educational services (Ezeocha in Ogbonna 2005:34).
According to Nwangwu (2007), school budget has three basic features: • It is a financial plan.
• It expresses the type of educational needs envisaged.
• It is usually prepared to cover a period of time, in order words, an academic session.
A good school budget should contain in detailed terms the estimates of receipts and expenditures as well as educational plan for the session.
Scholars usually talk of the triangle of educational budgets involving: • the educational plan; • the expenditure plan; • the revenue plan The Educational Plan It is necessary to note that educational plan is the life-wire of any educational budget.
The success of the school system is either enhanced by adequate revenue or marred by starving it with fund.
There is, therefore, the need to strike a balance between school policy and plan on one hand and the finance available to the school on the other.
In preparing school budget, the starting point is the educational plan.
The educational plan will show in clear terms the educational needs, strategies to meet such needs, the expected resources needed to meet the needs.
In other words, it will show the needs to be attained, how such needs will be attained, who is to realize such needs and with what resources (Nwangwu 2007).
In this regard, therefore, educational objectives should be determined, the personnel required determined, other relevant resources and the cost estimates also determined.
The Expenditure Plan: This is simply the translation of the educational plan into costs.
Expenditure items are classified and numbered.
This is to ensure proper accounting and easy administration.
State Ministry of Education usually has a standard classification.
It is necessary that such standards are adhered to strictly for purposes of clarity and uniform.
After the expenditure classification, the step that follows is collection of data that are needed for determining the cost each classified item for the academic session.
The budget is basically an estimate, consequently, the costs need not be exact.
However, it is expected that the estimate should be fairly accurate to make the estimate realistic and reasonable.
The Revenue Plan: In school budget, revenue plan closely follows expenditure plan.
This is the detailed estimate of receipts, which could be used by the school administrator to finance educational plan.
Ukeje, Akabogu and Ndu (1992:282) noted that the common classification of revenue receipts in educational institutions or school system include: • Revenue from local sources; • Tuition fees; • Equipment fees; • PTA levies; • Revenue from state sources; • Revenue from federal sources.
Budget Administration: The chief executive of the school, the headteacher is the controller of the budget.
In this respect, no expenditure should be made without the approval or authorization of the headteacher, who is the chief executive.
There is the need for proper co-ordination of all expenses done and the budget should act as a guide to this purpose.
When this is done, a situation where some items in the school are not bought because of fund whereas there is overspending in some items is avoided.
3.1.3 The Framework for Educational Budget The educational budget, as an instrument for educational planning involves different short term plans, which are in most cases translated into educational programmes through the annual budget funds.
The budget essentially dictates the direction and the level of educational plan implementation.
In other words, the annual educational budget is a tool, which can be employed to articulate, analyze, execute and evaluate government programmes for the education sector.
Babalola (2003:261-262), identified two levels of educational budget – micro- and macroeconomic levels.
According to him, at the micro-level, the budget is a tool, which can be used to implement institutional objectives relating to investment in and consumption of education.
At the macro-level, the educational budget can be used to address macroeconomic issues of the nation or a state.
It is, therefore, necessary for the budget to take into consideration the existing macroeconomic issues while preparing the annual educational budget.
These issues include the rising cost of education, unemployment, the role of government in education, user charges (i.e.
fees), public subsidy in education, excess demand for education etc.
These issues represent the areas of economic concerns irrespective of the fact that they have their roots in individual micro decisions relating to investment in and consumption of education.
Microeconomic goals, which an educational budget must take into consideration, include the production of maximum number of graduates and school leavers.
In other words, absorbing the excess private demand for education.
Other goals include producing the right type of manpower to fit the labour market, reduction of educational wastages (dropout and repeater wastages), high level of social return to education investment.
Bababola argued that most of the macroeconomic goals which educational budget must address are interrelated.
For instance, the rising cost of education can keep education out of the reach of those who would have ordinarily invested in it, with the consequence of changing the production, distribution, and consumption patterns of goods and services produced in the economy.
It is, therefore, imperative that school budgeters should take special interest in macroeconomic balance and consistency among macro- economic goals.
What this demands is setting some targets for the annual budget within which the macroeconomic goals will be realized.
Such targets include educational cost stability or control, reduction of unemployment, avoidance of budget deficits, educational growth rate and balance between supply of and demand for education.
3.1.4 Budgetary Process in Education The budgetary process is certainly a time consuming one.
It demands clearly spelt out all the estimated revenue and expenditure section by section and item by item.
Ogbonnaya (2005:83) identified four processes that are involved in budgetary process.
According to him, the process involves: 1. careful study of the educational needs of the school and estimation of the revenue that will be necessary to meet these needs; 2. planning and procurement of the necessary revenue to implement the educational programmes agreed upon; 3. the determination of the revenue that will be available to execute the educational programmes; 4. the determination of the ways to allocate the available revenue in such manner as to avoid friction, duplication and waste.
Lacey, cited by Babalola (2003:269-272) discussed various steps that are essential in budgetary decision-making process.
These steps include the following: Step 1: Determination of the overall levels of spending: A central body is responsible for the determination of the spending level within budget period.
The global ceiling are then communicated to all cost/revenue centres/units.
In response, all cost/revenue centres send back their estimates of individual programme costs for compilation and aggregation.
Step 2: Allocation of estimated available resources among sectors: A central body sends budget circulars indicating macroeconomic forecasts, policy objectives and how the budget is expected to help attain them.
In return, cost/revenue centres send budget proposals indicating current and capital aspects.
For capital expenditure, proposals for new projects based on criteria indicated in the budget circular are presented.
The proposal will provide information on rate of return, availability of financing, implementation capability and consistency with overall objectives.
For the recurrent expenditure, a time- table will be prepared to propose annual breakdown of expenditures for inclusion in the budget.
Step 3: Response to budget Circular: This involves negotiations among various decision-making bodies.
The usual approach is incremental (non zero-based).
Previous expenditures are scrutinized with special emphasis on the proposed increases.
Negotiations may be conducted on the basis of programme, but most frequently they are based on line items (i.e.
traditional budget) which cuts across programmes.
The traditional budgeting system focuses mainly on what government money is spent and it tends to over-emphasize cost with little or no attention paid to the benefit derivable from or even the efficiency of expenditure.
The line-item budget as the traditional budget is called provides almost no information on the objectives of spending such as, for instance, raising the level of literacy in a given area or providing textbooks for the handicaps.
Step 4: Preparation of draft budget document: A central body does this since requests generally exceed resources.
It is inevitable that there will be adjustment, integration and harmonization.
Step 5: Approval of draft budget: Usually this is done at the cabinet level.
A return of a draft budget for revision and modification may occur several times during the cycle.
Step 6: Preparation of final budget: The budget office may have to prepare a cogent summary and copious annexes at this stage.
This is in preparation for legislative review.
Step 7: Consideration by the legislative (or similar body): This may be the most difficult part of the process.
The review can involve: (a) consideration of budget framework (macroeconomic policies and assumptions behind revenue and expenditure forecasts).
(b) examination of detailed proposals at budget committee and sub-committee level.
(c) final plenary session to pass budget into law.
Step 8: Release of fund: Ministry of Finance will administer payments so as to ensure adequate control over the flow of expenditures.
There are three basic methods: (a) immediate release of budget amount; (b) release of funds against payment vouchers or receipts showing that the spending agency has effected or is about to effect payment and (c) periodic release of funds (for example, one-twelfth per month or one-fourth per quarter).
It is the responsibility of the spending agency to prepare forecasts of requirements over the year, prepare commitments and acknowledge receipts of goods and services and certification of expenditures on them.
Step 9: Implementation of capital expenditures: Project implementation includes the preparation of expenditure forecasts over the year and the organization/administration of bidding and contract procedures.
The Ministry of Finance would be responsible for ensuring that laws and regulations had been complied with before releasing funds.
Step 10: Procurement: A central body should be responsible for establishing uniformity in contractual procedures to ensure as many competitive bids as possible.
The spending agency should administer the procurement process including advertising, detailed cost evaluation (comparing with bid prices), evaluation of bids, negotiation with contractors and review of contractor’s performancy.
Contracts should only be awarded after budgetary allocation is assured.
Step 11: Reporting: The spending agency should prepare periodic (monthly or quarterly) progress report and accounts which should be consolidated and annualized by the finance ministry or similar body.
Step 12: Monitoring and evaluation: The spending agency is responsible for: a.periodic review of actual expenditure; b.analysis of variation with budget estimates; c.analysis of budgetary lags; and d.matching financial and physical progress.
The central monitoring body (Ministry of Finance) is expected to: a. conduct periodic overall progress reviews independently or jointly with the spending agencies; b. revise policies and objectives where appropriate in the light of these; c. reviews; and d. reallocate funds where necessary.
Step 13: Cash management: The central body or Finance Ministry should prepare an overall plan for cash management.
This is to ensure that borrowing is within limits and interest on debt minimized.
In addition, the spending agency should rapidly surrender excess funds or process request for funds in a timely manner.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we discussed school budget.
We noted that for efficient and effective running of schools, there is need for adequate fund.
The fund that is made available for the running of schools needs to be spent judiciously.
For purposes of accountability and judicious spending, school administrators prepare budgets.
It is axiomatic that the fundamental relevance of budget is that it guides and controls the financial activities of school administrators.
The school might be primary, secondary or tertiary levels of education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, we were able to define what budget is all about.
We also discussed the relevance of educational budget in the running of schools.
The framework of educational budget was equally examined.
Finally, we learnt about the budgetary process in education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define school budget in your own words.
2.
Discuss the relevance of educational budget in the administration of schools.
3.
Examine the framework of educational budget.
4.
Discuss the budgetary process in education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adesina, S. (1990).
Educational management.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd. Babalola, J.B. (2003).
Budget preparation and expenditure control in education.
In Joel B. Babalola (ed.)
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Ikediugwu, N.P.
(2000).
Budgeting: a tool for educational success.
Enugu: Rainbow Paper Mill Ltd. Nwangwu, I.O.
(2007).
Basic issues in school management.
Enugu: Computer Edge Publishers.
Ogbodo, C.M.
(2004).
Financing education in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Ogbonnaya, N.O.
(2005).
Foundations of education finance.
2nd edition.
Nsukka: Hallman Publishers.
Ozigi, A.O.
(1982).
A handbook on school administration and management.
Ibadan: Macmillan Nigeria Publishers Limited.
Ukeje, B.O., Akabogu, G.C.
& Ndu, A.
(eds.)
(1992).
Educational administration.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co., Ltd. UNIT 3: SOURCES OF FINANCE IN THE SCHOOL SYSTEM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Who Funds Education?
3.2 Sources of Finance in the School System 3.3.
The Role of Federal Government in the Financing and Control of Education in Nigeria.
3.4.
The Role of Local Government in the Financing and Control of Education in Nigeria.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The cost of education to individuals, government, parents and other stakeholders is very high.
This explains why a lot of money is channeled towards the provision of education to citizens.
Education is the only major thing that draws a distinction between human beings and animals.
It does not only preserve and transmit cultures from one generation to another, it also improves, enhances and changes culture.
It is against this background that education is said to be a necessity.
It is an instrument for the eradication of hunger, poverty, ignorance, and superstitious belief.
In the light of these, therefore, the question that usually comes to mind is who funds education?
The answer to this vexing issue will lead us to the topic of our lecture today – Sources of Finance in the School system.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lecture you will be able to: 1. know why it is important that the government should participate actively in the provision of education to its citizens.
2. know the sources of finance in the school system.
3. know the functions of various educational agents in Nigeria.
4. discuss the different functions performed by the Federal, State and Local Governments in the financing and control of education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Who Funds Education in Nigeria?
There has been this argument on whether the government should have any role to play in the financing of education or not.
A school of thought argues that education should be deregulated.
The argument of this school of thoughts is based on the fact that government or public schools are poorly funded and, therefore, offer inferior education to citizens.
Based on this, education should be left in the hands of individuals who can fund education adequately thereby providing qualitative education.
However, another school of thought believes that the government should play a significant role in the funding of education.
According to Ayeni (2003:329-331) the reasons include: (a) State Protection of Minors: Cohn is Ayeni (2003:329) defined minors as those children that are under eighteen years of age.
They are found mainly in the primary and secondary levels of education and cannot in most cases take decisions on their own.
The argument is, therefore, if the government does not partake in providing education in a given nation, most parents will be giving inferior education to their children who are brilliant.
(b) Equality of Opportunity: The equality of education argument comprises both allocative and the redistributive areas.
It is allocative in the sense that there are some families that cannot afford to educate their children to a certain level of education.
This invariably implies that there will be a loss of human resources that would have been injected into the nation’s economy.
The redistributive aspect concerns income distribution.
This is because the acquisition of additional education is required in order to obtain more income and so, if the current unequal income distribution is found undesirably, provision of education to the children of the poor is an instrument of making the unequal income distribution equal.
(c) Education and Democracy: Both democracy and illiteracy cannot co-exist in a society.
Rather, a democratic leadership is provided upon the acquisition of higher education.
There is, therefore, the need for governmental provision and support for education.
This will strengthen democracy and perpetuate it.
(d) Quest for Common Values: Common values are found within societies.
The provision of education makes the realization of the values possible.
Originally, the church had great role in the provision of education for citizens.
This then makes it possible for the church to directly or indirectly influence the activities of the populace.
(e) Education and Economic Growth: Economic growth is the increase in national output of a nation, the connection between both education and economic growth is considerable.
This is because acquisition of education of the workers offers them light as per improvement, innovation in the technologies of production.
It should be realized that once the goal of a nation is economic growth, then, the government’s involvement in education is justified.
Finally, to forestall less production of the socially desired education, there is the need for introduction of subsidies or the government’s direct provision of education.
Both primary and secondary education provides social benefits more than can be perceived by individuals within society.
From the foregoing, we have been rationalizing governments involvement in the funding of education.
The question that arises at this juncture is can the government alone fund education.
Secondary education is principally funded by the state governments.
The state governments pay both teaching and non-teaching staff salaries and allowances and also the running cost.
With the advent of universal basic education, education is free from primary school to junior secondary education.
The demand for qualitative and quantitative education is enormous.
It is based on this premise that we are going to discuss other sources of finance for funding education in Nigeria.
3.2 Sources of Finance in the School System Education is on the concurrent legislative list in Nigeria.
What this means is that both the federal and state governments are empowered to participate in the provision of education to its citizens.
Ayeni (2003) noted that many authors in Nigeria had discussed extensively the issue of financing educational programmes in Nigeria.
These authors, according to him include Adesina (1980), Akangbou (1987), Babalola (1991), Abe (1998) to mention few.
Among the sources of financing educational programmes as identified by these scholars include: 1.
Donations: These are free willing gifts in cash or kind to educational institutions.
Most of the established Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Nigeria and around the globe contribute substantially to the development of education in Nigeria.
Donations were received from foreign organization such as Carnegie Foundation, the Ford Foundation, Canadian International Development Association (CIDA), etc.
Donations also come from World Bank and UNESCO.
2.
Government’s Education Tax Fund: This is a means through which the educational sector can be financed.
The Nigerian government for instance directed that companies operating within the shores of the nation must pay 2 percent of their annual revenue or proceeds to the coffers of Education Tax Fund (ETF).
It is from the fund that some needs of the different educational levels are met, in addition to the Nigerian government financial allocation to the sector.
Akubue (2006:135) noted that in distributing the fund, the Education Tax Act 7 of 1993/94 specified the following formula: • Higher Education – 50% (University 25%, Colleges of Education and Polytechnics 12.5% each).
• Primary Education – 30% • Secondary Education – 20% Currently, the Petroleum Trust Fund (PTF) also contributes substantially in the financing of education in Nigeria.
3.
Governments Grants or Subventions: The government grants constitute an important source of educational financing.
The grants can be capital and/or current grants.
• Capital Grant: This grant when paid to schools is meant for erection of new buildings, carrying out of major repairs of old structures and purchase of hardware, school equipment such as the laboratory equipment.
The principle that underlies the granting of the subvention is the same, though the amount of grants from year to year do change.
One of the principles of granting subventions is proper accountability of the initial grants.
• Recurrent Grants: This grant is meant for salaries and allowances of the qualified teaching and non-teaching manpower in the school system.
This grant changes from time to time possibly because of government policies on salaries and wages.
4.
School Fees: The school fees represent a small percentage of the total school income especially in public schools.
With the advent of universal basic education, fees have been abolished in both primary and junior secondary levels of education.
5.
Internally Generated Revenue: In this case, schools raise money through various school activities taking place within the school.
Such activities include: sales of school uniforms, textbooks and stationery, staging of plays, sale of school farm products and students handcrafts.
6.
Scholarships: This is another veritable means of financing education.
Notable individuals, companies within and outside Nigeria, nations of the world always at one time or the other provide scholarship facilities to individuals for educational training.
In the 1960s, Britain led the donor nations in the provision of scholarship facilities for the training of Nigeria.
The British and the American governments are still offering scholarship facilities.
7.
Taxes: Education is further financed with the proceeds from taxes paid by the parents to the coffers of the government whether local, state or federal.
The tax is tagged Pay as You Earn (PAYE).
This form of tax is different from the company tax paid by companies to government purse.
These companies are expected to pay 2 percent of their annual revenue to the purse of Education Tax Fund for the development of education in Nigeria.
8.
External Aid: The financing of education can be done through granting of external aid from multinational organizations or from countries.
These aids are distributed to the different concerned schools through some institutions such as NGOs or a government department.
The external aid might be in form of labour or cash.
In fact, some forms of external aids are supply of experts and teachers, financing of institutions of particular sectors of the educational systems and also scholarship.
One major danger of external aid is that over dependence on it or an economy that is external aid - focused will suffer for it because of the withdrawal of the aid by the donor nation(s).
Again, the political, economic, social, educational systems of the receiving nation is directly or indirectly tied to the operating system of the external aid donor nations.
This will not benefit the recipient nation in terms of development.
Ogbodo (2003) also noted that Parents Teachers Association levies constitute a veritable source of finance for schools.
According to him, funds collected through Parents’ Teachers Association (PTA) levies help in meeting some needs of schools especially in the area of capital development.
Many public primary and secondary schools depend on such contributions for the erection of classroom blocks, staff quarters, fencing, etc.
Endowments and/or Donations are also means of financing educational programmes.
Higher institutions, according to Ogbodo launch endowment funds and wealthy individuals and corporate bodies make donations to universities and/or sponsor professional chairs in disciplines of their choice.
Donations are also made to primary and secondary schools.
He further observed that private education sector has recently been coming on strong as a veritable source of education finance in Nigeria.
According to him, private primary, secondary and commercial schools are being established by entrepreneur proprietors and run on strict business principles.
Professional schools that offer training in professional areas are also gaining in popularity.
Ikediugwu (2000), citing Ehiametalor and Aderounmu reported that communities are increasingly becoming aware of the importance of education and their role in bringing education nearer home for the benefit of the children.
In a community, parents organize themselves into groups or age grades to provide one form of project or another to assist the state government in its efforts to provide education to its citizens, The summary of what we have been discussing is that there is a growing acceptance of the reality by people that the government alone cannot provide adequate educational facilities for the people.
Diverse sources of fund should be explored in order to ensure qualitative and quantitative education in Nigeria.
3.3 The Role of the Federal Government in the Financing of Primary School Education in Nigeria.
The financing and control of education in Nigeria is vested by law in the Federal and State governments.
However, by delegation, some responsibilities are vested in the local governments.
The history of primary education administration as viewed reveal the instability in the government commitment of the financing of primary education.
Apart from different legislations on education in form of ordinances that were enacted, joint responsibility of Regions and Federal Government on education started in the Macpherson Constitution of 1951.
The Education Act of 1952 that established Local Education Authorities and Local Education Committees emphasized joint responsibility of the Central Regional and Local Governments, the local communities and the parents in primary education funding.
In 1954 constitutional amendment, the funding of education became decentralized as the Federal government and the three regions shared the responsibility of funding education.
First and second level of education was placed on residual list, only the Regional Government could legislate on primary and secondary education while higher education was on the concurrent legislative list, that is, both the Federal and Regional Government could legislate on it.
It was during this period that much effort was made to provide mass education in Western Region of Nigeria.
This put the public in control of education, the quantity of education in the system was the major concern of the government not the quality.
After much contribution of different commission between 1960 and 1970 on financing of education, the system of grant-in-aid was eradicated; education financing was based on the enrolment of pupils with the view that this would improve the quality of education.
The National Policy on Education 1977 (revised 1981) viewed education as an industry that needs a lot of money.
Thus,section12,(106) of the policy reads that: Education is an expensive social services and requires adequate financial provision from all tiers of government for successful implementation of the educational programmes.
Government’s ultimate objective is to make education free at all levels.
The financing of education is a joint responsibility of the Federal, State and Local Governments.
In this connection, Government welcomes and encourages participation of local communities, individuals, and other organizations.
3.4.
The Role of Local Government in the Financing and Control of Education in Nigeria.
As we have noted earlier, the Federal Military Government, on August 8, 1988 promulgated Decree 31 which established National Primary Education Commission (NPEC).
This Commission was made a parastatal of the Federal Ministry of Education whose primary responsibility was to reactivate primary education in Nigeria that had been in coma.
In consonance with this Decree, Primary Schools Management Boards were established in all the states of the Federation including the Federal Capital Territory.
Local Education Authorities were also established in all the Local Government Areas in the country.
However, Decree No.3 of 1991 whose title was Local Government Education Authority, repealed Decree No.
31 of 1988.
Thus, Decree No.
3 of 1991 established Local Authority in each of the Local Government Councils in the country.
By this arrangement, primary school administration and financing which had hitherto been a shared responsibility of the three tiers of government became the sole responsibility of the local Government Councils.
Accordingly, the functions of the Local Education Authority as contained in Decree 31 of 1991 include: 1. the day-to-day administration of primary school in their respective areas of jurisdiction; 2. payment of salaries, allowances and benefits to both academic and non- academic staff of the authority; 3. distribution of school equipment, furniture, registers, diaries, chalk, dusters etc to primary schools; 4. the appointment, deployment, promotion and transfer of teaching and non- teaching staff on Grade levels 01-06; 5. handling of disciplinary problems of staff of primary schools within its areas of jurisdiction; 6. collection of approved dues; 7. stimulating and encouraging communal participation in all primary schools; 8. payment for any land acquired for educational development in its area of authority (Atuma and Peretomode 2004:79).
An noted earlier, in 1993, the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) was established through the instrumentality of Decree 96.
This commission was charged with the responsibility of co-ordinating the activities of primary education in the country.
However, NPEC was also replaced by Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) in 2004 by an Act of National Assembly known as the Compulsory, Free, Universal Basic Education Act 2004 to manage the affairs of primary education in Nigeria.
This will constitute the balk of our next lecture 4.0 CONCLUSION We shall conclude this lecture bearing the following points in mind.
• Education is an instrument for the eradication of poverty, hunger, ignorance and superstitious beliefs.
• Therefore, its provision should be supported by all – the government, individuals and private organizations.
• The sources of finance in the school system are diverse and schools should explore these sources for purposes of adequate funding of educational programmes.
• Finally, although the administration and control of education is vested by law in the Federal and State governments, certain educational responsibilities are, by delegation invested in the local governments.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, you learnt the reasons why government should participate actively in the provision of education for its citizens.
We also discussed the various sources of finance in the school system.
Finally, you learnt of the important functions of the Federal, the State and Local Governments in the administration of education in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss why it is imperative that government should participate in the provision of education for its citizens.
2.
Discuss in detail at least ten sources of finance in the school system.
3.
Discuss the different functions performed by the Federal, State and Local Governments in the administration and control of education in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akubue, A.
(2006).
Managing, funding and supervising mission schools.
In G.U.
Dine, A.C. Adani, L.O.
Ugwu (eds).
Catholic Education in Nigeria within the 21st Century.
Enugu: Ndubest Production.
Atuma, E.J.
& Peretomode, O.
(2004).
The Organization and control of education in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed.)
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
Ayeni, A.O.
(2003).
Educational Cost.
In Joel B. Babalola (ed).
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: The Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Ikediugwu, N.P.
(2000).
Budgeting: a tool for educational success.
Enugu: Rainbow Paper Mills Ltd. National Teachers’ Institute (n.d.) NCE/DLS course book on education: cycle 4.
Kaduna: National Teachers’ Institute.
Ogbodo, C.M.
(2004).
Financing education in Nigeria.
In V.F.
Peretomode (ed).
Introduction to Educational Administration, Planning and Supervision.
Lagos: Joja Press Limited.
MODULE 5: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION (UBE)  MODULE 5: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION (UBE) UNIT 1: What is Basic Education?
UNIT 2: The Evolution of UBE Programme UNIT 3: Functions of the UBE Commission UNIT 1: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Basic Education?
3.1.1 UBE Programme and its Antecedents.
3.1.2 Objectives of the UBE Programme.
3.1.3 The Scope of UBE 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Universal Basic Education (UBE) is one of the current national policies embarked upon by Nigerian government.
It was launched by the Obasanjo administration on September 30, 1999 at Sokoto.
Its broad goal is to provide solid foundations for life-long learning through the inculcation of the desired learning-to-learn, self awareness, citizenship and life skills.
The duration of the programme is nine years universal, free and compulsory education.
This is broken into six years of primary education and the first three years of secondary education.
According to Ofoegbu (2004:362), it is an all- inclusive educational programme that encompasses both rural, nomadic and urban slum populations, the physically handicapped, street children, out of school children, hawkers and adults with special needs.
The aim of the programme is not simply to prepare individuals for a living but equally to help them to cope with the problem of unemployment, discrimination, anger and lack of self-worth.
In this lecture, we are going to discuss the extent of implementation and success of this programme.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lecture, you will be able to: 1. define universal basic education.
2. discuss the basic requirements that constitute basic education.
3. know both international and national antecedents of UBE programme.
4. discuss the objectives of UBE.
5. know the scope of UBE programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Basic Education?
Basic education is that education that enables an individual to adapt properly as a member of society.
This, therefore, implies that the requirements of basic education will vary from society to society and from one period to the other within the same society according to the needs of the society.
In other words, the concept of basic education is dynamic.
As the society changes, so also its basic needs change and this change is reflected in the requirement of basic education of that particular society.
For instance, some years back, computer literacy was not in vogue, but with the advent of technology, computer literacy has become a basic instrument for survival among the current generation.
It, therefore, behooves on the society to adjust so as to accommodate computer education in its basic education programme.
Basic education could, therefore, be said to be that minimum requirement needed by an individual to adapt properly within his society so as to become effective participant and contributing member of the society.
Ocho, in Nwangwu et al.
(2005:146), identified six minimum requirements that would constitute basic education in Nigeria.
These are: 1. acceptance and internalization of the moral imperatives of society that will enable the society to grow, develop and live in peace.
Ability to: 2. fend for one’s self through gainful employment; 3. read, write and calculate; 4. communicate effectively with others; 5. profit from modern technological information system 6. appreciate clean environment and understand basic health requirements.
According to him, the above list is not exhaustive but what is necessary is that the curriculum of basic education should change as the society and the people change.
The expectation of those that formulated the UBE is that nine years of school education are adequate for children of school age to attain basic education standard.
What UBE implies is that the government will provide basic education to all school age children up to Junior Secondary School and to all youths and adults who were unable to receive permanent literacy and numeracy.
The introduction of UBE more than two decades after UPE was launched is an indication that UPE failed to yield the desired goal.
In this lecture, we shall discuss the UBE’s antecedents, both international and national antecedents; the objectives and the scope of the programme.
3.1.1 UBE Programme and its Antecedents Writing on UBE programme, Obanya (2000) noted that UBE in Nigeria has both international and national antecedents.
According to him, at the international level, the following major points are to be noted: (a) The 1948 universal declaration on human rights, which emphasized the right of everyone to education, with special reference to basic education.
(b) The concern for a world educational crisis, leading to an international conference on the same theme in Paris (in 1968), the publication of a well known book on the subject by Philip Coombs, and the establishment of the UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning in Paris.
(c) The universal search for a precise definition of the concept of basic education, which led to Jomtien (1990) World Conference on Education for All (EFA).
Nigeria was also signatory to major International Convenants on Basic Education.
These include: Education for All (EFA) Related Conferences 1.
Jomtien Declaration and Framework for Action on Education for All (1990).
2.
New Delhi (1991) Declaration on E-9 countries.
3.
Ouagadougou (1992) Declaration on the Education of Women and Girls.
4.
Amman (1996) Affirmation on the pursuit of the goals of Jomtien.
5.
Durban (1998) State of Commitment on Inter-African Collaboration for the Development of Education.
6.
OAU Decade of Education in Africa (1997-2006).
7.
Recife (Brazil) Declaration on the pursuit of New Delhi goals on the massive reductive of illiteracy.
8.
The Dakar (2000) Recommendations on the pursuit of the Jomtien Goals.
Human Development Conferences 9.
The Rio Summit on the Human Environment (1992).
10.
Social Development Summit (Copenhagen, 1996).
11.
The Beijin Conference on Women and Development (1997).
12.
World Conference on Population and Development (Cairo, 1998).
National Antecedents The hallmark of national antecedents to UBE includes: 1.
The anti-colonial struggle which stressed the liberation of the people, with a strong emphasis on broadening access to education and the diversification of educational opportunities.
2.
The post-colonial education policies of the three regional governments, which had different approaches but which pursued the common goals of widening Nigeria’s educational base and reshaping the educational pyramid.
3.
The Universal Primary Education (UPE) programme of the Murtala-Obasanjo administration in the 1970s.
4.
The free education at all levels programme of UPN (1979-1983).
Obanya noted that the most important lesson from the international context has to do with what is now popularly known as The Jomtien Goals.
These goals stress the following points: a.
Basic Education, not a package but a process.
b.
Basic Education, not a question of years of formal education but a question of skills acquired.
c. Basic Education, not even formal education, but Education with a capital E. d. Basic Education, as the foundation level that emphasizes literacy, numeracy, basic life-skills and (most importantly) learning-to-learn, skills – in order words the foundation of life-long learning.
e. Basic Education, as emphasis on LEARNING, de-emphasizes repetitions and drop-outs.
f. Basic Education, as an essential part of a broad-based policy of INCLUSIVE EDUCATION.
3.1.2 Objectives of the UBE Programme In formulating the objectives of the UBE programme, Nigeria had to combine both the international and national antecedents.
This combination gave rise to the following objectives of the UBE as contained in the Implementation Guidelines for the Universal Basic Education Programme (FRN, 2000).
a.
Developing in the entire citizenry a strong consciousness for Education and a strong commitment to its vigorous promotion.
b.
The provision of free, universal basic education for every Nigerian child of school-going age.
c. Reducing drastically the incidence of drop-out from the formal school system (through improved relevance, quality and efficiency).
d. Catering for the learning needs of young persons who, for one reason or another, have had to interrupt their schooling through appropriate forms of complementary approaches to the provision and promotion of basic education.
e. Ensuring the acquisition of appropriate levels of literacy, numeracy, manipulative, communicative and life-skills as well as the ethical, moral and civic values, needed for laying a solid foundation for life-long learning.
It could be observed that the above objectives have strong emphasis on all-round development of individuals paying particular attention to both the intellectual and non- intellectual objectives of education.
This is in consonance with the definition of basic education by the Jomtien Declaration and Framework of Action on Education for All.
It defined basic education not in terms of years of schooling.
Rather, it perceives education in its broadest dimension as articulation of the formal, the non-formal and informal approaches to and mechanisms for awakening and all-round development of the human potential.
The broad aim is to lay the foundation for life-long learning through the inculcation of appropriate learning-to-learn, self-awareness, citizenship and life skills (FRN 2000:3).
3.1.3 The Scope of UBE It is pertinent that a programme of this magnitude should have a scope.
This scope will enable the operators to have a focus so that desired results will be achieved.
In this regard, the Implementation Guidelines sees basic education in its inclusive sense and it encompasses the following (FRN 2000:3).
1.
Programmes/initiatives for early childhood care and socialization.
2.
Education programmes for the acquisition of functional literacy, numeracy and life-skills, especially for adults (persons aged 15 and above).
3.
Special programmes for nomadic populations.
4.
Out of school, non-formal programmes for up-dating the knowledge and skills of persons who left school before acquiring the basic needed for life-long learning.
5.
Non-formal skills and apprenticeship training for adolescents and youths who have not had the benefit of formal education.
6.
The formal school system from the beginning of primary education to the end of the junior secondary school.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Universal Basic Education is the foundation for democracy if well planned and implemented.
Its goal is to establish a democratic principle to provide education for every citizen in the country.
It is a programme aimed at commencing the process of equal educational opportunities for all citizens.
When this is realized, it will result to the full development of the potentialities of every individual and enhance both economic, political and social development of the country.
It is because of the advantages that literate citizens have in the development of the nation that every nation strives to introduce and implement basic education programme.
This explains why Nigeria introduced basic education programme.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, you have learnt what Universal Basic Education programme is all about.
We also identified basic requirements that constitute basic education programme in Nigeria.
The UBE programme and its antecedents were equally discussed.
The objectives of the UBE programme were discussed.
Finally, the scope of UBE was also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define basic education.
2.
What are the requirements that will constitute basic education?
3.
Discuss both international and national antecedents of UBE programme.
4.
What are the objectives of the UBE programme.
5.
Discuss the scope of UBE programme.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (2000).
Implementation guidelines for universal basic education programme.
Abuja: Government Press.
Nwangwu, I.O.
; Aguba, R.C.
; Mba, G.C.E.
& Eya, P.E.
(2005).
Issues and concerns in education and life.
Enugu: Institute for Development Studies.
Obanya, P. (2000, July).
Sustainability, stability and continuity: The UBE response.
Paper presented at the Conference/Workshop on the UBE held at University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Ofegbu, F.I.
(2004).
Organization and administration of education: perspectives and practices.
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. UNIT 2: THE EVOLUTION OF UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Evolution of Universal Basic Education 3.2 The Scope of UBE Act of 2004 3.3 Basic Features of the Reform Programme 3.4 The Major Issues in Compulsory, Free Universal Basic Education Act of 2004.
3.5 The Home Grown School Feeding Programme.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this lecture, we shall discuss the evolution of the Universal Basic Education programme.
We shall review how the programme has progressed since its inception.
We shall also discuss various measures that have been put in place to ensure its success.
This is very important because, as we noted earlier, various educational policies in Nigeria had either collapsed mid way or implemented haphazardly to the effect that the desired goal is never achieved.
In our lecture today, we shall examine the steps that the Federal Government is taking to ensure that history does not repeat itself.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lecture, you will be able to: 1. discuss the evolution of UBE programme.
2. know the scope of UBE Act of 2004.
3. understand the features of the UBE reform programme.
4. discuss the issues that constitute compulsory, Free Universal Basic Education Act of 2004.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Evolution of Universal Basic Education Five years after the launching the UBE programme, it appeared that the operators of the programme were having problems of implementation.
This led to the reviewing of the programme.
The review resulted in the establishment of Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) in 2004 by an Act of the National Assembly known as the Compulsory, Free, Universal Basic Education Act, 2004 (FRN, 2004).
The UBE Act provides for compulsory, free, universal basic education for all children of primary and junior secondary school age in the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
It also stipulates penalties for parents who refuse to comply with the provisions of the Act.
In its reform agenda, the government states that the UBE programme was introduced to remove distortion and inconsistencies in basic education delivery and reinforce the implementation of the National Policy on Education (NPE) as well as to provide greater access to, and ensure quality of basic education throughout Nigeria.
According to a document released by the current UBE Commission, the UBE is aimed at: a. ensuring an uninterrupted access to 9-year formal education by providing free, compulsory UBE for every child of school going age; b. reducing school drop-out and improving relevance, quality and efficiency; and c. acquisition of literacy, numeracy, communication, manipulative and life skills and be employable, useful to himself/herself and the society at large by possessing relevant ethical, moral and civic values.
3.2 The Scope of UBE Act of 2004 According to the Act, the Federal Government shall only assist the states and local governments for the purpose of uniform and qualitative basic education throughout Nigeria.
The scope of UBE Act, therefore, covers: (a) Early Childhood Care Development and Education (ECCDE); (b) Six years of primary education (c) Three years of junior secondary education.
3.3 Basic Features of the Reform Programme The basic features of the reform programme of UBE include: 1. free formal basic education.
2. compulsory, uninterrupted nine years of primary and junior secondary school education.
3. provision of mid-day meals to enhance children’s access, retention and completion of the school cycle.
4. emphasis on curriculum diversification and relevance to effectively and adequately cover of individual and community needs and aspirations.
5. disarticulation of junior secondary schools from senior secondary schools; 6. realignment/integration of junior secondary education with primary education.
7. individualized teaching methods.
8. introduction of rudiments of computer literacy.
9. appropriate continuous teacher professional development.
10. community ownership of schools including participation in decision-making process in schools.
3.4 The Major Issues in Compulsory, Free Universal Basic Education Act of 2004 The major issues as contained in the UBE Act of 2004 are: 1. the Federal Government’s intervention shall provide an assistance to the States and Local Governments in Nigeria for the purposes of uniform and qualitative basic education.
2. every Government in Nigeria shall provide free, compulsory and universal basic education for every child of primary and junior secondary school age.
3. every parent shall ensure that his/her child or ward attends and completes: (a) primary school education; and (b) junior secondary school education.
4. the stakeholders in education in a Local Government Area, shall ensure that every parent or person who has the care and custody of a child performs the duty imposed on him/her under the Universal Basic Education Act of 2004.
5. every parent shall ensure that his/her child receives full-time education suitable to his/her age, ability and aptitude by regular attendance at school.
6. a parent who does not enroll or withdraws his/her child/ward from school contravenes sections 2(2) of the UBE Act and, therefore, commits an offence and be liable: (a) on first conviction, to be reprimanded; (b) on second conviction, to a fine of N2,000.00 or imprisonment for a term of one month or to both; and (c) on subsequent conviction, to a fine of N5,000.00 or imprisonment for a term of two months or to both.
7. transition from primary to Junior Secondary School (JSS) should be automatic, as basic education terminates at Junior Secondary School level, thus entrance examination may no longer be necessary.
Emphasis will be placed on effective continuous assessment, while final examination and certification will now be done at the end of the nine-year basic education programme.
8. the secondary school system should be restructured so as to ensure that the JSS component is disarticulated from the SSS as stipulated in the National Policy of Education (NPE).
9. the service provided in public primary and junior secondary schools shall be free of charge.
These are tuition, books, instructional materials, furniture and mid-day meal.
10. a person who receives or obtains any fee contrary to the provisions of the Act commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding N10,000.00 imprisonment for a term of three months or both.
11. the provisions of the UBE Act shall not apply to any parent who, for the time being, is resident outside Nigeria.
12. the Magistrate court or any other state court of competent jurisdiction shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine cases arising from non-compliance of the provision of Section 2 of this Act and to impose the punishment specified.
3.5 The Home Grown School Feeding Programme The Home Grown School Feeding and Health Programme is an initiative of the Federal Government of Nigeria within the framework of the UBE Act of 2004.
The programme is in pursuance of Government’s commitment to achieve Education for All (EFA) and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
It is aimed at reducing hunger among school children and improving their nutritional and health status with a view to promoting the UBE programme through improved enrolment, retention and completion of the school cycle.
Aims and Objectives The programme is aimed at: a. reducing hunger among Nigerian school children; b. increasing school enrolment, attendance, retention and completion, particularly of children in rural communities and poor urban neighbourhood; c. improving the nutritional and health status of school children; d. enhancing comprehension and learning achievements of pupils; e. correction of gender imbalance through increased girl-child enrolment; f. building and strengthening capacity for effective community involvement and participation in school management; g. stimulating the development of Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises; and h. reducing the incidence of poverty.
The broad goal of the above aims and objectives is to reduce the illiteracy rate in Nigeria.
The implementation of these aims and objectives will increase the enrolment and enhance the retention rate of children in schools, and by extension equip the youths, in the final analysis with the skills with which to survive and become active participants in the development of the nation.
4.0 CONCLUSION We shall draw our conclusion by stating that UBE has come a long way.
A lot of steps have been taken in order to ensure its success.
These steps are contained in the UBE Act of 2004.
It is expected that all these efforts will result in the success of the programme.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, we discussed the evolution of UBE programme, the emergence of UBE Act of 2004 which reinforced the implementation of the programme.
The basic features as well as the important issues in compulsory, free universal basic education Act 2004 were also discussed.
Finally, we looked at measures adopted by the government to increase enrolment and enhance retention rate in the schools.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the evolution of UBE programme.
2.
What is the scope of UBE Act of 2004?
3.
Discuss the features of the UBE reform programme.
4.
What are the issues that constitute compulsory, Free Universal Basic Education Act of 2004?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
Universal basic education programme: a flagship programme of the Federal Government of Nigeria.
Abuja: Universal Basic Education Commission.
UNIT 3: THE FUNCTIONS OF UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION COMMISSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Functions of Universal Basic Education Commission 3.2 The UBE Mid-Term Target 3.3 Funding of the Universal Basic Education 3.4 Checks and Balances of UBE Fund 3.5 The UBE Organizational Structure 3.6 The Universal Basic Education: The Success so Far 3.7 The Challenges Before Universal Basic Education Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As we have noted earlier in our lecture that the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) was replaced with the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) to handle the affairs of primary schools, our lecture today is on the functions of this new commission – UBEC.
In our last lecture, we observed that this Commission was established through the instrumentality of the Act of National Assembly known as the Compulsory, Free, Universal Basic Education Act of 2004.
We are, therefore, going to discuss in detail how this commission functions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lecture, you will be able to: 1. discuss the functions of Universal Basic Education Commission.
2. know how UBE will be funded.
3. draw and explain the organizational structure of UBEC.
4. know the successes so far recorded by UBE.
5. discuss the challenges facing UBE programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Functions of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) The broad function of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) as contained in the UBE Act of 2004 is to co-ordinate the implementation of the Basic Education Programme in the country.
Specifically, UBEC is mandated to: 1. formulate policy guidelines for the successful operation of the Universal Basic Education programme in the federation; 2. receive block grant from Federal Government and allocate same to states and local governments and other relevant agencies implementing Universal Basic Education in accordance with an approved formula as may be laid down by the Board of the Commission and approved by the Federal Executive Council; 3. prescribe the minimum standards for basic education throughout Nigeria in line with the National Policy on Education and the directive of the National Council on Education and ensure the effective monitoring of set standards; 4. enquire into and advise the Federal Government on the funding and orderly development of basic education in Nigeria; 5. collate and prepare after consultation with the States and Local Governments, and other relevant stakeholders, periodic master plans for a balanced and coordinated development of basic education in Nigeria including areas of possible intervention in the provision of adequate basic education facilities; 6. carry out in concert with the States and Local Governments at regular intervals, a personnel audit of teaching and non-teaching staff of all basic education institutions in Nigeria; 7. monitor Federal Government inputs into the implementation of basic education; 8. present periodic progress reports on the implementation of the Universal Basic Education programme to the President through the Honourable Minister of Education; 9. coordinate the implementation of the Universal Basic Education related activities in collaboration with non-governmental and multi-lateral agencies; 10. liaise with donor agencies and other development partners in matters relating to basic education delivery; 11. develop and disseminate curricula and instructional materials for basic education in Nigeria; 12. establish a basic education data bank and conduct research on basic education in Nigeria; 13. support national capacity building for teachers and managers of basic education in Nigeria; 14. carry out massive mobilization and sensitization of the general public and enter into partnerships with communities and all stakeholders in basic education with aim of achieving the overall objectives of the Compulsory, Free Universal Basic Education in Nigeria.
3.2 The UBE Mid-Term Target When the Act was enacted in 2004, the following mid-term targets 2007-2009 were set to be achieved.
1.
Access • 100% to graduate from Basic Education (BE) in institutions, possessing literacy, numeracy and basic life skills so as to live meaningfully in the society and contribute to national development.
2.
Quality • 80% of BE Teachers to have the Nigerian Certificate in Education (NCE).
• 50% of BE Schools to have conducive teaching and learning environment.
• 60% of Head and Assistant Head-Teachers to undergo training in School Management.
• Establish an efficient institutional framework for monitoring learning and teaching process at all levels.
3.
Periodic Review and Effective Implementation of Curriculum • Complete revision of BE curriculum to conform with the reform agenda.
• Produce educational materials.
• Establish libraries and information resource centres.
• Involve local craft people in the delivery of vocational education in schools.
4.
Promote Information Technology • 10% of BE graduates are computer literate • 50% of school managers are computer literate.
• 50% of BE teachers are trained in computer skills.
5.
Improve Gender Equity • Eliminate gender disparity in BE by 2008.
6.
Reduce Spread of HIV and Mitigate the Impact of AIDS • Achieve 100% awareness by 2008.
7.
Mobilization and Development of Partnership with International Partners, Private Sector and Local Community to Support and Fund Education • Improve collaboration.
• Achieve 80% community involvement in management of schools.
• Achieve 60% private sector involvement in managing and funding Basic Education.
3.3 Funding of the Universal Basic Education The UBE Act stipulated that the UBE programme will be financed through: a.
Not less than 2 percent Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF) of the Federal Government.
b. Funds/contributions in form of Federal Government Guaranteed Credits.
c. Local/International donor grants.
The Act also stipulated the formula for disbursement of the 2 percent of CRF approved by the Federal Executive Council as follows: 1.
Matching Grants to states on equality basis.
- 70% 2.
Grants to states identified as weak to support special programmes designed to rectify imbalance in basic education development, to last up to the year 2015.
- 14% 3.
Grants to states that have been adjudged as performing well in accordance with set criteria as incentive.
- 5% 4.
Special Grant to State and other providers to assist in the education of the physically and mentally challenged.
- 2% 5.
Special Grant to States for School Feeding Programme to increase enrollment, retention and nutritional level of children as well as their cognitive development.
- 5% 6.
UBE Commission Implementation Fund - 2% 7.
UBE Monitoring Fund - 2% The condition for accessing the UBE matching grant by states were also spelt out as follows: a. enactment of the State Universal Basic Education Law in compliance with Section 2(1) of the UBE Act of 2004. b.
Establishment of State Universal Basic Education Board in compliance with Section 12(1) of the UBE Act of 2004. c. Opening of separate Bank Account with the Central Bank titled UBE Matching Grant Account.
d. Evidence of lodgement of States’ counterpart contribution in compliance with Section 11(2) of the UBE Act, of 2004. e. Development and submission of State Action Plan to UBE Commission for approval, in compliance with a requirement imposed by the Federal Executive Council, June 2005.
The criteria for fund utilization of the UBE intervention fund by states and FCT are: (a) Pre-primary Education - 5% (b) Primary Education - 60% (c) Junior Secondary School Level - 35% Certain amount of percentage was allocated to various activities in each of the components of the UBE programme in respect of the expenditure.
The allocation of these activities is thus: (a) Infrastructural Development - 70% (b) Textbooks and Working Materials - 15% (c) Teacher Professional Development - 15% Total 100% In order to monitor the activities of the State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) in the utilization of the fund, it is stated in the Act that both UBEC and SUBEB must agree as to the specific and peculiar needs of the state upon which projects/programmes evolve for execution by the grant.
In this respect, therefore, Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) spelling out in details the nature of the projects/programmes shall be signed by both parties before the SUBEB embarks on the execution of the projects/programmes.
3.4 Checks and Balances of UBE Fund For effective and proper utilization of UBE funds, monitoring mechanisms were put in place.
These mechanisms as contained in the Act include: 1. regular routine and specialized supervision, monitoring and evaluation will be conducted by UBE Commission.
2. special financial audits will be instituted by the UBEC through the instrumentality of independent auditors.
3. special monitoring will be conducted jointly by Universal Basic Education Commission, Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Ministry of Education, National Assembly, Office of the Accountant General of the Federation, Budget Monitoring, National Planning Project Monitoring Unit in the Presidency, Non- Governmental Organizations (NGOs), Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and other Civil Society Organizations.
4. occasional Presidential visitation will be instituted from time to time.
5. the peer group mechanism among the states and among Africa nations including the involvement of relevant bilateral and multi-lateral agencies will be encouraged to participate in the process.
3.6 The UBEC Organizational Structure The Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) is a parastatal of the Federal Ministry of Education and reports directly to the Federal Ministry of Education.
The Commission is made up of 22 Member Governing Board which is the policy making body of the Commission.
It has the powers to monitor the finances and public affairs of the Commission.
At the head of the Commission is an Executive Secretary who is the chief administrative and financial officer of the organization.
He reports to the Federal Ministry of Education, in other words, the Minister.
He is assisted by two Deputies of Technical and Service Matters.
The Commission has six departments and each department is headed by a director from each of the six geo-political zones of the country.
Each of these departments is restructured into units.
There are 22 units in all in the Commission and each unit is headed by either a Deputy Director or Assistant Director.
In a nutshell, there are: a.
4 units in the Office of the Executive Secretary.
b.
4 units in the Finance and Accounts Department.
c. 4 units in the Administration and Supplies Department.
d. 3 units in the Planning and Information Management Department.
e. 3 units in Academic Services Department.
f. 2 units in Monitoring and Evaluation Department.
g. 2 units in Social Mobilization Department.
The two Deputy Executive Secretaries offer assistance to the Executive Secretary in supervising the implementation of the programmes by various departments.
Thus each one of them is in charge of three departments and units within them including those in the Office of the Executive Secretary.
In decision-making, the Commission adopts a committee system of decision- making.
In this report, the Governing Board has three standing Committees: (a) Finance and General Purpose.
(b) Programme and Establishment.
(c) Management.
The Management Committee is divided into 2 sectors (Services and Technical) for purposes of decision-making.
It has 16 working/technical committees.
Ministry of Education EXECUTIVE SECRETARY Deputy Secretary Deputy Secretary (Technical Matters) (Service Matters) Director Director Director Director Director Director (Financ ial (Admin.
(Academic (Monitoring (Social (Planning & Account) Mobilization) Information) & Supply) & Service) & Evaluation ) Figure6: Organizational Structure of Universal Basic Education Commission 3.7 The Universal Basic Education: The Success So Far The Universal Basic Education has recorded the following success as contained in the Universal Basic Education Programme: A Flagship Programme of the Federal Government of Nigeria.
A.
Growth 1.
Early Childhood Care Development and Education (ECCDE) 13,64.8 ECCDE centres have been established across the country.
These centres had an enrollment figure of 741,886 consisting of 53.93 percent males and 46.07 percent females.
ECCDE had 53.04 percent of its caregivers as males and 46.96 percent as females.
2.
Public Primary Schools A total number of 55,497 public primary schools have been established with an enrollment figure of 24,768,497 pupils consisting of 55.56 percent of boys and 44.44 percent of girls.
3.
Junior Secondary Schools A total number of 6,330 junior secondary schools had been established with an enrollment figure of 2,523,029 students with 56.27 percent consisting of males and 43.73 percent being females.
B.
Development It was recorded that: 1.
20,005 new classrooms were constructed in 34 states and the FCT from year 2000- 2005.
2.
40,926 classrooms renovated in 32 states and FCT from 2000-2005.
3.
748,592 units of furniture were provided by SUBEBS to schools in 28 states and the FCT.
4.
Other agencies, namely UBEC, ETF, SELF-HELP, UNICEF etc constructed and renovated 17,192, and 12,811 classrooms respectively and provided 228,175 additional units of pupil furniture between years 2000-2005.
5.
SUBEBs initiated various teachers’ professional development programmes in conjunction with Nigeria’s National Teachers Institute (NTI).
6.
26 SUBEBs have special welfare package as incentive for teachers in their respective states.
7.
The Federal Government has so far spent N44,870,676,627.06 in implementing UBE since 2000.
3.7 The Challenges Before the Universal Basic Education In spite of the above gains or successes recorded, the Commission equally envisaged some challenges that need to be resolved.
These challenges include: 1. more than 8 million children 6-11 years are not in schools.
2. dropout rate in primary school is 9.3 percent.
3. transition rate to secondary school is 61 percent.
4. there were only 590,655 teachers catering for the learning needs of 24.77 million children in primary school.
5.
UBE requires more than 40,000 teachers, 336,467 additional classrooms, 336,144 additional chairs and tables and 950,430 units of toilets to meet the current requirement.
6. employment and retention of teachers of good quality.
7. tracking federal funds to ensure effective and efficient utilization.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) is an important organ in the implementation of universal basic education programme in Nigeria.
The success of the programme depends on it to a large extent.
The functions of the Commission are elaborate and if well implemented, the realization of high level of literacy in the country will be a dream come through.
As noted earlier, many children of school age are not in school, drop out rate high and literacy rate is still low, it is only a programme such as UBE programme that can redress these anomalies.
This explains why all hands should be on deck to ensure its success.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, we discussed the function of Universal Basic Education Commission.
Its functions are all encompassing and if well executed will lead to a huge success.
We also examined the funding of the universal basic education.
The funding and disbursement of UBE funds are well spelt out in the UBE Act of 2004.
Various checks and balances of UBE fund were also discussed.
The Universal Basic Education Commission Organizational Structure was also discussed.
Finally, we looked at the successes recorded so far and the anticipated challenges facing the Commission.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss at least ten functions of UBEC 2.
Discuss how UBE will be funded.
3.
Draw and explain the organizational structure of UBEC.
4.
To what extent has the UBE succeeded?
5.
What are the challenges facing UBE programme?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
Universal Basic Education Programme: a Flagship Programme of the Federal Government of Nigeria.
Abuja: Universal Basic Education Commission.
