 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE: PED 421 COURSE TITLE: DEVELOPMENTAL GUIDANCE IN PRIMARY EDUCATION 1  COURSE guide: developmental guidance in primary Education Course code: PED 421 Course Developer Lawani , Lucy A. PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Writers Lawani, Lucy A. PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
and Ajufo, Beatrice PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Editor Prof. Adedipe Noun Study Centre, Akure Programme Leader Dorothy Ofoha PhD National Open University of Nigeria, 2  Lagos.
Course Coordinator Lawani, Lucy A. PhD National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Content Introduction…………………………………….
About the Course……………………………… Course Aims…………………………………………………………..
Course Objectives…………………………………………………..
Working Through This Course………………………………….
Course Materials…………………………………………………….. Study Units…………………………………………………………….
Assignment File……………………………………………………….
Presentation Schedule…………………………………………….. Assessment………………………………………………….
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA )…………………… Course Marking Scheme………………………………….
How to Derive Maximum Benefit From This Course 3 Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….
SUMMARY………………………………………… PED 421 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION The course PED 421: Developmental Guidance in Primary Education is a two credit unit course designed for 400 Level undergraduates running the B.A.
(Ed)/Primary Education programme, of the National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, the course materials you will need and how you can derive maximum benefit from the customised self-instructional materials.
It also provides hints on your Tutor-Marked Assignments, details of which will be given to you at your study centre.
Tutorial sessions, where you can seek clarifications on the course materials will be arranged for you at your centre.
It is in your own interest to attend the sessions!
The time and venue will be made known to you at your centre.
4 2.
The COURSE The three-module course is designed to equip the teacher-trainees with the methods, approaches, and strategies required to teach developmental guidance in primary education.
The first module introduces you to developmental guidance of children; where the meaning of developmental guidance and various guidance needs of primary school children were clearly stated.
The second module deals with the child behaviour and guidance, and the third module deals with counselling in the primary school; where various counselling methods could help the young children.
The ability to get the right guidance at the right time is an essential ingredient in the development of the child.
A child who is counselled in time of difficulty is bound to learn from his /her mistakes and move forward to achieve success in life.
At the end of this course, you are expected to be able to identify the likable problems and needs of children and how would you as guidance tutor help the children of the primary school age.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to expose you to the general guiding principles required of primary school age children.
You will learn that apart from the school counsellors, there are other people that could guide children in their education.
The aims of the course are to:  Introduce you to guidance principles in primary education.
 Teach you the roles of the school Counsellors and their identity.
 Enumerate the guidance needs of children in the primary school.
 Differentiate between the social guidance needs and the emotional guidance needs.
 Enable you appreciate the collaborative efforts of parents, teachers and counsellors in guidance services delivery at the primary school.
` Course Objectives 5  By the end of the course, you should be able to:  Enumerate the roles of the school guidance counsellors.
 List the guidance needs of children in the primary School.
 Identify the social and emotional guidance needs of primary school children.
 Identify the guidance needs of children in the primary school.
 Compare the social guidance needs and emotional guidance needs of primary school children.
 Enumerate the collaborative efforts of parents, teachers and counsellors in guidance services delivery in the primary school.
3.
WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE You are required to spend a lot of time and commitment to studying this course, you are required to read books and other materials.
You will need to find out more about the examples given to illustrate certain points.
You will need to spend three hours on each unit of this course.
We advise that you avail yourself of the opportunity of the tutorial sessions, where you benefit from clarifications from your course facilitators, and the interaction with your colleagues.
Course Materials The components of the course are: You will be provided with the following materials: a.
Course Guide, b.
Study Units.
c. Textbooks d. Assignment file e. Presentation schedule 6  Study Units The following are the study units contained in this course: Module1 Developmental Guidance and the Child Unit 1: Overview of Developmental guidance Unit 2:Educational Guidance Needs of Children Unit 3:The Social Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child.
Unit 4:The Emotional Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child.
Unit 5:Personal Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child.
Module 2 Child Behaviour and Guidance Unit 1:Understanding Human Behaviour.
Unit 2:Problem of Adjustment and Learning.
Unit 3:Role and Responsibilities of the School Personnel in the Administration of Guidance Programme.
Unit 4:Personnel Interrelationship within Developmental Guidance Services.
Unit 5:Developmental Guidance.
Module 3 Counselling in the Primary School.
Unit 1:The Counselling Process in Elementary Education.
Unit 2:Group Counselling.
Unit 3:The Teacher and Developmental Group Counselling.
Unit 4:The Elementary School Counsellor.
Unit 5:Consultation with Parents.
7 Each study unit consist of three hours work and includes the specific objectives, Direction for study, reading materials and other sources.
Each unit consists of Self assessment exercise questions, which would test you on what you have read in the course material.
The self assessment exercise help you to assess your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
These exercises together with the Tutor Marked Assignments will assist you in achieving the stated objectives at the beginning of each unit.
Recommended Textbooks These textbooks are necessary for you.
You should try to buy them yourself.
1.
Makinde,O.(1985).
Fundamental of Guidance Counselling.
London: Macmillan Publishing Ltd. 2.
Baker,S.(1996).
School Counselling in the Twenty First Century.
USA: Prentice Hall.
Presentation Schedule Dates for prompt completion and submission of your TMAs and attendance of tutorials will be reflected in your course materials.
You should remember to submit all assignments at the stipulated date and time.
You should work as scheduled, and do not lag behind in your work!
Assignment File You will find details of works you are to submit to your tutor for marking in your assignment file.
The marks you obtain for your assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File itself and in the assessment section of this Course 8 Guide.
Each unit of this course has at least two assignments.
These assignments are meant to help you understand the course and assess your progress.
4.
ASSESSMENT There are three aspects to the assessment for this course.
The first is in form of the Self-Assessment Exercises, the second are the Tutor- Marked Assignments, and the third is the written examination/end of course examination.
You are advised to attempt the exercises with all sincerity as that will assist you greatly.
In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor/facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will account for 30% of the total course score.
At the end of the course, you will sit for a final or end of course examination of about three hours duration.
This examination will form 70% of the total score for the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs ) The TMA is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You are required to submit at least four (4) TMAs before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMAs would be given to you by your facilitator, and would be returned to you after they have been graded.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your study units and references.
However, it is desirable to demonstrate that you have 9 read and researched into other references; this will give you a wider view point and a deeper understanding of the subject.
Ensure that each assignment reaches your facilitator before the deadline in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time , contact your facilitator before the assignment is due, to discuss the possibility of extension.
Extension sought after the due date, will not be granted.
End of Course Examination and Grading The end of course examination for this course will be about three hours, and will account for 70% of the total course score.
The questions will be fashioned after the self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked assignments that you have previously encountered during your course.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Utilise the time between the last unit and the commencement of your examination to revise the whole course.
You might find it useful to review your self-test, TMAs, and comments on them before the examination.
The end of course examination covers information from all parts of the course material.
The time for the examination is not fixed, but you will be given adequate notice of the examination.
Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 The best three (3) of the four Assignments will be rated based on 10% Each, making a total of 30% of the course Marks.
End of course examination 70% of overall course marks.
Total 100%.
10  How to Derive Maximum Benefit from this Course 1) In distance learning, the study units replace the university lectures.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you.
Realise the fact that you are reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way, a lecturer might assign you some reading materials.
The study units tell you when to read, your text materials and recommended books for your further reading.
You are provided exercises to attempt at appropriate point in time, just as a lecturer might give in a classroom situation.
2) Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with other units, and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives state the mental tasks you should be able to accomplish by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are therefore, meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
3) The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources; this is either from your references or a reading section.
4) The following is a practical strategy for working through the course: If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or visit the study centre nearest to you.
Remember, your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to ask your tutor to provide it.
11  5) Read this Course Guide thoroughly; this is your first assignment!
6) Organise a Study Schedule; Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available at the centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Decide on whatever method you choose , and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
7) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that lag behind in their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
8) Turn to unit 1, and read the instruction and the objectives for the unit.
9) Assemble the study materials.
You will need your references and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
10) As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
11) Visit your study centre whenever you need up-to- date information.
12) Before the relevant due dates ( about 4 weeks before due dates ), visit your study centre for your next required assignment .
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore , will 12 help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments as at when due 13) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are not sure about any of the objectives, , you can move to the next unit.
Study unit by unit through the course, and try to space your study so that you can keep to the schedule.
14) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
15) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives ( listed at the beginning of each unit ), and the course objectives ( listed in the Course Guide ) .
5.
TUTOR and TUTORIALS There are 15 hours of tutorial provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and venue of these tutorials, as well as the name, and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are fixed in a tutorial group.
Your tutor or facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments.
He/She keeps a close watch on your progress, so as to render necessary assistance when required.
You mail your tutor-marked assignment to your tutor before the scheduled date ( at least two working are require ) .
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
13  Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail, and discuss your problems for necessary assistance.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your facilitator if :  You do not understand any part of the study units of the assigned readings.
 You have difficulty with the self-test or exercises.
 You have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance for a face-to-face contact with your course facilitator, and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problems encountered in the course of your study.
To derive maximum benefit from course tutorials , prepare a list of questions before the tutorial session.
You will learn a lot by your active participation in the discussion.
6.
SUMMARY This course intends to introduce you to the general principles under the guidance of a counsellor or any other adults that could lead the primary school age children to success in their studies.
Upon completing this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge and the step by step guiding principles to make any primary school age child successful in his/her studies.
By the time 14 you complete this course, you will be able to answer the following questions:  What do you understand by developmental guidance?
 What are the roles of a guidance counsellor in your school?
 Who could give educational guidance to children in the primary school?
 Mention ten personal needs of a primary school child?
 What are the social guidance needs of a child in the primary school?
 Is there any need for a child’s emotion to be guided at the primary school?
 What are the guidance services available at the primary school?
 Apart from the guidance counsellor, who else could give guidance service to the children of the primary school age?
7.
CONCLUSION There are many other questions that you can answer on this course.
To gain the most, from this course, you should try to read more and ask questions.
We wish you success in this course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
We hope you enjoy your relationship with NOUN and we wish you every success in your future undertakings.
15  PED 421: Developmental Guidance in Primary Education Module 1: Unit 1: - Overview of Developmental Guidance - Meaning of Developmental Guidance - Rationale and Philosophy of Developmental Guidance - Purposes and Objectives of Developmental Guidance Unit 2:- Educational Guidance Needs of Children - The Need for Educational Guidance - Principles of Developmental Guidance - The Classroom Teacher and Developmental Guidance Unit 3:- The Social Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child - The Role of the Teacher / Counsellor in Meeting Social Guidance Needs in Pupils Unit 4:- The Emotional Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child - The Role of the Teacher / Counsellor in Meeting Emotional Guidance Needs in Pupils Unit 5:- Personal Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child - The Role of the Parents / Counsellor in Meeting Personal Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child 16 Module 2: CHILD BEHAVIOUR AND GUIDANCE Unit 1: Understanding Human Behaviour - The Definition of human behaviour - The dimensions of personality - The Developmental Tasks and Guidance Process (Erikson ) Unit 2:- Problem of Adjustment and Learning - Anxiety - Causes of anxiety - Anxiety and learning - Learning - Adjustment - Adjustment Problems in school - Helping Children with Adjustment Problems Unit 3:- Programming for Developmental Guidance - Role and Responsibilities of the school Administration a) The Role of the Head teacher b) The Role of the Class teacher c) The Organization for Total Involvement of Staff Unit 4:- Personnel Interrelationships within Developmental Guidance Services - The Counsellor as Coordinator - The Guidance Programme Unit 5:- Developmental Counselling - Rationale for Developmental Counselling - Developmental Tasks and School Counsellor - Goals of Developmental Counselling Module 3 COUNSELLING IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL 17 Unit 1:- The Counselling Process in Elementary Education - The Uniqueness of Child Counselling - The Basic Principles of Child Counselling - Approaches to Child Counselling Unit 2:- Group Counselling - Definition of Group Counselling - The Need of Group Counselling - The Nature of Group Counselling Unit 3: The Teacher and Developmental Group Counselling - Definition of Listening Skills - Importance of Listening Skills for teachers - Techniques of Listening Skills Unit 4:- The Elementary School Counsellor - Functions of a School Counsellor - The Characteristics of a School Counsellor Unit 5: Consultation with Parents - Rationale for Parents Consultation and Parents Education - Objectives of Parent Consultation and Parent Education - Teacher and Counsellor Functions in Parent Consultation - The Teacher –Parent Conference Module 1: Unit 1 Contents The Meaning of Developmental Guidance 1.0 Introduction 1.2 Objectives 18 1.3 Main Content 1.2.1 Rationale and Philosophy for Developmental Guidance 1.2.2 Purposes and Objectives of Developmental Guidance 1.2.3 Principles of Development Guidance 1.2.4 The Classroom Teacher and Developmental Guidance 1.4 Conclusion 1.5 Summary 1.6 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.7 Reference / Further studies 1.0 The Meaning of Developmental Guidance In studying developmental guidance of a primary school child, there is need to know who is a child?
And what are their characteristics.
When we know the characteristics of a child in the primary school, we might be able to know their needs and how to help them achieve the aims of going to the primary school.
The school guidance counsellor could be of great help, the home and the teachers could be contributory factor in the development of children of the primary school age.
1.2 Introduction Developmental guidance is the organized effort of the school to personalize and humanize the educational process for all school children.
The process involves a cooperative effort on the part of all school personnel to assist the child to understand himself and others; his opportunities and his responsibilities, to the end that he might become purposeful in his approach to the educational experience and life.
It is our belief that developmental guidance is an approach that would be useful throughout the entire school system.
However, we see its greatest potential in terms of the elementary school.
The rationale for emphasizing developmental guidance in the elementary school relates to the nature of the child and the setting or learning environment.
1.3 Main Content Guidance in the Elementary School 19 Counselling in the schools is distinct from psychotherapy conducted in the child guidance clinic or private practice.
The primary difference is that one is focusing not only on pathology and maladjustment but upon the developmental problems of all school children.
As the counsellor is part of an educational team, he must be aware of the philosophy, educational objectives, curriculum, policies and practices of the school.
Guidance will not work effectively in the elementary school unless the counsellor is aware of the teacher‟s role in classroom guidance.
It is the teacher in the elementary school who becomes the key person in the guidance programme.
He should be encouraged to provide regular guidance activities and establish a climate which permits the individualization of learning process.
The counsellor, then serves to supplement and support the services of the teacher.
He is a collaborator with the teacher to the pupil‟s benefit.
1.4 Rationale and Philosophy for Developmental Guidance Educational programmes are considered to be developmental when they start with the child where he is and help him to fulfill himself while becoming a contributing member of society.
The purposes of primary education focus on intellectual, personal and social development.
There is increasing recognition that development must occur in all these areas if the child is to get maximum benefit from his school experience.
Intellectual development of the child is usually carefully planned for.
Educators are increasingly becoming aware that social and self- development affect academic progress and hence require more than incidental attention.
Developmental guidance is not an incidental activity; instead, it is one which is scheduled, planned for and constantly evaluated.
A close look at the current Nigerian educational scene convinces one that elementary school guidance is increasingly a crucial issue in distinguish between quality educational programmes which are falling short of the goal of assisting each youth to grow into a responsible, cooperative, productive, self reliant citizen.
The type of programme we are 20 advocating occurs within the general frame –work of elementary education in a democracy.
It recognizes that if long-range goals and objectives of educational programmes are to be achieved, they must be founded on a solid developmental guidance programme.
Guidance is that part of the educational programme which emphasizes the individual.
While it does not deny the remedial and corrective aspects of guidance, developmental guidance instead works toward assisting each child to utilize his opportunities for learning and personal development.
This service is not a specialized therapeutic service adjunctive to the school, but it is a part of the educational process.
It is concerned with helping the child as a learner.
In order for this kind of guidance to be effective, the guidance philosophy must permeate the entire structure of the school system to the extent that it influences the philosophy of the administration, the practices of individual school teachers and the daily learning experiences of he child.
The philosophy of developmental guidance is based on the assumption that every human being is of value and has a right to optimum development.
From this point of view any concept of guidance as a separate service, primarily therapeutic in nature or essentially supplementary to other parts of the school programme is impossible to reconcile with modern educational thinking.
Instead guidance is an integral part of the total educational programme, with its nature and scope cooperatively defined by the entire school staff.
Guidance is inherent in the teaching process, and guidance and curriculum become inseparable parts of the total educational process.
From this point of view, the teacher thus has major functions in structure, curriculum and guidance‟s.
Guidance assists in facilitating an environment which promotes self- understanding and the full use of one‟s capacities and potentialities.
It nurtures the individual pursuit of personal adequacy and provides for a better understanding of each child‟s uniqueness.
It is concerned about placing children in situations where they are able to develop in relationship to realistic expectations.
Guidance, then , involves behavioral change.
21 1.5 Purposes and Objectives of Developmental Guidance The purpose of elementary school guidance are closely aligned with the personalizing of education and the facilitating of the instructional process.
They focus on helping each child profit from his educational opportunities and to realize his potential.
Objectives then are set up for the child, the teacher, the parents and community.
CHILD i.
To assist the child to develop, increased self –understanding and comprehension of the relationship between his abilities, interests, personality, achievements and opportunities.
ii.
To facilitate the socialization process and a sensitivity to the needs of others, as well as to develop social interest and a feeling of belonging.
iii.
To help the child becomes purposeful; and responsible and also to assist him to develop the intrinsic motivation for learning that is necessary for academic competence to become a meaningful and personal goal.
iv.
To promote increased self-direction, problem –solving, decision-making and involvement in the educational process by the child.
v. To develop wholesome attitudes and concepts about self; a feeling of adequacy and self –acceptance, the courage to function in the tasks of life.
vi.
To understand the casual and purposive nature of human behaviour and as a result to mature in human relations.
TEACHER i.
To assist the total educational programme to meet the needs of all school children in intellectual, personal and social areas.
22 ii.
To promote understanding of an individual and to encourage the individualization of instructions, as well as to reconcile the individual‟s uniqueness and the educational programme iii.
To stimulate and promote the use of guidance procedures by the teacher, and the total staff, thereby increasing the utilization of meaningful pupil personal data.
iv.
To develop recognition of the importance of readiness and involvement process, and the necessity of involvement in the educational process, as crucial concepts which produce purposeful educational experiences.
v. To reconcile the uniqueness of individual pupil and the demands of school and society.
PARENTS i.
Assist each parent in dealing with the normal human-relations problems in each family as they relate to the child ii.
Aid each parent in coordinating both home and school environments in order to make success not only possible but probable in both situations.
COMMUNITY i.
Help the community to provide services which free and expand, rather than limit, human potential.
ii.
Assist the community in coordinating all resources that are available to help the child.
This involves helping each child become aware of these resources and making sure they remain available 1.6 Principles of Development Guidance 23 Developmental guidance is based upon a democratic philosophy of education.
The following principles serve as guidelines for the development of a programme which views guidance in terms of a process meeting the needs of pupils.
i. Developmental guidance is an integral part of the educational process and must be consistent in purpose with the philosophy and objectives of the elementary school in which it operates.
ii.
Developmental guidance is for all children, not only the deviate iii.
It is an organized effort of the school to help the child develop his maximum potentials, both academically and socially.
iv.
The primary school teacher himself must be expected to perform certain guidance functions v. Guidance can be effective dealing with incidents as they occur, but it functions best as a planned programme providing continuous assistance to the child during his school experiences, helping him to accomplish tasks which lead to his cognitive and affective development.
The school curriculum provides the experiences, but the guidance functions of counsellor and teacher assist the child in succeeding in these experiences.
vi.
A guidance programme is most effective when there is cooperation between teacher, counsellor, parents, administration and community.
The counsellor provides services to the child directly – through counselling, pupil appraisal and group guidance – and indirectly, through consultation with teachers and parents.
vii.
It helps the child make full use of his potential talents and capacities.
24  viii.
It stresses the perceptual understanding of human behaviour in order to maximize the educational process.
ix.
It emphasizes purposeful; and meaningful learning experiences.
x.
It discovers and encourages the child‟s assets, shows faith in him and recognizes his strength and efforts.
1.7 The Classroom Teacher and Developmental Guidance The purpose of elementary guidance is facilitating learning in the child and modifying pupil, teacher and parent attitudes.
Guidance should make possible the mutual alignment of pupil and teacher purposes.
If elementary guidance is to be efficacious, much emphasis must be given to the teacher‟s role in the classroom.
The teacher spends more time with the child than any other professional and more than that, the teacher has access to the situation in which the child copes with two primary tasks –adaptation to work and adaptation to others.
The classroom thus affords both the time and the opportunity.
It is the only place where certain kinds of developmental guidance processes occur.
However, in actual practice classroom guidance functions by teachers vary considerably.
Some classrooms provide children with guidance experiences, while others appear to be primarily subject matter – oriented.
The time has come for schools to consider the necessity of providing an organized classroom guidance programme for each child.
This would necessitate specifying the classroom guidance functions and processes.
It is therefore obvious that the teacher has a function in the guidance process that cannot be adequately handled by any other adult in the child‟s life space.
It is the teacher who accepts, understands, clarifies and encourages an adequate concept of self in children.
This kind of guidance is based upon a certain type of milieu.
25 Some assumptions regarding guidance in the classroom: a) A complete acceptance of pupils b) A feeling in pupils that they belong to the group c) A mutual trust and mutual respect d) An environment where it is safe for the child to look at inner needs e) An opportunity to express some of these needs, which if not articulated and clarified hamper the learning process.
f) An emphasis placed on the importance of self evaluation in contrast to evaluation by others g) A climate marked by identification, recognition, acceptance and valuing of differences h) An emphasis placed on growth from dependence to independence i) An atmosphere where limits in the situation are most often a result of natural and logical consequences and seldom a reflection of the personal needs of the teacher The guidance programme, then places its emphasis on developmental problems.
It is directed at discovering the assets and abilities of all children.
The pupil becomes more than the object of child study, he is a participant in child study.
Classroom guidance in this type of organization is not incidental –instead it is the primary responsibility of every teacher.
While the teacher will not engage in diagnosis or therapy, he is involved on a daily basis in identifying guidance needs and assisting pupils to meet the developmental tasks.
1.8 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
What do you understand by Developmental Guidance?
2.
Do you think Developmental Guidance should be part of Primary school programme?
26 3.
Give a comparative account of the objectives set up for the child, the teacher and the parents in Developmental Guidance.
Module 1: Unit II UNIT 2: Educational Guidance Needs of Children Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Some Educational Needs 3.2 School Responses to Educational Guidance Needs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction In this era that the young ones go to school early, unlike what it used to be in the traditional olden days when a child would start schooling at age 7, children nowadays go 27 to school from age 2 years..
There is therefore the need to guide them physical, emotionally and psychologically through the school system to prevent them from becoming deviants.
It is the duty of the counsellors and the teachers to guide them through their educational development.
This unit would point some educational needs of the primary school children and what the school should do to respond to their needs.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit carefully, you should b able to: 1.
List some guidance needs for children 2. explain the reason that could lead to a change in curriculum 3. identify the different responses to children‟s guidance needs.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need For Educational Guidance Children throughout the ages have exhibited remarkably similar needs.
They seek security, affection, and the kind of purposeful activity which gives full rein to their imaginative facilities.
They need to satisfy a desire for achievement and recognition by parents, teachers and peers.
They need to know their individual strengths and weaknesses-personal, social and academic – and they need the opportunities to assess such traits themselves or have them assessed by others.
As the child develops social and educational contexts change, new needs arise.
Such changes maybe the inner physiological, mental or psychological alterations which are often of critical importance during say, adolescence.
On the other hand, the changed situation may be externally based, as when a child starts, changes or leaves, school or starts work; or it may, spring from some catastrophe at home, like death or divorce.
These internal and external changes may occur separately or simultaneously; but the necessary adjustment and accommodation to them must be the task of the child himself, supported and guided by the home and the school.
28 The home does not or cannot always provide such help.
Thus there is that general agreement on the need of young children for curricular, emotional, disciplinary and sometimes career guidance.
The current situation in education demands our services study of the crucial need for guidance.
It is apparent that while we are philosophizing about quality educational experience for all children, at the same time there is an increasing waste of human resources.
This waste can be observed in the dropout, the under achievers, the truants and all the others who do not seem to accommodate themselves to the general purposes of a democratic society.
It is apparent that our past approach of focusing on deviation and exceptionality has not met the major educational concerns.
There is considerable evidence in child development research which spells out clearly the uniqueness of each pupil.
It is apparent that schools must develop a procedure which deals with uniqueness.
Guidance, then becomes a method for personalizing the educational process.
The need for elementary school guidance has expanded as studies have increasingly pointed to the relationship between social and self development and intellectual development.
The education of the whole child is becoming more than a philosophy –it is a necessity.
This has been accompanied by a growing awareness of the significance of the early school years for the educational process.
Children should have access to the guidance process in the critical years.
The knowledge explosion has also forced teachers to seek additional assistance in meeting child needs in the self and social development areas.
The elementary school has a unique potential for providing guidance services.
Parents of elementary school children are extremely interested in helping their child to get a good start in school.
Accordingly, they are also seeking guidance in their own efforts to cooperate with the school and to learn more effective ways of child training.
It is also apparent that children are able to change their style of life and self-concept more easily at an early age.
29 There is need for guidance in attitude concentration and motivation for children who have little interest in school.
These children‟s expectations are generally low since their parents are showing no interest or enthusiasm in their children‟s schooling.
More than half of the population in school are victim of this circumstance.
Also there is need for training in language and communication skill.
This calls for training of staff on improved management and expression of feelings to be able to help the school pupils.
There might be need to change the school or subject curriculum, where many pupils are not doing so well.
Disruptive pupils need educational guidance.
Counsellors and the class teachers can come together to guide such pupils to have a conducive classroom and teaching.
These pupils could further be helped by withdrawing them from class for short periods of teaching that is appropriate to their level of needs and attentive capacities.
The teacher could use creative activities like art and crafts, drama and play to engage them.
They could be taken aside for counselling, focusing on raising the pupils self-esteem and modeling and teaching adaptive personal and social skills.
Children with lack of pre-school capability needs educational guidance.
These are children that cannot recognize colours, some are not familiar with reading, or which direction to read a sentence.
Specialists could be employed in training of these category of children: to teach, counsel and train them to become effective members of the society.
Other needs are, the needs for opportunities for the development of pupils‟ outside academic such as sport, opportunity to play.
There is also need for access to health or other experts /specialists, the need for a voice for pupils and the need for rules and boundaries.
3.2 Principles of Developmental Guidance 30 Developmental guidance is based upon a democratic philosophy of education.
The following principles serve as guidelines for the development of a programme which views guidance in terms of a process meeting the needs of pupils.
i) Developmental guidance is an integral part of the educational process and must be consistent in purpose with philosophy and objectives of the elementary school in which it operates.
ii) Developmental guidance is for all children, not only the deviate iii) It is an organized effort of the school to help the child develop his maximum potential both academically and socially iv) The elementary school teacher himself must be expected to perform certain guidance functions v) Guidance can be effective dealing with incidents as they occur, but it functions best as a planned programme providing continuous assistance to the child during his school experiences; helping him to accomplish tasks which lead to his cognitive and affective development.
The school curriculum provides the experiences but the guidance functions of counsellor and teacher assist the child in succeeding in these experiences.
vi) A guidance programme is most effective when there is cooperation between teacher, counsellor, parents, administration and community.
The counsellor provides services to the child directly –through counselling, pupils appraisal, and group guidance – and indirectly through consultation with teachers and parents.
vii) It helps the child make full use of his potential talents and capacities 31 viii) It stresses the perceptual understanding of human behaviour in order to maximize the educational process.
ix) It emphasizes purposeful and meaningful learning experiences.
x) It discovers and encourages the child‟s assets, shows faith in him and recognizes his strengths and efforts.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt important facts about educational guidance needs of children in the primary school.
You have learnt some educational guidance needs of pupils and also the school responses to their educational needs.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt some educational guidance needs of the primary school pupils such as the need for literacy and numeracy, attendance and absenteeism of primary school children.
Drop-out rate, language and communication, change in curriculum remedies to be employed in dealing with the situation on our primary school.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1.
Describe in brief the need for guidance for the primary school child, 2.
Discuss the functions of developmental guidance in elementary schools.
3.
What are the basic principles of developmental guidance?
7.0 References Barnet (2003):Educational Needs Generated by New Housing Developments London Borough :Beacon Council Inc.. Briggs D.C (1970) Your Child’s Self Esteem.USA: Doubleday and Company Inc. 32  Unit III: The Personal Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child.
Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Family Type 3.2 School Responses to Personal Guidance Needs 3.3 Role of the Teacher Counsellor / Support Teacher in meeting the Personal Needs of Pupils 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, you were introduced to some guidance needs of primary school children and how to respond as counsellor / teacher of the young ones.
In this unit, we shall move further to see what are the personal guidance needs of these children and how you as a teacher / counsellor can help to stabilize them in the classroom.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1) Recall with ease various problems presented by children in the primary school.
2) Explain how to use Jenny Mosley‟s “circle time” to help children.
3) List some school response to children‟s personal needs.
33 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Family Type Pupils have problems related to themselves, their parents and family, their friends and teachers.
They often have memories related to home or family, which create feelings of disappointment in them.
Their parents leave them with a feeling of incompetence and insecurity, when they fail to live up to their expectations.
Often parents nag their children and create an unfavourable atmosphere at home for studies.
At times, the strained and unhappy relationships at home hamper progress in study.
There may be jealousy among siblings, domination of elders, maltreatment of children, lack of a sense being wanted, lack of a sense of belongingness which disturb the mental equilibrium of the young children, resulting in poor or low achievement.
Guidance has to be provided to these pupils so that they face the situation boldly and with confidence.
Some pupils are obsessed with problems such as lack of friends, loneliness failure, feelings of inadequacy, inferiority and the like.
They feel a sense of chaos and despair around which creates serious emotional conflicts among them.
They need help while passing through these psychological situations.
Pupils also face difficulties on changing school due to transfer or for other reasons.
The new entrants get involved in conflicting social situations and some feel demoralized as if arriving in a place, where nobody speaks their language.
They need guidance for proper adjustment.
Pupils at times, find difficulty in concentration, learning and recall; they feel tense, anxious and depressed.
They need guidance to overcome these problems.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Describe a pupil with centration block and as a teacher how can you help?
3.2 School Response to Personal Guidance Needs 34  Having been told some problems that a child with personal guidance needs have, there is need to help and find treatment to the problems enumerated.
These are the steps the school counsellor and teacher need to take.
The “Circle time” meaning a range of class activities which foster gentle play, and conflict resolution, promote turn taking, delay gratification, improve social skills and promote tolerance is the most popular school response to the needs for personal guidance.
There should be provision of specific programs to address personal guidance needs.
Drug education programmes could be introduced to the children, so that they do not fall victim of this circumstance.
It is recommended that there should be a guidance / pastoral counselling to deal with the children‟s situation.
The ethos of the school is geared towards showing care and respect for children in vulnerable and difficult situations.
The school works to create a caring ethos where children are valued and listened to.
Also, it is mandated that all the teachers in the school commit a lot of time to social and personal skills as they are important for the child in society.
The school ethos also attempts to redress the lack of care, respect and support shown for children who come from dysfunctional family background as discussed earlier.
Other school responses include one – to – one intervention, anti bullying strategies and anger control.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 The “Circle time” what do you understand this to be?.
3.3 Role of the Teacher Counsellor / Support Teacher in Meeting the Personal Guidance Needs of Pupils 35 Teachers used Jenny Mosley‟s circle time which encourages good behaviour, develops listening time, self esteem and social skills (Ryan 1999).
Many teachers spent time individually with children in sessions of one to one listening in an accepting and non judgmental way with distressed children who need personal attention and with very difficult children.
This work can involve the use of worksheets and games to improve self –belief and self esteem and dealing with specific needs or problems.
The teacher could use art and craft, clay, sand, drama, cookery etc to gain the interest of the pupils and spark enthusiasm in children who may be quite turned off about school.
The use of play activities also links back to exploring dealings and anger management, Self Assessment Exercise 3: How would you as guidance teacher use Jenny Mosley‟s “Circle time”?
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt some facts about the personal needs of Children in the primary school.
You were also able to see the school responses to the children‟s needs and the role of teacher/ counsellor in meeting the needs of pupils 5.0 Summary You have leant some personal guidance needs of children.
You were able to learn what are the dysfunctional family background is and how to help pupils from such houses.
Children with poor social skills, children with centration block, egocentrism block, reversibility block, transformation block and how to help such children overcome their situation through the school response and the help of teacher counsellors/ support teachers.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1).
Why is it essential to provide guidance in personal matters of the school children?
2) Describe how reversibility block could affect children‟s learning 36 3) How would you as teacher help children who are turned off from coming to school?
7.0 References Barnet (2003): Educational Needs Generated by New Housing Development.
London Borough: Beacon Council Inc. Briggs, D.C (1970): Your Child’s Self Esteem.
USA: Double day and Company.
Unit IV: The Social Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Social Guidance Needs 3.2 School Response to Social Guidance 3.3 Role of the teacher Counsellor / Support Teacher 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference /Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In the last unit you were made to see some personal guidance needs of the primary school pupils and how to go about helping them as teacher counsellor.
In this unit we shall move further to see some of the social needs of the children that need guidance.
The 37 difference in helping the children with the personal needs is not totally different from their social needs.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: 1) List some social guidance needs of children.
2) Explain how the school can enhance character education in school pupils.
3) State in few sentences how the trained teacher can develop accountability in children.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Social Guidance Needs Just as we have said in the last unit, children present themselves with various problems.
One of the problems could be classified as social problem, which needs our attention as guidance tutors to help these children.
Social problem could be classified as physical, emotional and mental problems.
Pupils wish to be effective as individuals in society.
They often have to sit with classmates they do not like or play with those for whom they have a positive aversion.
These pupils need to be guided in social behaviour and relationships, making new friends and becoming leaders in their own groups.
Pupils in schools come from heterogeneous, linguistic and socio-economic backgrounds.
There should be an arrangement to give adequate direction for their proper adjustment.
Children could need social skills training in how to relate to others and how to get on with others.
Social problems among children could be seen in form of quarrelling with other children in the group, not having patience to take one‟s turns, not able to share equipment with others and can‟t listen or follow simple requests.
This lack of social and inter personal skills was as a result of lack of love and caring in pupils lives.
In a study carried out by Ryan (2000), more than 60% of the respondents were in need for guidance in the management of emotions, especially anger.
The children are seen to have a limited repertoire of coping skills resulting in over reaction even to the slightest conflict.
They have difficulties expressing their feelings resulting in physical and verbal 38 aggression.
„The children need a lot of help in the area of feelings‟ naming them, owing them and moving on.
Other social guidance needs identified include pupils‟ lack of self – esteem, bereavement, loss and abandonment, and sign of neglect.
According to Egbochukwu and Alika (2008).
Social guidance is more than “personality adjustment” it is the assistance given to an individual or a student by a professional counsellor in matters that borders on interpersonal problem of life adjustment with fellow students, parents, teachers and other members of the society.
Thus, it is very vital in facilitating self –understanding, understanding of others and having good relationship with others and the community at large.
3.2 Role of the Teacher Counsellor / Support Teacher in meeting the social Guidance Needs of Pupils.
No matter how enormous the school programme is, it is the teachers that would be the executors of such programmes.
This has made teacher counsellor/ support teachers to manage the social needs of the primary school.
The trained teacher who has further training in guidance and counselling will be able to aid each child to take an honest look at himself/herself, become aware of his/her potentialities and weaknesses, consider alternatives in the light of existing fact and information and make realistic decisions.
The children like adults, need to be held accountable for their actions.
When a child makes unsafe or unhealthy choices, redirect their behaviour and prevent it from happening again by creating a sense of accountability.
Creating a sense of accountability can be accomplished by: - asking children to state what they have done.
Ask them also whether or not such a behaviour is allowed in the classroom, at school or at home.
- discussing what the child might do differently if the bad situation were to happen again ,what are the appropriate options.
39  - Privately discussing inappropriate choice with a child.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit you have learnt a lot about the social needs of children.
You were also able to see the school responses to the children‟s needs and the role of teacher and counsellor in meeting the needs of pupils.
5.0 Summary You have been able to see how children could learn social skills to get along with other children.
You were also told what lack of social and interpersonal skills could result to.
The school response to social needs were enumerated and the role of teacher and counsellors in social guidance of children were mentioned.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Describe the basic assumptions that underlie guidance to solve the social needs of the school children.
2.
How would a school use character education to enhance school pupils?
3.
Could a sense of accountability be determined in children?.
Discuss 7.0 References/Further Reading Ryan (2000): Guidance Training Needs of the Teacher Counsellor / Support Teacher Pilot Scheme in Primary Schools.
National Centre for Guidance in Education Autumn Edition.
www.nice.org.uk/TA 102, and the NICE clinical guidance on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (August 2008) Egbochukwu E. and Alika .J.
( 2008): Guidance and Counselling; A Comprehensive text UNIBEN Press 40 http://add.about.com/od/parenting and children/f/ Child Behaviour htm http.//www.hmie.gov.uk/documents/publication/ewe.html Unit 5: The Emotional Guidance Needs of a Primary School Child Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How the Home and School can help 3.2 Signs of Depression in Children 3.3 Coping Strategies for Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction: 41 In the last unit, we were able to learn about the social problems counsellor / support teacher could give guidance to in the Primary School.
In this unit, we are going to examine whether a child could have emotions or not, what are the symptoms of emotion in the young ones and how can we as tutors guide the emotional needs of the young ones.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the study you should be able to: 1) Differentiate between emotions and expression 2) Enumerate views of scholars on depression 3) List some signs of depression in children.
3.0 Main Content Development is typically defined as a progressive series of orderly, coherent changes leading toward the goal of maturity.
This may be the grand design, but as many parents know to their cost, their children‟s progress through life is often disorderly and incoherent and the changes are not always in the direction of maturity.
When this happens, such reactions are quite likely to be labeled as emotional problems and thought of as abnormal.
The term “emotional problems” as it refers to particular aspects of development is nothing more than a convenient bit of shorthand – a quick way of referring to the difficulties of a variety of troubled and troublesome children.
In reality, the generic term “emotional problems” applies to a heterogeneous collection of childhood manifestations ranging from withdrawn behaviour, dependency, fears and bedwetting, to stealing, aggressive behaviour, truancy and poor achievement.
These are the kinds of disturbance which are sometimes thought to indicate emotional problems requiring professional attention.
The definition which would be of greatest use to the school would be one which is operationally related to the possibility of early detection and intervention in the school.
In terms of their visibility to the teacher emotionally handicapped children can be perceived 42 as children who demonstrate one or more of the following characteristics to a marked – extent and over a period of time:- a) An inability to learn which cannot be explained by intellectual, sensory or health factors.
An inability to learn is perhaps, the single most significant characteristics of emotionally disturbed children in school.
Such non learning may be manifested as an inability to profit from experience as well as inability to master skill subjects.
The non learner seldom escapes recognition.
Achievement tests often confirm what the teacher has long suspected.
b) An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and teachers.
It is not just getting along with others that is significant here.
Satisfactory interpersonal relations refer to the ability to demonstrate sympathy and warmth toward others, the ability to stand alone when necessary, the ability to have close friends.
The ability to be aggressively constructive, and the ability to enjoy working and playing with others as well as enjoying working and playing by oneself.
In most instances, children who are unable to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships are most visible to their peers.
Teachers are also able to identify many such children after a period of observation c) Inappropriate types of behaviour or feelings under normal conditions.
Inappropriateness of behaviour or feeling can often be sensed by the teacher and peer groups.
“He acts funny” another child may say.
The teacher may find some children reacting disproportionately to a simple command such as “please take your seat”.
What is appropriate or inappropriate is best judge by the teacher using her professional training, her daily and long term observation of the child and her experience working and interacting with the appropriate behaviour of large numbers of normal children.
d) A general, pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression.
Children who are unhappy most of the time demonstrate such feelings in expressive play, art work, 43 written composition or in discussion periods.
They seldom smile and usually lack a „”joie de vivre” in their school work or social relationships”.
e) A tendency to develop physical symptoms, pains or fears associated with personal or school problems.
This tendency is often noted by the parents.
Illness may be continually associated with school pressures or develop when a child‟s confidence in himself is under stress.
In some cases, such illness or fears may not be apparent to the teacher; peers however, are often aware of children who are sick before or after tests.
Speech difficulties which may be the symptoms of emotional distress are usually most visible to the teacher and parents.
3.1 How the Home and School can Help We are all aware that children can be envious of one another.
When a child does well and the parent praises him or her, other siblings are usually jealous.
Parents should help in counselling these children so that jealousy would not turn to hatred.
Children that are separated from their parents do become stressed.
People around them should be able to give love and help these children to come out of stress.
An important aspect of children‟s emotional lives is learning how to cope effectively with stress.
Care givers could help children cope with stress.
The basic theme is (1) remove at least one stressor from the child‟s life and (2) Teach the child how to cope effectively.
Butter, (1979) said that, removing one stress or hassle can help children feel stronger and more competent.
For example, Lisa has been coming to school without food.
It is the duty of the teacher to arrange breakfast at school for her.
In this study, Lisa improves her concentration in school.
This also helped Lisa to suppress for a time her anxiety about her parents‟ impending divorce.
Children should be taught new coping techniques, so that they do not feel incompetent, so that they can get improved.
Psychologists could help talk to the stressed children to prepare them ahead of what is coming.
Children in stress could also be given additional responsibilities, so as to forget what is going wrong around them.
44 Self Assessment Exercise 2 How can the home and the school help children in their emotions?
3.2 Signs of Depression in children If your child becomes depressed, he / she is unlikely to talk about it.
Your first warning signs will probably be change in behaviour that may suggest a troubled and unhappy state of mind.
A child who used to be active and involved in class activities, may suddenly become quiet and withdrawn.
A good student might start getting poor grades.
Some of the common signs of depression can occur when school ,social or family pressures become too great.
Do not assume that your child is experiencing a major depression if he/ she shows only one of these signs.
Your child may however, be depressed and need professional help if there are unexpected changes in his / her behaviour or if you notice several of the following signs of depression: Changes in feeling: your child may show signs of being unhappy, worried guilty, angry, fearful, helpless, hopeless, lonely or rejected.
Changes In Thinking: your child may start to say things that indicate low self esteem, self dislike or self blame.
He / she may have difficulty concentrating or frequently experience negative thoughts.
He/she might even think about suicide.
Physical Changes:- your child may start to complain of headaches or general aches and pains.
He / she may not have energy, sleeping or eating problems, or feel tired all the time.
Changes in Behaviour: Your child might withdraw from others, cry easily or have less interest in sports, games or other fun activities that he/ she normally likes.
He/ she might over react and have sudden outbursts of anger or tears over fairly small incidents.
How to help a Depressed Child.
45 Talking helps.
If you notice any of the signs discussed above, do your best to encourage your child to talk to you about how he / she is feeling and what is bothering him / her.
If you think your child is seriously depressed, call the professionals.
Depression is treatable.
children, teens and adults can be helped to overcome depression.
Parents could first check with their doctors the cause of feelings of fatigue, aches and pains.
Talk to your child‟s school to find out if any teachers have also noticed changes in behaviour and mood.
Talking to your child‟s teacher about his/her difficulties may change the way the teacher interacts with your child and can increase your child sense of self –esteem, in the classroom.
Many school boards, have professional counsellors as staff.
The school counsellor may be able to refer you to individual or group counselling to help children and teen cope with stress.
The school counsellor or your family doctor may refer you to children mental health clinic.
If there isn‟t a clinic nearby, there may be psychiatrist or psychologist who specializes in working with children.
3.3 Coping Strategies for Children It is likely that stressors for children that pressures of modern life are forcing children to grow up too soon and making their childhoods stressful, many of today‟s children are expected to succeed in school, to compete in sports and meet parents emotional needs.
They are pressured by adults and peers to act in certain ways.
Children are exposed to many adult problems on television and in real life before they have mastered the problems of childhood.
They know about sex and violence, and they often must shoulder adult responsibilities.
Many children move frequently and have to change homes and schools as a result.
They leave old friends behind.
The tightly scheduled pace of life can also be stressful.
Yet children are not adults.
They feel and think like children.
This is why you must help them.
46 Self Assessment Exercise 3 How would you as a teacher pick signs of depression in children?
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, some emotions of children are learnt and the response of home and school to guide the children were enumerated.
5.0 Summary You were able to learn that children have emotions.
Details of stress and depression in children were mentioned , how the home and school could identify the signs of depression and stress were mentioned, and what the home and school can do to help these children.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Do you agree with me that children can have emotion?
Briefly differentiate between emotion and depression.
2.
What is depression?
Cite with examples the views of some scholars on depression .
3.
List some signs of depression.
How can the home and school help the depressed children.
7.0 References / Further Reading 1.
Santrock, S. W (2001): Child Development USA: McGrawHill Com.
Inc. 2.
Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary (2001) 6th edition NY: University Press.
3. http://www.cmha.calbins/content-page.asp cid.
47  MODULE 2 CHILD BEHAVIOUR AND GUIDANCE Unit 1: Understanding Human Behaviour Unit 2: Problem of Adjustment and Learning Unit 3: Role and Responsibilities of the school Administration Unit 4: Personnel Interrelationships with Developmental Guidance services Unit 5: Developmental Counselling UNIT 1: UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOUR CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Human Behaviour 3.1.1 The Dimensions of Personality 3.2 The developmental tasks and Guidance Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to give an insight into human behaviour, that is, knowing what causes us to act the way we do.
We often act externally in a manner dictated by the situation that does not really reflect what we actually think and feel.
At other times, we feel compelled to express deeper aspects of our personality, even when we know that we should not or that others may disapprove of our behaviour.
In order to understand 48 ourselves and others, we need to look into the dimensions of human personality.
The unit will also look into developmental tasks and guidance process of children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define human behaviour  define personality  discuss the five dimensions of personality  compare and contrast extraversion, introversion and agreeableness  discuss the developmental tasks associated with primary school children 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Human Behaviour Human behaviour refers to the range of behaviours exhibited by humans and which is influenced by culture, attitudes, emotions, values, ethics, authority, rapport, hypnosis, persuasion, coercion and / or genetics.
The behaviour of people fall within a range with some behaviour being common, some unusual, some acceptable and some outside acceptable limits.
3.1.1 Personality 49 One important psychological mechanism which guides behaviour is personality.
Everyone has their unique pattern of feelings, thoughts, and behaviour, which is formed by a fairly stable combination of personality traits (Phares, 1991).All these in turn determine the unique adjust ments each person will make to any situation.
What is Personality?
There is no universally acceptable definition of personality.
„Personality is that pattern of characteristic thoughts, feelings and behaviours that distinguishes one person from another and that persist over time and situations (Phares, 1991).
It is the sum of biologically based and learnt behaviour which forms the person stimuli (Ryckman 1982: 4-5) The personality structure is fairly stable and predictable throughout situation and time (Phares, 1991: 4 – 7).
There are personality traits of different depth and significance.
The innermost layer is the basis, while the outermost layer is situation-bound and influenced by, for example, tiredness.
A tired person might accordingly behave in a way that is not like his their true self.
The changes which reflect events and feelings during the life span only affect the surface and not the core character.
3.1.2 Dimensions of Personality Personality dimensions and the poles of traits they form.
Based on Costa & McCrae (1992: 14 – 16, 49) Personality dimension High level Low level Neuroticism Sensitive, nervous Secure, confident Extraversion Outgoing, energetic Shy, withdrawn Openness to experience Inventive, curious Cautious, conservative Agreeableness Friendly, compassionate Competitive, outspoken 50 Conscientiousness Efficient organized Easy-going, careless Neuroticism (sensitive/nervous vs secure/confident) – A tendency to experience unpleasant emotions easily such as anger, anxiety, depression or vulnerability.
Low levels of neuroticism indicate the likelihood of expressing negative emotions.
Persons with high levels of neuroticism are reactive and more easily bothered by stimuli in their environment.
They are more frequently unstable, worried, temperamental and sad.
Resistant persons on the other hand need strong stimuli to be provoked (Howard & Howard, 1995).
The Extraversion – introversion dimension – (Outgoing / energetic vs solitary / reserved) Extraverts tend to be more physically and verbally active whereas introverts are independent, reserved, steady and like being alone.
Extraverts are adventurous, assertive, frank, sociable and talkative.
Introverts may be described as quiet, reserved, shy and unsociable (Costa & McCrae, 1992:49) Openness – (Inventive / Curious vs Consistent / Cautious) – Appreciation for art, emotion, and venture, unusual ideas, curiosity and variety of experience.
People with a high openness to experience have broad interests, are liberal and like novelty.
Those with low openness to experience are conventional, conservative and prefer familiarity.
Agreeableness – (Friendly/Compassionate vs Cold/Unkind) – A tendency to be compassionate and cooperative rather than the suspicious and antagonistic towards others.
Agreeable people can be described as altruistic, gentle, kind, sympathetic and warm (Costa & McCrae, 1992: 49).
Conscientiousness – (Efficient/Organized vs Easy-going/Careless) – A tendency to show self-discipline, act dutifully, and aim for achievement, planned rather than spontaneous behaviour.
Conscientious has been linked to educational achievement and particularly to the will to achieve.
The focused person concentrates on a limited number of goals but strives hard to reach them, while the flexible person is more impulsive and easier to 51 persuade from one task to another (Howard & Howard, 1995).
The more conscientious a person is, the more competent, dutiful, orderly, responsible and thorough.
Self Assessment exercise 2 Compare and contrast extraversion, introversion and agreeableness.
3.2 The Developmental Tasks and Guidance Process 3.2.1 What are developmental tasks?
Developmental tasks are tasks that arise during different stages of individual development and whose successful completion is regarded by a society or culture as appropriate and necessary for acceptable functioning and subsequent development.
In other words, the cognitive, emotional and behavioural changes needed to continue along the path of further growth are called developmental tasks.
Each life stage imposes these developmental tasks on individuals before successful entry into an ensuring stage can be achieved.
3.2.2 Developmental Tasks & Guidance Process Infancy (Birth to 2 years) The developmental tasks (Need): Babies need to form a strong attachment with someone in their world, usually their mother or father.
This is one of the most crucial stages in a human being‟s life.
All future stages depend on it.
The crisis (Social/emotional lesson: trusts vs mistrust.
Infants up to two years of age have major crisis to resolve.
If infants learn that they can trust those around them to really care for them, love them and meet their needs, then they can trust the world and transit to the next stage of developmental easily.
If children learn to mistrust those 52 around them because their needs are not met and they are not consistently cared for, then they carry this unrest into all other stages of development.
Guidance Process: Mutuality with his caregiver.
Babies must have a loving, trusting relationship with a caregiver in order to successfully learn they can trust the world.
This relationship provides the basis for all future attachments.
Toddlers (2 to 4) Developmental task (Need) – Toddlers need to be self-sufficient in many activities: how to tie their shoes, put on their pants, feed themselves, learn to talk, play with others and begin to exercise a little self control (physically, as he learns to use the toilet instead of diapers).
They need to learn how to move away from the physical dependence they had on others as infants.
Crisis (Social/emotional lessons): Autonomy vs shame and doubt).
When toddlers are given the message they can begin to do things for themselves.
If toddlers are given the message that they cannot do things for themselves, they learn to feel ashamed of their own natural efforts and abilities.
Guidance Process: Imitation.
Toddlers watch those around them and imitate what they do and say.
Fantasy play becomes important as they begin to act out and express things they observe in the world.
Toddlers try to pretend they are driving cars; make cell phone calls etc.
It is the process of imitation at work.
Early school Age (4 to 6) – The Play Years Developmental Task (need) – In addition to becoming more autonomous and independent, pre schoolers begin to observe and learn about the different roles people play in their lives.
Children in this age group learn about others through role-play.
“Play is the work of the child” holds true for this stage more than any other.
53 Play at this stage is mostly dramatic play as children begin to act out different adult-like roles and activities that they observe in their lives.
They role-play being mummy, daddy or grandma, etc.
They observe and learn about what women and men do.
Crisis (emotional / social lesson): Initiative vs guilt.
As children grow and become more independent in this stage they begin to initiate more play and more activities.
Their thinking increases and their fantasies and ideas expand.
When children are met with acceptance during this stage, when they are encouraged to play and fantasize, they learn that their new abilities are positive.
However, when children are criticized for their new found ideas and their creative play, they learn to feel guilty about them.
Children who grow up feeling guilt are likely to carry that guilt into their adulthood.
Guidance Process - Identification: Through fantasy play children often role play the people and circumstances around them.
The stereotype is that little girls and boys identify with the men.
This is one of the many reasons children truly need to have same- sex adults in their lives-to learn from them.
In the absence of a same sex parent, a close relative or qualified mentor can help to fulfill this role.
School Age (6 – 8) – The Early Years Developmental task (Need): Primary School age development is a time for children to learn new skills-both social and competency .
Children tend to form groups at this age, even groups of two or three.
These groups tend to have their own social lives, norms, and language.
Children at this age become more particular about who their friends are and less interested in playing alone.
Crisis (emotional/social lesson): Industry vs inferiority.
During this stage children learn that they can be become more competent and productive or they end up learning the opposite – that they can do nothing well.
Their peer group, teachers, church/mosque group, and parents – generally in that order – all work as vehicles for children to learn new skills and to develop their self-image.
When children are criticized for their efforts and failures they tend to develop a sense of inferiority – something they tend to carry with them throughout their lives.
54  Guidance Process: Education – curricular and extracurricular.
Through education, school projects, extracurricular activities, church/mosque groups, and friends children gain competency and skill during this time or they develop a sense of insecurity.
Pre-Adolescence (9 – 12) Developmental task (need): This is one of the most confusing stages in children‟s development.
They are no longer young children; nor are they adolescents.
They are in that in-between stage where one moment they will insist on their maturity and need for independence and the next moment break down in needy frustration.
Children in this stage have become aware of, and sensitive to, differences among people.
The recognition often leads children in this age range to look for and bond with peer groups in order to belong and feel isolated when they are not part of a larger group.
These groups tend to develop their own culture, with shared ideas, dress code, language and rules for behaviour.
Crisis (Emotional/social lesson) Children in this age-range are in the end stage of industry vs inferiority.
As with the younger children in the age range, children are naturally drawn toward school achievements, projects, team sports, etc.
However, preadolescents typically strive to become more industrious and skillful but within group setting.
Children who fail to develop some degree of industriousness or remain outside of groups tend to develop a sense of inferiority.
This is where school bullying can become so damaging and even dangerous.
Guidance Process: Education, School projects, school and extracurricular activities, peer groups, team sports, etc.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Discuss the developmental tasks of early school age children 55  4.0 CONCLUSION Understanding human behaviour and the developmental tasks associated with primary school children will help the parents, teacher and the counsellor in providing an atmosphere and environment conducive to the intellectual, physical, social and emotional development of these young ones.
In addition, this will also equip the teacher and the counsellor on how to assist the children to overcome whatever problem they are faced with at every stage of developmental task they go through.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major highlights of what we have learnt in this unit:  Human behaviour refers to the range of behaviours exhibited by human which is influenced by culture, attitudes, emotions and values;  Understanding human behaviour gives an insight into knowing what causes us to act the way we do;  One important psychological mechanism that guides behaviour is personality;  Personality is the unique and distinctive characteristics which set a person apart from another;  The five dimensions of personality are neuroticism, extraversion- introversion, openness, agreeableness and conscientiousness;  The developmental tasks and guidance process of children from infancy to pre- adolescence period were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How can you define human behviour?
2.
What are the five dimensions of personality?
3.
How can you assist a child who is a “bully”?
56  7.0 REFERENCES Costa P.T.
& McCrae R.R.
(1992) NEO PI – R. Professional Manual.
Odessa, F. L Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc. Heinstrom, J (2003) “Five Personality Dimensions and their influence on Information Behaviour” Information Research a(1) paper 165 (Available at http://information R.net/ii/a-/paper 165.
Htm) Howard P. J.
& Howard J. M (1995) The Big Five Quickstart: an introduction to the Five-Factor Mode of Personality for human resource professionals.
Charlotte, NC Centre for Applied Cognitive Studies.
Maase L. M. A.
(2008) Understanding Your Children‟s Development Pt 2 Retrieved 25th May, 2011 from c://understanding-children‟s-development html Phares, E. J.
(1991) Introduction to Psychology (3rd ed) New York: Harper Collins Publications Ryckman R. (1982) Theories of Personality (2nd ed) Monferey, CA: Brooks/Cole Wikipedia, free encyclopedia (2011) Big Five Personality Traits – Retrieved 26th May 2011 from http://en.wikipedia.org 57  UNIT 2: PROBLEM OF ADJUSTMENT AND LEARNING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Anxiety 3.1.1 Causes of anxiety 3.1.2 Anxiety and learning 3.2 Learning 3.3 Adjustment 3.4 Adjustment Problem in School 3.5 Helping Children with Adjustment Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit 1, you have been exposed to the understanding of human behaviour and the developmental tasks associated with children with a view of knowing how to assist the children to resolve whatever problem that arises at every stage of their developmental tasks.
This unit is designed to make you understand what anxiety, learning and adjustment are all about and how children with adjustment problems can be helped.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 58  define anxiety, learning and adjustment in your own words  identify possible causes of anxiety  identify adjustment problems in school  outline various ways by which children with adjustment problem can be helped 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ANXIETY This is an unpleasant, complex and variable pattern of behaviour which individuals show when reacting to internal (thoughts and feelings) or external (environmental situations) stimuli.
The terms anxiety and fear are sometimes used interchangeably.
To be precise, anxiety is a more general feeling associated with the expectation of danger from an unknown source, such as being anxious because your life is not going well.
Fear usually describes a feeling resulting from a specific threat, such as fear of snakes.
Anxiety is a major problem in children as in all human beings.
Earlier only the adults were exposed to anxiety and stress related disorders but nowadays kids and especially teenagers fall prey to the anxiety related issues.
Highly anxious children often excessively fear embarrassment, disapproval, punishment or the general lessening of their status (Oladele, 2004).
Other behavioural symptoms of anxious people include: restlessness, high irritability i.e sudden jump or sudden noise, twisting of fingers, lack of concentration of study, un-paired concentration or attention e.g.
repetition of pardon in an interview is a sign of anxiety, etc.
3.1.1 CAUSES OF ANXIETY The fast moving life, high expectations, lack of attention, poor mental growth can be the reasons of anxiety amongst the children.
Abused childhood, negligent parents, divorced 59 parents are other reasons which cause anxiety in children.
Anxiety not only hinders the growth of children but also makes them vulnerable.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 In your own way, what do you think are the causes of anxiety?
3.1.2 ANXIETY AND LEARNING A general feeling of anxiety or a specific fear moves us to act.
The anxiety motive can work two ways: it can make it easier for a person to learn, or it can get in the way of learning – depending on its strength.
Mild anxiety can motivate constructive and helpful responses.
It can help arouse the necessary energy to learn.
If you are a little anxious, you will be aroused to search for the cause of a certain problem, or figure out why you should act in a particular way.
Too much anxiety or fear however is likely to block a person‟s efforts to learn.
For example, someone who has a great fear of the water may never learn to swim.
Students who have great fear of failing school courses may become passive and withdrawn, resisting participation in course work activities.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 How does fear affect how you learn something?
Write down one activity which you do well, and one in which you need to improve your performance.
Next to each, describe the conditions under which you learned the basic skills involved.
3.2 LEARNING What is learning?
Learning is a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience or practice.
Learning occupies a very important place in our life.
Most of what we do or do not is influenced by what we learn and how we have learnt it.
Learning, therefore provides a 60 key or structure to one‟s personality and behaviour.
Experience – direct or indirect is found to play a dominant role in molding and shaping the behaviour of the individual from the very beginning.
While approaching a burning match stick, the child gets burnt and withdraws.
The next time, when he faces a burning match stick, he wastes no time in withdrawing himself away.
He learns to avoid not only the burning match stick but also all burning things.
Learning involves new ways of doing things and it operated on an individual‟s attempt to adjust to new situations.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 What is learning?
3.3 ADJUSTMENT The term adjustment refers to harmonious relationship between an individual and his environment.
It is a positive capacity to adapt to one‟s circumstances and needs.
This presupposes three things:  A sensitive appreciation of reality;  Some accommodation to environmental pressures;  Continuing efforts to modifying the environment to suit ones needs.
According to Psychological dictionary, adjustment is the variations and changes in behaviour that are necessary to satisfy needs and meet demands so that one can establish a harmonious relationship with the environment.
If one fails to make these variations and changes one‟s needs will not be satisfied, the demands will not be met thus one will not be able to establish a harmonious relationship with the environment.
Thus, maladjustment is disharmony with one‟s environment.
Raju and Rahamtulla(2007) view adjustment as a process in which an individual maintains a balance between needs and circumstances.
61  Adjustment is inferred from behaviour an individual shows in a given situation.
In adjustment, the two crucial actors are the individual and the environment.
Self Assessment Exercise 4 In your words, explain what you understand by the term “Adjustment”?
3.4 ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS IN SCHOOL School adjustment problems usually become a matter of concern when a teacher or parent is bothered by the way a child is functioning.
The concern may arise because the child is perceived as not learning appropriately and / or is behaving inappropriately.
Adjustment problems could manifest in the following ways among school children:  Bullying;  Poor school achievement;  Hyperactivity;  Stealing;  Truancy;  Aggression;  Cheating;  Thumb sucking ;  Persistent anxiety.
Self Assessment Exercise 5 Identify five common adjustment problems among school children?
3.5 HELPING CHILDREN WITH ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS 62 There is the need for children with adjustment problem to be helped in order to prevent their motivation for school from dwindling and behaviour problem from increasing.
According to Oladele (2004), the following measures can be taken to help the children with adjustment problems:  Get to know the characteristics of normal children and watch out for early signs of adjustment problem.
For example, looking out for children who are excessively lazy, aggressive, anxious, living in fantasy or without companions or friends.
 Attempt to build the morale of children.
Arrange school work and co-curricular activities in such a manner that poorly adjusted pupils get success in some field and thus gain self-confidence.
 Do not let dull or otherwise handicapped pupils feel neglected or unwanted.
 Encourage children to play games, to take part in school societies and mix with other children outside the school.
 Consult with parents, if and when the child‟s behaviour continues to cause concern or refer the child to the child Guidance clinic.
 Deal with minor difficulties as soon as they arise.
 Educate parents about effective child rearing practices and healthy relationships between parents and their children to avoid the pitfalls of factors responsible for maladjustment 4.0 CONCLUSION The school is a major socialization institution for any child.
It is the child‟s first contact with the world outside the house.
A child spends 5 – 7 hours a day in the school.
School is one of the most important foundation pillars on which the child‟s personality develops.
The growing child is dependent on the immediate environment i.e.
the house and the school to meet his growth needs.
When these needs are not met, child encounters some adjustment problems in school.
The resultant effect is that learning will be hindered and the goal of the school will also not be achieved.
63  5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major highlights of what you have learnt in this unit:  Anxiety which suggests feeling of fear and apprehension  Causes of anxiety – high expectation, poor mental growth, abused childhood etc.
 Learning – a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience or practice  Adjustment – effort to modify the environment to suit one‟s needs  Adjustment Problems – truancy, bullying, stealing, lying, poor academic, etc.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly explain anxiety, learning and adjustment in your own words 2.
Look around and identify six adjustment problems among school children 7.0 REFERENCES Centre for Mental Health in Schools (2000) Addressing School Adjustment Problems.
Retrieved on 27th May 2011, from http:sinhip:psychology.ch.uda Oladele J. O.
(2004) Fundamentals of Educational Psychology (5th Edition) Lagos, John-Led Publishers Ltd. Raju M. U. R. & Reahamtills, T. K. (2007) Adjustment Problems among schools students.
Journal of the Indian Academy of Applied Psychology, Vol.
33, No 1, 73 - 79 64 UNIT 3: ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SCHOOL PERSONNEL IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF GUIDANCE PROGRAMME CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Role of the School Personnel in the Administration of Guidance Programme 3.2 The Role of the Head teacher 3.3 The Role of the Class teacher 3.4 The Organisation for Total Involvement of staff 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units, you were taught the problem of adjustment and learning as well as how children with adjustment problem can be helped.
In this unit, we shall be discussing the role of the head teacher, class teacher and the total involvement of the school personnel in the administration of guidance programme.
By the end of this unit, you would have had an overall view of role and responsibilities of the school administration in the organization of guidance services.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the role of the head teacher in the implementation of guidance services 65  enumerate the role of class teacher in the implementation of guidance services  state the role of other school personnel in the administration of guidance programme 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Role of the School Personnel in the Administration of Guidance The school guidance and counselling programme is a function of every member of the school personnel.
The term “personnel” used here includes everyone who has direct or indirect contact with the children for whom the programme is developed.
They include the head teacher, class teachers, school inspectors, pupils, counsellors and non-academic staff such as clerks, messengers, gatemen and drivers.
Others connected with school life such as the resource people and Parents Teachers Association (PTA) members.
The Counsellor cannot work in isolation from the other members of the school as every member has a role to play in order to bring about success of the programme.
All the members of staff are working together for a purpose.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 What do you understand by the term “Personnel” in the administration of guidance programme in the school?
3.2 The Role of the Head Teacher The Head teacher‟s work involves planning, directing, coordinating and managing human and material resources.
As the school head, he/she is the liaison officer between the school and Ministry of Education.
He/She is potentially the most singularly important person in the development of guidance programme in the school being the leader or chief executive in the school.
In fact, the guidance programme can succeed only if it has the support and backing of the head teacher.
He / She is in-charge of time, resources, funds, 66 human and materials in the school.
The head teacher approves the final plans and gives a go ahead to various programmes.
It is clear from the above that head teacher‟s support and participation are very important to the success of school guidance programme.
According to Ajufo and Owoyele (2008), the head teacher‟s roles in the school guidance programme are essentially as follows:  Referring pupils, staff and parents to counsellor for assistance  Giving clear, open financial support and making adequate provision in the school annual budget for staffing facilities and equipment or materials for counselling such as test materials.
 Providing desirable publicity to the programme by communicating guidance programme characteristics, achievement and needs to Ministry of Education, parents and the communities around  Encouraging and motivating the staff to help and cooperate with the counsellor  Allocating time officially for counselling and reducing the teaching load (where the counsellor is not a full time counsellor)  Providing adequate physical facilities for the counsellor such as office space, cabinets and tables.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 “The head teacher is potentially the most singularly important person in the development of guidance programme in the school” Discuss?
3.3 The Role of the Class Teacher The teachers have a big and important role to play in the successful implementation of guidance programme in the school.
This is due to the closest, most frequent and most extended contacts they have with the pupils.
Without their cooperation, guidance services can never become an integral part of any educational programme.
Their role in the overall programme is inevitable.
Their roles in guidance services include the following: 67  Developing a classroom climate free from tension  Recognizing, identifying and referring students who need counselling (it could be in the area of academic, vocational or socio-personnel) to the counsellor.
 Assisting in the diagnosis of some problems prone to some children in the school  Organising co-curricular and leisure time activities thereby helping the pupils‟ personal and social growth.
 Assisting in identifying other resource people or helpers outside the school or among the Parents Teacher Association (PTA) members.
 Preparing and making pupils‟ continuous assessment available to the counsellor  Helping pupils to discover their abilities.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Identify the role of the teacher in the implementation of school guidance services?
3.4 The organization for total Involvement of Staff Guidance programme is a teamwork approach, in which every member of staff is considered responsible for contributing to the success of the programme.
Apart from the head teacher and the class teachers, other non-academic staff like the school drivers, clerks, messengers, and medical team and gateman have peculiar roles to play, for instance, the gate man can carry out referral work since by virtue of his position within the school knows the habitual late comers and could provide the information to the counsellor.
The medical team too can refer clients to the counsellors and the counsellors too can refer clients to the medical personnel for adequate treatment of any ill health.
Guidance is an all-inclusive programme, a good rapport between the counsellor and the head teacher, teachers, students and every member of staff is therefore a necessary lubricant for guidance programme to operate successfully in the school.
The instructional staff members are the school personnel whose main duty involves the giving of instruction to the learners in the class rooms.
They are the academic staff 68 members of the school.
They are otherwise known as class teachers and subject teachers.
They have several roles to play in the guidance programme of the school.
These roles include membership of the guidance committee, identification of prospective clients and information of giving.
Other areas where the instructional staff have great roles to play in the guidance programme are in carrying out orientation services, placement into educational and vocational schemes as well as in carrying out the evaluation of guidance services and follow-up services.
They can also function as club coordinators.
Self Assessment Exercise 4 “The school counsellor cannot work in isolation, he needs the support of other school personnel in the implementation of guidance services”.
Discuss 4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing you would have noted that school guidance programme is a broad one demanding total involvement of staff in the school system.
You should also note that guidance programme as a joint venture, intended to help students/pupils achieve their optimum potentials involves all the people who have direct or indirect contact with the students/pupils.
However, if these roles are ignored or neglected, then the guidance programme will probably suffer.
5.0 SUMMARY The school guidance programme is a cooperative enterprise with all personnel in the school system.
Thus, this unit discussed the roles the various school personnel have to play in ensuring the success of the school guidance programme.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 69 3.
Discuss the role of the instructional staff in the implementation of school guidance services 4.
Discuss the role of the: a. Gateman b.
Head teacher c. Health personnel in the implementation of guidance services 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajufo, B. I.
& Owoyele, J. W. (2008) Basics in the Organisation & Administration of Guidance Services, Ijebu-Ode, Sanjo Prints.
Akinade, E. A; Soken B. O.
& Osarenren N. (2005) An Introduction to Guidance and Counselling (A basic text for Colleges and Universities) Lagos, Caltop Publications (Nigeria) Limited.
Gesinde, S. A.
(2000) Organisation and administration of guidance services in schools.
External Studies Programme, University of Ibadan.
Kochhar, S. K. (2002) Guidance and Counselling in Colleges and Universities, New Delhi, Sterling Publishers PVT.
Ltd. 70  71 UNIT 4: PERSONNEL INTERRELATIONSHIP WITHIN DEVELOPMENTAL GUIDANCE SERVICES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Counsellor as Coordinator 3.2 Guidance Programme 3.2.1 Orientation Service 3.2.2 Appraisal Service 3.2.3 Information Service 3.2.4 Counselling Service 3.2.5 Placement Service 3.2.6 Follow-up Service 3.2.7 Referral Service 3.2.8 Liaison with the Community 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION From the work done in the previous unit, you can identify the various role played by every member of staff in the administration of school guidance programme.
In this unit, you will get to know about the counsellor as the nerve centre, manger, initiator, consultant and coordinator of the school guidance programme.
You will also get to know 72 the guidance service organized by the counsellor in the school with the purpose of meeting students‟ needs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define guidance programme in your own words.
 discuss how the counsellor can coordinate the school guidance programme.
 list and explain the various guidance services that can be organized in Nigerian school setting.
 enumerate the purpose of guidance service in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Counsellor as Coordinator The Counsellor is the nerve centre of the guidance programme in the school.
He should therefore take the lead and act as initiator, manager, consultant and coordinator of various guidance activities under the umbrella of the principal / head teacher.
For him to succeed, he should have a well-balanced lovable personality, a broad outlook, an understanding attitude and a genuine interest in helping students / pupils.
He should use democratic approach with the counsellees, show dogged commitment to making a success of initiating and sustaining guidance and counselling programmes.
In addition, he should seize any available opportunity to explain the relevance of guidance.
He should stress that guidance is for all and it is designed to make people more 73 efficient and useful to themselves and the society.
The counsellor as the specialist in the guidance programme should serve the school as best as he can.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Describe how the counsellor can coordinate guidance services in the school?
3.2 GUIDANCE PROGRAMME Guidance programme is for effective achievement of the nation‟s educational objectives.
It is the programme provided within the school aimed at helping the students / pupils from beginning to the end of the school system to cope with function well and get the best out of the educational system (Adana, 1998).
Guidance services are greatly concerned with helping the individual gain insight and understanding of himself in relation to present and future environment such that decisions or choices made would lead to more satisfying and rewarding experiences.
Guidance programme is an integral part of the school programme and it complements other school activities.
Guidance services are provided to assist individual to cope with the socio-personal, educational and vocational problems.
Olayinka and Omideyi (1998), identify the following purposes of guidance services in schools, especially at the primary and secondary levels of education:  It assists the students/pupils to effect smooth transition from home to primary school and from primary school to secondary and post secondary institutions.
 It helps the students/pupils to learn skills and values necessary for successful living in and outside the school.
 It removes problems that might disturb learning.
 It makes pupils develop positive image of self-understanding, self-direction and skill in problem-solving and decision making.
 It affords pupils opportunities to take part meaningfully in both curricular and co- curricular activities organized by the school.
74  It assists teachers to understand the individual differences that exist among their pupils.
The following are the common guidance services organized by the counsellor in the school:  Orientation service  Information service  Placement service  Appraisal service  Counselling service  Follow-up service  Referral service  Liaison with the community Self Assessment Exercise 2 Why do we need guidance services in school?
3.2.1 ORIENTATION SERVICE Orientation activities are aimed at assisting new intakes to adjust to school environment.
Orientation activities as observed by Adana (1998) include information provided to students to help them in their adjustment process.
Orientation activities are prepared to familiarize the newly admitted students with the overall school situation.
Many of the new intakes most especially at the primary and secondary schools are perhaps leaving home for the first time, they therefore need to get used to their new social surrounding, know the staff and fellow students/pupils.
The orientation service includes among others, introducing the new intakes to physical plants, administrative set-up, rules and regulations governing students conduct, the use of school facilities, teaching staff and how the school guidance programme can serve their needs.
3.2.2 APPRAISAL SERVICE 75  In appraisal service, the counsellor makes use of data which he has gathered, organized and interpreted.
This may be done through the teachers, parents and significant others.
The pupils have cumulative record folder where the information and data about them are kept.
All the necessary information or data needed for appraising a pupil are usually obtained from the pupil‟s cumulative record.
The information in this record could serve as background information whenever the need for counselling arises.
Through the appraisal services, gifted children can be identified and helped.
3.2.3 INFORMATION SERVICE The counsellor also provides information service in the school system.
He / she provides educational, vocational and social-personal information so that the students/pupils can make better information on various aspects of life.
The pupil needs to be exposed to information service so that he / she can understand himself, his world and his abilities in order to utilize his/ her potentialities fully.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Highlight the duties of a counsellor in the following guidance services: a. Orientation service b.
Appraisal service and c. Information service 3.2.4 COUNSELLING SERVICE Counselling service is the heart of the school guidance programme.
Objective of counselling includes helping the client to understand himself better which will enable him to make a wise and realistic decision.
In the primary school environment, learning, inter personal, emotional and adjustment problems could be solved through this service.
Counselling could be educational, vocational or personal- Social.
Counselling service 76 can be carried out to an individual, as a person (counsellor and the client), and in group (counsellor and a number of clients).
3.2.5 PLACEMENT SERVICE This service is designed to enhance pupils‟ development by assisting them to select, and use opportunities inside the school.
The child in the primary school has to be properly focused upon and helped so that he can be properly placed in the appropriate secondary school of his choice.
3.2.6 FOLLOW-UP SERVICE Follow – up means monitoring of individual with a view of obtaining regular progress report on his performance and how satisfied he is with his academic performance.
Follow-up is that review evaluation which is carried out to find out whether guidance service in particular and educational programme in general satisfy the needs of the students/pupils.
Follow-up service also affords the counsellor the opportunity to obtain an update for information about places and institutions he can refer client to in his referral service.
3.2.7 LIAISON WITH THE COMMUNITY The counsellor plays a great role in providing liaison between the school and local community as a result of his interaction with parents, employers, government officicals and private humanitarian organizations.
The counsellor occupies a vantage position interpreting the entire school programme to these various groups as well as the community in general.
Self Assessment Exercise 4 Discuss the purpose of the following guidance services –  Counselling service 77  Placement service  Follow-up service  Referral service 4.0 CONCLUSION Guidance programme is executed in schools through guidance services.
It is concerned with meeting students‟ needs.
Guidance services are the activities organized by the counsellor in the school to assist the pupils in developing their potential to the optimum.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt about how the counsellor can coordinate the guidance programme in the school.
You also learnt about what the guidance programme is all about and the purpose of it in schools.
The various guidance services were also enumerated and discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Assess the importance of the information and appraisal service in the school 2.
Identify guidance services that can be employed to solve educational problems 3.
Discuss the various guidance services a counsellor is expected to carry out in a school setting 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING Adana B. S. (1998) The School Guidance Programme.
In Idowu A. I.
(ed) Guidance and Counselling in Education, Ilorin, INDEMAC (Nigeria Publishers) Limited.
78 Ajufo, B. I.
& Owoyele J. W (2008) Basics in the organization & administration of Guidance Services.
Ijebu-Ode, Sanjo Prints.
Akande E. A, Sokan B. O. and Osarenren N. (2005) An Introduction to Guidance & Counselling: A Basic Text for Colleges and Universities, Ibadan: Caltop Publications.
Eweniyi G. B, Olowe, D. T and Olagunju M. K. O.
(2002) Essentials of Guidance and Counselling, Ijebu-Ode – Old, Fembol Integral Publications.
Omodeyi, A.
A and Olagunju, M. K. O (1998) The place and stages of Guidance and Counselling in the Primary School System.
Paper delivered at the first National Colloquium on the future of Primary Education in Nigeria held in Lagos State College of Primary Education.
79 UNIT 5: DEVELOPMENTAL COUNSELLING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Developmental Counselling Programme 3.2 Rationale for Developmental Counselling 3.3 Developmental Tasks and School Counselling 3.3.1 Definition of Development Tasks 3.3.2 Developmental Tasks of Infancy – Middle childhood (Birth – 12 years) 3.3.3 School Counselling 3.4 Goals of Developmental Counselling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units we have examined the various guidance services organised in the school by the counsellor with the assistance of every member of staff and the role of the counsellor as the coordinator of school guidance programme.
In this unit, you will be exposed to developmental counselling.
Also, you will gain insights into the rationale and goals of developmental counselling.
By the end of this unit, you will have an overall view of developmental tasks of children between 0 – 12 years and as well as what school counselling is all about.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 80  define and explain the concept of developmental task;  explain the rationale for developmental counselling in schools  discuss the developmental tasks of children between ages 0 – 12 years;  identify the goals of developmental counselling 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Developmental Counselling Programme Developmental counselling is a structured, sequenced large-group activity directed to the needs and interests of all pupils/students in the school.
It is also a programme that is sensitive to the developmental competencies and interests of students at different class levels.
It is a helping process in which the counsellor and teacher present a series of lessons representing a curriculum of counselling.
Developmental couselling programme is designed to permeate all aspects of school counselling programmes.
It pervades social – emotional issues throughout childhood development including pre- school.
The developmental approach targets the accomplishment of student / pupil competencies in three main areas of living: Personal/social, career/vocational and academic/ learning development  Personal/social: identifies competencies that will assist students/pupils in understanding and expressing self, as well as looking at how to relate to others as individuals and in groups; helps students/pupils see how their thinking, feeling, and behaviours shape their personality, their being and their interpersonal relationship.
 Career/Vocational: targets competencies that will assist students/pupils in exploring career decision – making and enables them to make a successful transition from school to the world of work.
 Academic/learning: provides activities and experiences that develop competencies leading to a student‟s /pupil‟s educational achievement and success.
81 Developmental counselling programme is systematic and strategically designed.
In developmental counselling, students or pupils are exposed to programmes that attend to their developmental and personal needs.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 What do you understand by developmental counselling programme?
3.2 Rationale for Developmental Counselling Programme A developmental counselling programme assumes that as individuals grow, they encounter certain developmental challenges that if met, allow that students or pupils to act in responsible ways, if school counsellors offer a developmental and preventative curriculum that employs both individual and group methods, students or pupils will be able to learn to communicate effectively, act responsibly, and live lives that are safe, satisfying and productive.
Developmental counselling programme is based on the premise that all students or pupils need assistance throughout their school years in accomplishing developmental tasks.
Successfully achieving these skills can lead each student or pupil to a sense of personal fulfillment and enhance the quality of life as a productive person in society.
Due to the variety of social problems in the society like poverty, violence, teenage pregnancy, dysfunctional families, drugs, etc, which threaten the growth and development of young people in the society, school counsellors therefore believe that teaching life skills is critically necessary in preparing all pupils/students for life.
It was from this rationale that a developmental school counselling programme was established.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Outline the rationale for development of school counselling programme.
3.3 DEVELOPMENTAL TASKS AND SCHOOL COUNSELLING 82  3.3.1 Definition of developmental tasks Developmental tasks are tasks that arise during different stages of individual development and whose successful completion leads to happiness and success with later tasks, while failure leads to unhappiness in the individual, disapproval by the society and the difficulty with later tasks.
These tasks are dictated by factors such as an individual‟s physical maturity, psychological competence and one‟s societal expectation.
The cognitive, emotional and behavioural changes needed to continue along the path of further growth are called developmental tasks.
3.3.2 Developmental Tasks According to Havighurst (1972), critical tasks arise at certain times in our lives.
Mastery of these tasks is satisfying and encourages us to go on to new challenges.
Difficulty with them slows progress toward future accomplishments and goals.
Havighurst has identified six major age periods:  Infancy and early childhood (0 – 5 years)  Middle childhood (6 – 12 years)  Adolescence (13 – 16 years)  Early adulthood (19 – 29 years)  Middle adulthood (30 – 60 years), and  Later maturity (61 +) Below are the developmental tasks of infancy to middle childhood.
Developmental Tasks of Infancy and Early Childhood (0 - 5 years)  Learning to walk 83  Learning to take solid foods  Learning to talk  Learning to control the elimination of body waste  Learning sex differences and sexual modesty  Forming concepts and learning language to describe social and physical reality  Getting ready to read Middle Childhood (6 – 12 years):  Learning physical skills necessary for ordinary games  Building wholesome attitudes towards oneself as a growing organism  Learning to get along with age-mates  Learning an appropriate masculine or feminine social role  Developing fundamental skills in reading, writing and calculating  Developing concepts necessary for everyday living  Developing conscience, morality, and a scale of values  Achieving personal independence  Developing attitudes towards social groups and institutions 3.3.3 School Counselling Guidance and counselling programme is a total and comprehensive approach that integrates a curriculum of counselling into the educational process for all students or pupils in the school.
Counselling is the core of the school guidance programme.
It is a personal relationship between a counsellor and a counsellee with the aim of assisting the latter in self-understanding, decision-making and problem solving.
It is also oriented towards facilitating effective learning skills, acceptable habits and appropriate behaviours in individuals.
A comprehensive school counselling programme is developmental, systematic, sequential, clearly defined and accountable.
Due to the developmental characteristics and needs of the children at the primary school level, school counselling programmes put special emphasis on developmental issues and prevention.
Also, 84 because of the manner in which primary school systems are structured, the counselling programme will make special use of group methods, consultations with parents and teachers, and the use of the classroom to accomplish the objectives of the counselling programme.
School Counselling services include the following:  Educational planning  Career development and counselling  School counselling  Developing and facilitating anti-violence education programmes or conflict resolution programmes, or both  Providing crisis intervention programmes within the school setting  Making appropriate referrals to outside agencies  Interpreting achievement, career, and vocational test information  Providing individual and small group counselling  Addressing the developmental needs of students or pupils by designing curricula for classroom counselling and guidance  Consulting and counselling with parents for the academic, careers and personal success of their children Self Assessment Exercise 3 1.
What are developmental task?
2.
Discuss the following: i.
The developmental tasks of children of age bracket 0 – 5 years ii.
The developmental tasks of middle childhood 3.
List six (6) school counselling services carried out by the counsellor in primary school 3.4 Goals of Developmental Counselling The goal of the comprehensive school counselling programme is to provide all students with life success skills.
It is designed to help students or pupils acquire knowledge, 85 skills, and attitudes in three domains; academic, career and personal/social/emotional.
Within each domain, there are several goals as will be discussed below: Domain A: Academic Goals As a result of participation in the school counselling programme, pupils are expected to acquire the knowledge, skills, and attitudes to: 1. develop positive attitudes towards school and focus on lifelong learning, develop effective study skills 2. understand the school environment and develop an awareness of learning success in knowledge and skills.
Domain B: Career Goals Many schools offer programmes such as career day or job shadow opportunities to help expose pupils to different career options.
As a result of participation in the school counselling programme, pupils will acquire the knowledge, skills and attitudes to: 1. make appropriate career decisions 2. establish goals, plan and prepare for the future Domain C: Social Emotional Goals As a result of participation in the school counselling programme, the pupils will acquire knowledge, skills and attitude to: 1. understand, accept and respect self 2. understand and get along with others, respect cultural diversity and other differences 3. behave responsibly in the family, school, and the community 4. communicate effectively in groups 86 5. resolve conflicts in safe and responsible manner 4.0 CONCLUSION Developmental counselling programme should be based on the competencies identified in the child as the child develops.
School counselling programme enables counsellors to impact pupils in their personal, academic, and career development.
It also provides a cost effective service to all pupils in an accountable manner.
It provides information that takes care of pupils‟ developmental and personal needs.
Developmental Counselling can be made available to all students in the school, not just to a few who can be aided through individual or group counselling.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major highlights of what you have learnt in this unit:  Developmental Counselling Programme  Rationale for developmental counselling  Definition of developmental tasks  Developmental tasks of infancy-middle childhood  School counselling  Goals of developmental counselling 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define and explain the concept of developmental task 2.
Discuss the rationale for developmental counselling in school 3.
Discuss the developmental tasks of pupils of age bracket 6 – 12 years old 87 4.
Identify the social/emotional goals of developmental counselling of school children 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Geber M. (1997) The Psychomotor Development of African Children in the First Ten Years.
New York: Appleton – Century – Crofts.
Harighurst R. J.
(1972) Developmental Tasks and Education, Third Edition.
New York, Longman.
Illinois Counselling Association (2nd ed), (2010) Developmental Counselling Model for Illinois Schools, Illinois, Illinois Counselling Association.
88 MODULE 3 : COUNSELLING IN THE PRIMARY SCHOOL Unit 1: The Counselling Process in Elementary education Unit 2: Group Counselling Unit 3: The Teacher and Developmental Group Counselling Unit 4: The Elementary School Counselling Unit 5: Consultation with Parents Unit 1: THE COUNSELLING PROCESS IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Uniqueness of child counselling 3.2 The Basic Principles of child Counselling 3.3 Approaches to child counselling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will get to know about the counselling process in elementary school.
Counselling in the primary school is different from counselling in the other stages of school system.
The clients that the counsellor deals with at the primary school level are younger than those in the higher levels of the educational system.
Many of them are between the ages of six and twelve years.
It requires the counsellor to create supportive environment that is based on a positive relationship of trust between the counsellor and the clients.
89 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss why child counselling is unique  Enumerate basic principles of child counselling  Discuss the approaches to child counselling 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Uniqueness of Child Counselling Counselling children differs in various aspects from counselling and adults.
Children are still in a process of developing and therefore their therapeutic needs will be addressed differently.
Counselling at the primary school level is unique because of the following:  The primary school child is not frequently a volunteer for counselling.
Even when he is referred to the counsellor by a teacher or his parents, he may not really understand why he requires counselling.
 The pupil in the primary school tends to assume less responsibility during counselling session.
Child clients at this level may require more verbal activities on the part of the counsellor.
 Whereas adults may struggle to express their emotional worlds in words, many children easily do so through playing.
The child client may express feelings in role play or playing with dolls or puppets.
Play is an essential process of child counselling.
Through imaginative play or media such as paints, clay, sand and water, children express themselves figuratively and symbolically.
 Language needs to be age-appropriate and should reflect the child‟s own words- usage.
For example, children may have their own words for body parts.
 Parents consent is usually necessary to work with children under the age of 16.
A younger child may be happier to have their parent present but there may be situations when this would not be advisable (e.g.
parent abuser).
An older child 90 or young person would probably be seen alone but limits of confidentiality should be explained.
He / she is free to discuss the sessions with anyone.
This approach is important as it helps children to differentiate between confidentiality and secrecy.
 One of the main aspects of working with children that is different from adult work is their use of non-verbal means of communication.
Children sometimes lack vocabularies to express their feelings and therefore resort to communicate non- verbally.
 In counselling children, limits are set from the onset of counselling.
Counsellors set limits in counselling to protect children, materials and themselves and to communicate the boundaries of acceptable behaviour.
Although many child counsellors share the goal in limit setting some accomplish it by helping children to generate their own alternative behaviours.
Setting limits is fundamental in counselling with child clients.
Self Assessment exercise 1 “Counselling children differs in various aspects from counselling adults”.
Discuss.
3.2 The Basic Principles of Child Counselling Counselling helps children cope better with emotions and feelings, and to make positive choices and decisions.
Doing this involves the following principles:  Establishing a helping relationship with the child  Helping the child to tell his / her story  Listening attentively to children  Providing correct and appropriate information  Helping the child to make informed decisions  Helping the child to recognize and build on his / her strengths  Helping the child to develop a positive attitude to life .
91 It does not involve:  Making decisions for the child  Judging, interrogating, blaming, preaching, lecturing or arguing with the child  Making promises to the child that you cannot keep  Imposing beliefs on the child.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Outline the basic principles involved in child counselling?
3.3 Approaches to child Counselling In counselling children, caution has to be taken concerning the counselling theories and strategies to be used.
This is because some of the counselling theories may not be adequate for counselling the primary school child.
For example, the client centered therapy, which is a non-directive therapy may not be very adequate for the primary school child who needs a directive approach.
The same holds for other counselling theories.
Many child-counsellors prefer the multimodal approach which is the eclectic approach to counselling and as well as play therapy.
Play therapy is the medium through which children communicate.
Play is the child‟s natural mode of communication.
It provides him / her with a symbolic way of expressing internal thoughts or feelings.
Eclectic approach involves procedures or techniques selected from different theories and utilized in treatment without necessarily subscribing to the theories that spurned them.
Play therapy should not be used alone as a diagnostic tool to place the child.
The counsllor is advised to be eclectic before making judgment on the effective state of the child.
92 Self Assessment Exercise 3 In your own view, why do you think the counsellor should adopt a multimodal approach in counselling children?
4.0 Conclusion The main goal of counselling children as with adults is for them to learn to cope with the issues they are facing.
Children need to be given a chance to be heard.
They need to learn that they have strengths and be able to build upon them.
Child counselling timed appropriately can mitigate prolems later in life.
Primary school counselling requires a different approach from the ones needed for other levels of education.
Whatever counselling approach employed by the counsellor must be such that will meet the needs of the primary school children.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the uniqueness of child counselling and the basic, principles involved in child counselling.
The approaches to child counselling were also discussed.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Why do you think that counselling children is quite different from counselling adults?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinade, E.; Sokan B. O.
& Osarenren N. (2005) An Introduction to guidance and Counselling (A Basic text for colleges and universities) Lagos, Caltop Publications (Nigeria) Limited.
93 Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development (2008), Supporting Orphans and other vulnerable children thrugh communication and basic counselling.
A reference guide for service providers.
Retrieved June 12, 2011 from http://ww.aidsalliance.org OVC support net (2004), Counselling: Psycho-social support.
Retrieved June 12.
2011 from http://www.fhi.org/NR/rdonlyres 94 UNIT 2: GROUP COUNSELLING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Group Counselling 3.2 The Need for Group Counselling 3.3 The Nature of Group Counselling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Groups provide the structure on which communities and the larger society are built.
This is because people are born into a group, grow as part of a group, develop through a group, create as a member of a group and in death leave the group.
Group counselling therefore is used to help members cope with their day-to-day adjustment and developmental problems.
In this unit, we will be looking at the definition of group counselling, the need for group counselling and the nature of group counselling.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define group counselling  Discuss the need for group counselling in the school  Describe the nature of group counselling 95  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Group Counselling Group couselling is a process in which a counsellor is involved in a relationship with a number of counsellees at the same time.
The maximum number of counsellees is usually eight and twelve.
Group counselling is usually concerned with developmental problems and situational concerns of members.
It is designed to help resolve interpersonal conflict and promote greater self awareness and insight.
The members of the group counselling are usually people who have similar problems.
Group counselling is different from individual counselling.
Although both are aimed at helping the counsellees achieve self-integration, self-direction and responsibility.
Individual counselling on the other hand can be defined as one-to-one, face-to-face relationship marked by rapport between the counsellor and the counsellee.
Individual counselling is private in nature.
This is the more common of the two types of counselling.
Self Assessment exercise 1 Distinguish between individual and group counselling 3.2 The Need for Group Counselling Group counselling is full of values not always attainable through individual counselling.
The following are the need for group counselling:  To provide opportunity for learning for self-direction with respect to educational, vocational and personal- social aspects of life.
96  To provide the opportunity for security, especially to people who might otherwise experience anxiety in a one-to-one relationship.
Such people feel safer within the group and thus are less threatened by the presence of the counsellor.
 To help individuals come to a fuller realization and acceptance of self and others.
 To help facilitate group problem solving as it is concerned with helping to solve individual personal and emotional problems.
 To help an individual express and explore feelings that might otherwise be withheld.
In discussing personal problems, he finds support from his peers as well as from the counsellor.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Why should a counsellor use group counselling in the school setting?
3.3 The Nature of Group Counselling Group counselling is not simply individual counselling applied to groups, nor it is merely an economical use of counsellor‟s time.
It is sometimes successful with clients who have not responded well to individual counselling.
The interaction which takes place in a group counselling offers the student/pupil a means of gaining insight and understanding into his own problems through listening to other students/pupils discussing their difficulties.
The primary goal of group counselling is the creation of inter-personal helping climate (counselling atmosphere) which will help each individual to develop insights into himself and to achieve healthier personal adjustments.
Group counselling is essentially preventive in nature, hoping to prevent problems from growing to the point where the individual needs special help to cope with them.
In group counselling, the counsellees not only receive help, but also help others.
A group relationship also helps the members to feel closer to others to understand and accept others.
It fosters healthy personality adjustment because the different members of the 97 group have the opportunity to share with others their experiences, problems and issues.
By this sharing, the group members who is currently experiencing such a problem becomes relieved.
At least, he is assured that such a problem is not peculiar to him / her alone.
Leadership is provided by an elected member of the group with the counsellor acting as coordinator.
Emphasis is on the normal development and adjustment of group members.
Group counselling focuses attention on each member.
Each member has a sense of belonging.
4.0 Conclusion A unique feature of group counselling is that each member of the group becomes a co- counsellor or co-facilitator who extends help to other members.
Group counselling is not simply individual counselling applied to groups but a relatively new way of working to help people.
It entails creating and fostering an effective working group, the therapeutic agent of change in groups.
It is highly important to practicing and would-be counsellor to have basic knowledge of group work practice.
This is because the counsellor‟s skills and confidence are the keys to successful group counselling.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to define group counselling, discuss the need for group counselling and as well as the nature of group counselling.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA)  Distinguish between individual and group counselling.
 With what justification would you recommend that a school counsellor should practice group counselling.
98  Outline the characteristics of group counselling.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajufo B. I.
(2008) Group Counselling.
In Hassan E. M, Oladipo S. E. & Owoyele J. W. (Ed) Readings in Counselling Psychology, Ijebu –Ode, Department of Counselling psychology, Tai Solarin University of Education.
Akinade E. A, Sokan B. O. and Osarenren N. (2005) An introduction to Guidance & Counselling: A basic Text for Colleges and Universities, Ibadan: Caltop Publications.
Eweniyi G. B, Olowe, D. T. and Olagunju M. K. O.
(2002), Essentials of Guidance and Counselling, Ijebu-Ode, Fembol Integra Publications Kochhar, S. K. (2002) Guidance and Counselling in Colleges and Universities, New Delhi, Sterling Publishers, PVT, Ltd. Oladele J. O.
(1987) Guidance & Counselling: A Functional Approach Yaba, Johns-Lad Enterprises.
99  UNIT 3: THE TEACHER AND DEVELOPMENTAL GROUP COUNSELLING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of listening Skills 3.1.2 Importance of listening skills for Teachers 100  3.2 Techniques of listening skills 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt about group counselling in its totality.
In this unit, we will talk about listening skills.
Listening seems like a simple process and yet so many of us are more eager to talk than to listen.
A teacher needs to be a good listener.
By listening to students, a teacher builds the relationship of trust and caring which is essential to student‟s motivation to learn.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define listening  discuss the importance of listening skills for teacher  outline and explain the techniques of listening skills  define who a good listener is.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Listening Listening is the process of receiving, constructing meaning from responding to spoken and or non verbal messages.
It could also be seen as making effort to hear something, hearing something with thoughtful attention, paying attention to what is said.
101 Listening is an art.
Listening, however, is more than just being able to hear and understand what someone else says.
Listening skills involves etiquette, asking for clarification, showing empathy and providing appropriate response.
The best way to be a great communicator is to be a really good listener.
Good listening skills include using body language that empowers the speaker.
A good listener maintains an eye contact with the speaker.
People who have good listening skills show respect to the speaker by not interrupting him while he is talking.
Even if the speaker stutters or is slow to speak or selects his words, being patient and retraining yourself from finishing his sentence is a mark of a good listener.
Good listening skills depend on good comprehension.
Demonstrate that you understand by restating what you think you have heard.
Then ask if you in fact did hear correctly.
Ask questions that request specific clarification on points that you are unsure about.
Good listening skills are measured by the response of the listener.
When the message is being adequately delivered and received, the result should be an action or statement that demonstrates that there has been a transaction between the speaker and the listener Self Assessment Exercise 1 What is listening?
With examples, define who a good listener is.
3.1.1 Importance of listening skills for Teachers Do teachers need to have good listening skills?
Good listening skills help to forge a healthy relationship between the teacher and the pupils.
Being patient and attentive goes a long way in making the pupils feel that they are being listened to and heard.
Listening skills are an incredible important skill for teachers.
It is difficult for a teacher to know what needs to be taught unless he can hear what is missing, what needs clarification and what is understood.
If a class of any age feels the teacher does not hear 102 them, their needs or their concerns, then the learning will suffer whether the teacher knows it or not.
A teacher needs to have good listening skills to be able to establish a relationship with the pupils.
Good listening skills are an important instructional practice.
Teachers must have patience and compassion, the ability to inspire and good listening skills.
A teacher‟s dependence on communication is very high.
In fact, communication is a pillar of the profession.
In the zeal to pass information and knowledge to the learners, the teacher should not forget that communication is a two way process.
It involves a give and take relationship with the learners.
Teachers are not only transmitting the messages, but they are supposed to receive the messages that the students are passing to them.
A teacher‟s effective listening skills motivate students to participate better in the teaching and the learning process.
It is important for teachers to actively listen to the class in a sincere and meaningful way.
During instruction the teacher who uses open dialogue should listen to each student‟s contribution intently.
This promotes participation and helps the students feel secure while learning in the classroom.
Also, if the teacher asks questions after teaching, he should be sure to listen to student‟s replies without having a prepared responses to an assumed answer.
Although a teacher must multitask when actively listening.
Listening must be the priority.
Many times students approach their teachers with problems which fall outside the scope of academics.
In such a situation, a teacher cannot refuse to help and may be required to act as a counsellor.
It is important for teachers to have a positive rapport with students.
For a teacher to be able to deliver in this role of counsellor, a teacher needs to have good communication skills, needs to be a good listener, needs to have a lot of information, an empathetic attitude, a good rapport with the students and needs to be good motivator.
The learner has to be approached in a very engaging manner.
103 Self Assessment Exercise 2 As a teacher in the making, why do you think that listening skills are important to a teacher?
3.2 Techniques of Listening Skills Active listening is a communication technique that requires the listener to understand, interpret and evaluate what he / she hears.
Here are some tips:  Stay present – Do not let your mind wander.
 Make eye contact – Let the speaker see your interest by regularly making eye contact.
 Ask questions for clarification – This is not your time to respond.
Get really clear about what is being said.
If you don‟t understand, ask questions in an open non- charged manner.
 Acknowledge feelings – If the speaker is telling you something about his / her feelings, acknowledge them.
You don‟t have to agree to show that you see the speaker is upset or happy about something.
 Restate or paragraph – Make sure you are getting the information the speaker is presenting by periodically repeating what you hear the speaker says in different words.
For example “Let me see if I have got it so far?”  Seek first to understand and then to be understood – Before you state your thoughts and ideas, make sure you totally understand and acknowledge the speaker‟s thought.
 Give non verbal feedback – While the speaker is speaking, be sure to smile, nod, shrug your shoulders, or raise your eyebrows – whatever is appropriate.
 Silence – Do not be afraid of this.
Periods of total quiet will allow you and the speaker to think about what was said.
When you are sure the speaker has completed his / her thoughts on the subject, it will be time for you to comment.
 Take in all the information both verbal and non verbal- Focus on the meaning of what is being said and also what is not being said.
104  Get permission – sometimes people just want to be heard.
At other times they are seeking advice.
Give advice only when requested and only after the person has had a chance to give you the whole story.
If you are not sure, ask if the person is looking for your input.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Briefly discuss how you can show that you are listening to a student who is engaged in a discussion with you.
4.0 CONCLUSION Listening to students is critical to students / teacher relationship.
When the students know that their teachers are interested in what they are saying, it makes them feel cared for and emotionally connected to school.
Listening is as important as speaking in communication.
Every teacher wants his / her students to listen to him / her.
No teacher enjoys a non- responsive classroom.
To create and establish a relationship with students ,it is important for a teacher to be a GOOD LISTENER.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have looked at definition of listening skills, who a good listener is, the importance of listening skills for teachers and also listening techniques.
To be attentive to students is the most important thing while listening to them.
Teacher‟s attention motivates them to speak and express themselves.
Nobody enjoys a listener who is listening to him / her half-heartedly.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
How can you define listening?
105 2.
Why do you think listening skills are important for teachers?
3.
Discuss the characteristics of a good listener.
4.
Identify and discuss the techniques of listening 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Does a Teacher need to be a Good Listener?
(2010), Retrieved June 21, 2011 from http://www.brighthub.com/education/special/articles Importance of Listening Skills for Teachers (2011) Demand Media – Inc. Retrieved June 21, 2011 from http://www/ehow.com/about Teachers in the Role of Counsellors (2010), Retrieved June 21, 2011 from http://www.brighthub.com/education/special/articles The Definition of Listening Skills (2011) Demand Media, Inc. Retrieved June, 22, 2011 from http://www/ehoe.com/about Parker A.
(2011) Top Ten Listening Techniques.
Retrieved June 22, 2011 from http://www.evancermichael.com/Business-coash/107/Top-Ten-Listening- Techiques.html 106  UNIT 4.
The Elementary School Counsellor Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Elementary School guidance 3.2 Functions of a school counsellor 3.3 Characteristics of a counsellor 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Reading 1.0 Introduction An Elementary school counsellor is the teacher/ specialist in guidance counselling posted to the primary school to give guidance to the children of primary school age when they need guidance.
In this unit, we shall discuss who a counsellor is and their functions in schools.
2.0 Objectives 107 After studying this unit carefully, you should be able to: 1) Tell who an elementary school counsellor is 2) Identify the functions of a school counsellor 3) Describe the characteristics of a counsellor 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Elementary School guidance Late 1960s, the role of the school counsellor began to take its current shape.
Presently, guidance has grown to include counselling, planning, placement, referral, and consultation (Schmidt,1993).
At the same time, guidance at the elementary school was being developed and implemented.
Along with the development of elementary guidance came the emphasis on prevention, intervention, and coordination (Muro & Kottman, 1995).
As the field of developmental guidance has grown, so has the emphasis educators placed on coordination and cooperation.
In a well functioning school environment, cooperation exists between all school staff members.
For a comprehensive guidance programme to flourish, cooperation between school counsellors and teachers is paramount.
According to Nugent (1990), next to counsellors, teachers are the most important component in implementing a successful comprehensive guidance program.
By and large, teachers are the key and adult figure in the average pupil‟s school day.
They are the most influential figures, be it positive or negative, to the average student.
This is particularly true at the elementary level, where children spend the majority of their day in one classroom.
Self Assessment Exercise I: Who are the agents of guidance programme in our schools today?
3.2 Functions of a school counsellor School counsellors have traditionally been expected to play diverse and often conflicting roles They have been called to act in the capacity of confidant, disciplinarian, consultant, scheduler, politician, administrator, psychologist and academic helper.
The ambiguity 108 about counsellor‟s roles and expectations has created confusion among teachers, support staff, parents, and students.
( Ettinger, Lambert, & Rudolf 1994).
In addition, facilities and resources for planning and implementation career guidance and counselling programmes are sadly lacking.
The student- to counsellor ratio in most schools limit the services that counsellor can deliver.
The following list of tasks is limited, yet typical (Gysbers & Henderson, 1994): Counsellors register and schedule all new students.
Counsellors are responsible for administering tests.
Counsellors teach classes when teachers are not there.
Counsellors send students home that are inappropriately dressed.
Counsellors assist with duties in principal‟s office.
Counsellor compute grade point averages.
Counsellors are in charge of student records.
Counsellors are assigned lunchroom duty and supervise study halls.
The function of a counsellor is not easily defined.
Myrick(2003),suggested that function definition was dependent upon the group of people creating the definition.
For example, students may see the function of guidance counsellor much different than administrators, who may view their function much differently than do counsellors themselves.
Other variables come to play when trying to determine the function of school counsellors.
For instance, the function a counsellor performs at the secondary school level may differ greatly from the functions of an elementary counsellor.
Additionally, an established and veteran counsellor may very well perform different functions than a first-year counsellor.
Other factors such as age and gender may influence function definition as well.
The American Counselling Association (ASCA)has devised a description that helps define the function of a school counsellor.
The definition views guidance counselling as consulting agents, coordinators, and counsellors (ASCA,1997).
Other models exist that attempt to explain various counsellor functions.
Myrick (2003) grouped counsellor functions into six categories that focus mainly on the development of the student: 109 1.
Individual counselling with at risk or high priority students.
2.
Small group counselling, preferably with four to five members that meet a minimum of once per week.
3.
Large group classroom guidance.
4.
Peer facilitator programmes 5.
Consultation, with teachers, administration, school personnel, and parents.
6.
Coordination of guidance services, including testing, career information, educational placement, and orientation.
Gysbers and Henderson(2000) developed a comprehensive guidance model that placed functions into four components: a.
Guidance curriculum b.
Responsive services c. Individual planning d. System support The guidance curriculum component covers the delivery of classroom lesson plans to all students in the school, as well as consultation with teachers and other school personnel so that they can provide additional guidance lessons.
Responsive services covers critical incidents and crisis intervention.
Individual planning covers future and career planning for each student.
The system support component refers to the supporting role a guidance counsellor plays within a complete school system.
(Hannah &Bemak,1997).
Gibson and Mitchell (2003) defined counsellor‟s functions as guidance activities, and comprised a list of ten activities that serve as a guideline for the overall function of guidance counsellors: 1.
Individual assessment 2.
Individual counselling 3.
Group counselling and guidance 4.
Career assistance 5.
Placement and follow-up 6.
Referral 7.
Consultation 110 8.
Research 9.
Evaluation and accountability 10.
Prevention Bradley and Stone(1994) stated that the function of guidance counsellors varied, depending on the grade and emotion and emotional level of the students involved.
These authors devised separate guidance principles for both primary and secondary guidance counsellors.
The function of primary counsellors was perceived to be activity driven with pupils, teachers, and parents.
The function of secondary counsellor was thought to be less activity driven and more cognitively directed.
The American School Counsellors Association (ASCA) viewed counsellors as student academic developers.
This association recognizes that counsellors utilize a variety of strategies, activities, methods and resources to promote students development by giving: 1.
Counselling 2.
Consultation 3.
Coordination 4.
Case management 5.
Programme evaluation and development 6.
Guidance delivery 7.
Programme delivery Cuskey (1996) perceived that counsellor roles were paramount to the effectiveness of a developmental guidance programme in elementary schools.
The author devised a study in which teacher perceptions regarding school counsellors‟ functions and effectiveness in public elementary schools were examined.
The research found out that the most commonly perceived counsellor roles by teachers were: 1.
Planning appropriate classroom activities 2.
Contributing constructive ideas and suggestion in support of classroom teachers 3.
Assisting teachers in helping students 4.
Providing classroom presentations that reinforced skills and attitudes and 111 5.
Including classroom guidance activities that were effective in making children more aware of their own behavior and feelings were effective with parents, and provided the school with the positive climate.
In addition, school counsellors were seen as the most competent in the area of consultation, followed by delivery of classroom guidance.
Counsellors were viewed as less effective in the area of individual and small group counselling.
The elementary teachers who participated in the study felt the most valuable services offered by their counsellors were consultation and support for teachers, individual counselling, and developmental/classroom guidance activities.
Counsellors were not perceived as being available for individual counselling at the level desired.
(Cuskey 1996).
Self Assessment Exercise 2: What are the guidelines for the function of a guidance counsellors?
3.3 Characteristics of a Counsellor The question to ask is who should be a counsellor in the school system?
What are his characteristics?
For anyone to be able to provide any meaningful counselling in the primary school, he should have the following characteristics: (a) Empathy; (b) Genuineness; (c) Patient Understanding; (d) Ability to maintain good appearance (e) Sound moral character; and (f) Ability to maintain confidentiality.
The counsellor is a helping professional who is trained in human behavior.
He interprets human behavior.
Guidance counsellor seeks to help individual of all ages and sex in their bid to solve their problems.
He is always out to treat individuals with dignity and respect.
The counsellor empathizes with individuals and confidentiality is his watchword.
He keeps his counselees secret -secret.
He is a career educator, who ensures that individuals are properly guided in their choice of careers.
Indeed, the counsellor is an adviser, a helper, a teacher, a parent, a confidant and a friend to the child.
112  Self Assessment Exercise 3: Would you agree with me that a counsellor is a different specie?
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt many important things about a counsellor.
You should now be able to enumerate what developmental guidance is, and identify the functions of a school counsellor.
More importantly, you should be able to describe the characteristics of a counsellor.
5.0 Summary You have just learnt in this unit that guidance counselling in school took place as far back as in the „60s.
You have equally learnt that counselling took the form of prevention, and coordination.
You also learnt various functions of a school counsellor; ranging from scheduling of students to administration of tests, to supervision of pupils in the classroom, and guidance of students in schools.
You were also taught the characteristics of a school counsellor.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 1) Enumerate the growth of developmental counselling in school.
2) Identify ten functions of a school counsellor?
3) Describe the characteristics of a school counsellor.
7.0 References / Further Reading Idowu, Segun (1986).
Basics of Guidance and counselling.
Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Smith, E. (1979).
Counselling the culturally Different Black, youth, Columbia, Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company.
Hoose, William H. (1973).
Elementary School Guidance, and Counselling.
A Composite View.
113  UNIT 5: Consultation with Parents Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Rationale for Parents Consultation and Parents Education 3.2 Objectives of Parent Consultation and Parent Education 3.3 Teacher and Counsellor functions in Parent Consultation 3.4 The Teacher-Parent Conference 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0Further Reading and other Resources 1.0 Introduction In the last unit we were made to see how the school and counsellor could work together in a collaborative relationship in order to reach the goals of each school and bring positive influence on the future of the school.
In this unit, we are going to see how the home and school could work together to bring about positive changes in children.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1) Recount the importance of parents relating with school 2) List some parents expectations of their children 3) List some methods of parents involvement in their children education 114  3.0 Main Content 3.1 Rationale for Parents Consultation Schools today are far removed from what it used to be in the 1950s.
Now, parents and teachers mostly do not live in the same environment or neighbourhood, and they may not share the same common experiences.
Most mothers and fathers are employed outside their homes, it is increasingly difficult to arrange for contacts between parents and teachers.
Yet the need to involve parents in the education of their children is essential.
We know that a child‟s earning is greatly enhanced when there is an understanding of the parental, community and the school in the child‟s life.
(Rosenthal & Sawyers, 1996).
Children‟s interest and stage of development determine what is meaningful for them, and the stimuli and experiences that result in learning come from many forces within each child‟s life.
When we are considering who is responsible for children education, we must consider who has the child‟s time and who is closer to his mind and interests.
We must consider all the forces giving him information and experience for example, a definite curriculum of the home exists, although we do not label it so.
It starts at birth and continues to be dominated by primary caregivers for children‟s earliest years.
The community begins to affect children by the time they are toddlers, these stimuli increase dramatically through early childhood (Barbour & Barbour 1997).
The trained teachers of early Childhood Education have always recognized the home and the school linkage and found danger in not involving the parents.
As a result of this, these educators have designed several methods to build a strong school –home relationship.
These are based on the understanding that: i) Parents have expectations for the school ii) Parents are busy, whether their family is traditional, single –parent or blended.
iii) Teachers and Parents share a love and concern for the child.
115 Self Assessment Exercise1 Why should Parents relate with the school?
3.2 Objectives of Parent Consultation and Parent Education Teachers are regarded as the authority figures for both children and parents.
No matter how young the teacher may be, since he / she has had courses in psychology and learning, he/ she is expected to be in charge of the child and has to have answers for all questions and concerns.
The teachers have to be sympathetic with the parents worries on their children and have to guide them rightly.
Books could be lent to parents as guide or the teacher can organize for experts to talk to parents in a meeting.
It is the duty of teacher to promote parents cooperation by asking for their opinions and acting on them, complimenting the achievements of their children and showing genius respect for the family (Rosenthal and Sawyer, 1996).
Teachers should be a good resource to parents of the children with special needs.
Information that could guide them, for treatment, fund , special classes for English lesson etc.
Could be posted on the parents bulletin board.
Where videotapes are available to help the parents on their children, these should be released for parents‟ use (Brantlinger, 1991).
Parents are concerned about their children‟s progress.
The teacher is expected to tell them their children‟s weakness and where parents could work on to improve their children since parents are so concerned about their children‟s achievements, the teacher can show them how they can reinforce the school work at home.
The teacher can give them games and books to borrow, or you could send home ideas they can use to help their children practice special skills.
These don‟t have to be formal homework/ assignments but ways parents can informally teach children at home.
You might let them know how letting children help put away groceries could help in the knowledge of classification, or letting them weigh vegetables or fruits at the supermarket provides experiences with measurement and numbers.
Parents at times want to know how their wards socialize with peers in school.
The teacher also should be able to state the school‟s expectations and values and explain the rationale for them.
The teacher should build support and trust by sharing with parents the similarities and the differences of their expectations and that of the school.
116  Parents expect confidentiality in the information given to the teachers about their families.
Parents expect the teachers to be secretive about information given them.
Keeping parents secrets would amount to respect and they would be ready to work with the teacher, to share their hope and disappointments, their joys and tribulations for their children.
The teacher must not discuss their children‟s background, achievement or failure with anyone else.
This sounds like common sense, but it is an area where professionalism can break down.
Self Assessment Exercise2 How can Parents reinforce the School work?
3.3 Teacher and Counsellor functions in Parent Education.
Communication among teachers, parents and the counsellor is important in helping to ensure that the needs of students are being met.
The counsellor should be there to meet the needs of parents and teachers over their wards.
The counsellor could use Student Assistance Program (SAP) to collaborate with parents and teachers.
In parent and teacher consultation, it is best to set an appointment with the counsellor.
In this meeting, the party come together to plan and implement strategies to help students to be successful in the education system.
The counsellor as a consultant primarily helps parents and teachers think through problems and concerns, acquire more knowledge and skills and become more objective and self confident.
This intervention can take place in individual or group conferences, through staff development activities, or parent educational workshops.
The consultation provides information and skills to parent/guardians, teachers and community to assist them in helping students in academic, career, and personal/ social development.
What the Counsellor has to know in consultation program is to identify the problem by listening attentively to the consultee.
The next step is to clarify the consultee‟s situation by giving attention to the following: (i) Feeling- consultee‟s and client‟s.
(ii) Specific behaviours of client and the consultee.
(iii) Consultee‟s expectations in the situation.
(iv) 117 What the consultee has done so far.
(v) What are the positive attitudes and behavior of the consultees?
Self Assessment Exercise3 What are the things to watch out for on the client during consultation by the counsellor?
3.4 The Teacher- Parent Conference Schools work best when parents are involved.
There are many formal and informal ways to involve parents in the school programmes (Barbour & Barbour, 1997), it is important for the teacher to have many methods of working with the parents.
Successful teachers use a variety of methods to involve parents for example, parents may restrict involvement to their own child‟s development progress, others may be actively involved in tutoring a number of children, working on fund raising events, or in school campaigns.
In a few schools, parents assist in staff hiring and grant writing successful programme depend on how the principal and staff welcome parents and respond to their needs.
(Bloom 1992 Rich 1992).
Let us understand that the best education comes from partnership.
Conference meeting is another traditional way of parental involvement in their children‟s education.
There, parents can be informed of their children‟s progress and performance in relation to the schools expectation.
The teacher must consider and plan the time, place, general purpose, materials and agenda for conference.
Teacher must start and end the conference on a good note.
He/she must prepare a written agenda that can be used to discuss the child‟s progress.
He/she must give the parents a copy so that they can follow the discussion.
There should be ready samples of children‟s work to document their development.
The teacher must stretch areas of growth and progress and be frank about the areas in which the child needs improvement.
118  The head teacher and management team have a principal role in taking account of the views of parents and communicating the school‟s aims and expectations to them.
With the wider staff team, they involved parents in activities.
They often took the lead in liaising with parents where problems were affecting a pupil‟s progress of behaviour at school.
Where there were conflicting values between a parent and the school, for example in relation to acceptable behaviour, the skills of the management team were crucial in establishing an agreed programme of action which had the support of the school and the parent.
Lawani (2004), collaborates this idea by positing that parents are stakeholders in education and they need to play active role by getting themselves involved in Parent Teacher Association (P.T.A.)
to solve any problem confronting the school and their wards.
Home Visits This is the teacher going to homes of pre-scholars and primary –grade children.
This was an established practice a generation ago but the practice is still valuable.
The practice is much more limited in recent years.
Earlier plans focused on health needs.
Whereas more recently visiting is focused on enhancing cognitive and social development.
Home visit is recommended for the trained home tutors.
Home visits are for various reasons some programmes are designed to provide children and parents with educational experiences that focus on children intellectual, social, physical and nutritional needs.
The class tutors do not usually go on home visit, it is done by trained home tutors.
Home visits, is once or twice in a year.
The initial visit is to acquit parents with programme and for the tutor to get a clearer understanding of developmental level of the children who will be attending the programme.
Home visit is done by establishing good communication links between school and home.
Home visit can be threatening to both teachers and parents.
Parents fear that teachers are snooping, while teachers fear door being slammed at their face.
During every home visit, the home tutor should be himself/ herself and follow his / her instincts and style.
There is need to do the following during home visit.
119 1.
Call ahead of the visit to fix time 2. state the purpose of your visit 3. bring some toys that children can play with and some other items for the parents (ice breaker) 4. be punctual and leave close to the time you said you would leave 5. encourage parents to let the child stay for the visit 6. discuss the positive aspect of the child‟s school behaviour 7. try to be an active listener as parents discuss concerns or satisfactions with the child‟s schooling.
Informal Contact Informal Contacts is another way of home –school interactions.
Where parents are busy and could not attend a formal school meeting with the teacher, the teacher can do an informal contact with the parent when parent drop their children or pick them back home.
It is usually snoppy.
The aim of this contact is to build effective home-school relationship.
Where this form of contact is not possible, the teacher can write note to communicate his /her intention to the parents.
Parents in the Classroom.
Another home-school relationship is having parents in the classroom.
Keeping parents informed is vital, but involving them as active partners in the classroom provides an even stronger base of support for school and families.
If parents are on site, they benefit by getting first hand information about the school‟s functioning and the teacher‟s interactions with the children.
In head start and other government funded school programmes ; parents are often hired as classroom aides or ask to serve as volunteer.
Parents have to be used in the ways that capitalize on their skills.
Guideline handwritten could be given to parents involve in classroom activities.
Daily review of parents work in the classroom is essential.
The regular volunteer teachers, orientation is necessary so volunteers may understand their 120 roles in the classroom, how the programme, functions and developmental level of the children.
Parents who cannot volunteer regularly, can render help in other ways.
Parents can share their special talents or occupations at school functions and classes.
A concert pianist, basket weaver, male and female nurse, police officer are just a few examples of adults who visited one school on a “career week”.
Making materials for the class to reinforce, kindergarten stories, helping out on trips, providing refreshments or coming to school to read a special story are other ways parents can be involved in the school activities.
Parents that are actively involved in the classroom programmes feel fulfilled because as they see children grow and recognizing their contribution to their growth brings satisfaction.
Lawani (2004), in her study of parents involvement in children‟s school work came out with these findings: Children whose parents are involved in children‟s formal education have greater academic achievement especially in English Language and Mathematics.
Parents therefore are to take active part in their children‟s education by getting actively involved in their children‟s homework and providing learning materials for their wards.
Furthermore, she emphasized the pre-eminent role the home plays in shaping the lives of school children.
Parents should go out of their way to make the home a source of inspiration and not inhibition to the child‟s learning ability through adequate care, provision and attention.
Self Assessment Exercise4 Why should teachers involve the parents in the education of their children?
4.0 Conclusion 121 You have been exposed to home –school interaction.
You have learnt how parents can relate with the school, what are parents‟ expectations of their wards and various ways of getting parents involved in their children‟s education.
5.0 Summary This unit have brought out the importance of home working together with the school to bring about understanding, trust, positive change and most especially having to know that parents could contribute to the development of the child not in only at home but also in school.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
“He who has the child‟s time and interests is closer to his mind”.
How close is the parent‟s mind to their children.
2.
What are Parents‟ expectations of the teacher?
3.
Mention some methods of home - school partnership 7.0 Reference / Further Reading Seefeldt, C. and Barbour .N.
(1998) Early Childhood Education: An Introduction USA, Prentice –Hall, Inc. 122 Roseythal, .D.M, & Sawyers, J.Y.
(1998): Building Successful Home / School Partnership: Strategies for Parent Support and Involvement Childhood Education 72(4) 194-200 Babrbour, C. & Barbour, N.H. (1997): Families Schools and Communities: Building Partnerships and Educating Children.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill / Prentice Hall.
Brantlinger, E. (991).
Home –School Partnership that Benefit Children with Special needs.
Elementary School Journal, 91 (3) 249-250.
Bloom, J.
(1992) Parenting our Schools.
Boston: Little Brown Rich, .D.
(1992): Megaskills: In School and Life, the best gift you can give your child.
USA: Boston Houghton Mifflin Lawani, L.A. (2004).
A Casual Model of home and School Factors as Determinants of Primary School Pupils Achievement in English Language and Mathematics Unpublished Ph.D thesis University of Ibadan.
123
