 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: PED 130 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL STUDIES 1 PED 130: INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL STUDIES COURSE GUIDE Course Developer: Dr. M. B. Lawal National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Writer: Dr. M. B Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor: prof B. J. Obebe Faculty of Education University of Lagos Akoka Nigeria Programme Leader: Dr Timothy James School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr F. F. Fatimeyin School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 3 PED 130: INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL STUDIES 1.0 : INTRODUCTION The course PED 130: Introduction to Social Studies is a two-credit course consisting of three modules and fifteen units.
It is designed to cater for undergraduates offering B.A.Ed programmes and other related programmes in the School of Education of the National Open University of Nigeria.
It is a two- unit course that demands your full attention and commitment as an undergraduate student.
As an undergraduate student of Education the course familiarizes you with the foundation of Social Studies, its philosophical background, and relationship with other disciplines.
You are equally going to interact with some basic concepts which will provide you with a proper grounding for mastering the subject matter of Social Studies.
Your successful completion of this course should prepare you better for the handling of curriculum content areas of any Social Studies programmed at the basic education level of the nation’s education system.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what relevant reference materials are available to complement your reading of the course material and how you can work your way through the course.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor- marked assignments.
2.0 : WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The course will avail you an opportunity to acquire the basic and relevant knowledge and skills required for becoming a professional teacher of Social Studies who can boast of adequate grasp of the content of the subject.
The Course is expected to facilitate your understanding of the historical and philosophical background of Social Studies as well as the values of learning the subject.
You will also learn about the relationship between the subject and other disciplines such as history, sociology, economics, geography, and other subjects.
Some basic concepts such as growth and development, peace and conflict resolution, self reliance human rights and civic responsibilities which are part of the major drivers of most curriculum contents in Social Studies will also be learnt in this Course Guide.
4  3.0 : COURSE AIM The course is designed for you as a reader and student to improve your knowledge of the subject matter of Social Studies and its values which you will be expected to be taught as an affective-based subject.
4.0 : COURSE OBJECTIVES The aim of this course as stated in the preceding section serves as an all embracing goal which equally influences the objectives of your studying each of the units presented in the course material.
The objectives have been identified for each of the units.
You are advised to read them before you start working through each of the units.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit, in this way, you can be sure that you have done what is required of you by the unit.
By the end of this course it is therefore expected that you should be able to do the following: Identify definitions that are not compatible with the nature and focus of Social Studies.
i.
Give a concise definition of Social Studies which represents its value-laden nature and focus.
ii.
Describe the origin of Social Studies in the United States of America.
iii.
Describe the origin of Social Studies in Britain.
iv.
Describe the origin of Social Studies in Africa v. Describe the origin of Social Studies in Nigeria.
vi.
Describe the philosophical background of Social Studies in Nigeria.
vii.
Establish the relationship between this philosophical background and the realization of the objectives of Nigeria’s National Policy on Education in relation to social studies viii.
Describe the relationship between Social Studies and the Social Sciences ix.
Describe the relationship between Social Studies and the Arts x.
Describe the relationship between Social Studies and some other Disciplines xi.
Identify the goals and objectives of teaching Social Studies at different levels of Nigeria’s educational system :primary ,secondary and tertiary xii.
Highlight the values of teaching and learning Social Studies.
xiii.
Discuss the prospects of the subject.
xiv.
Describe what concepts and generalizations actually mean.
xv.
distinguish between concepts and generalization xvi.
List some examples of concepts and generalisations that can be used for effective teaching and learning of Social Studies xvii.
mention the importance of concepts and generalisations in Social Studies teaching and learning.
xviii.
Explain the concepts of growth and development.
xix.
Mention the characteristics of growth and development xx.
Establish the relationship between growth and development xxi.
Explain the concept of self reliance.
xxii.
Explain what self reliance in education means xxiii.
Identify some of the ways of becoming self reliant as individuals.
xxiv.
Explain the concept of peace xxv.
Explain the concept of conflict xxvi.
Describe some of the steps carrying out conflict resolution in our society.
5 xxvii.
State a concise definition of social problem xxviii.
Identify the different types of social problem xxix.
Identify and discuss the causes of social problems and xxx.
Suggest ways by which social problems could be tackled in our society.
xxxi.
Give a concise meaning of human rights.
xxxii.
Explain the origin of human rights xxxiii.
Identify the different classification of human rights xxxiv.
Describe these identified classification of human rights xxxv.
State the meaning of constitution xxxvi.
Explain the provisions of fundamental human rights as contained in the Nigerian Constitution xxxvii.
Explain the Universal Declaration of Human Rights xxxviii.
Mention some of the provisions of the Declaration xxxix.
Explain the origin of the African Union xl.
Mention the objectives and organs of African Union xli.
Give a simple meaning of civic responsibilities xlii.
Identify the different types of civic responsibilities xliii.
State the importance of fulfilling our civic responsibilities and obligations.
5.0 : WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE It is important for you to be determined to complete this course by reading through from Unit 1 of the first module to the last unit of the third module and, carrying out all the activities stipulated therein.
These include self-assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignments listed under every unit.
At certain points during the course, you will be expected to submit your tutor-marked assignments as your scores in some of them form a reasonable percentage of your total scores for the course.
Each unit of each of the modules starts with an introduction followed by objectives to be achieved after interacting with the main content and the exercises.
Your facilitator for the course will be available to attend to you in case you find it difficult to comprehend any aspect of the course material.
You are therefore advised to ensure that you read ahead and attend tutorial sessions where you would be able to ask questions and interact with other colleagues of yours and the facilitator.
At the end of the course is a final examination.
The course should take you about a total 42 weeks to complete.
Below are the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
6.0 : THE COURSE MATERIAL The major components of the course which will be made available to you include: • The Course Guide • The course material with the corresponding Study Units • Assignment file & • Presentation Schedule.
6  7.0: STUDY UNITS The study units in this course are presented in the table below.
S/No.
Module Corresponding Units 1 Foundations of Social Studies Unit 1: Meaning of Social Studies Unit 2: Historical Background of Social Studies Unit 3: Philosophical Background of Social Studies in Nigeria Unit 4: Social Studies and other Disciplines Unit 5: Values of Learning Social Studies 2.
Some Basic Concepts in Social Studies Unit 1: Concepts and Generalisations in Social Studies Unit 2: Concepts of Growth and Development Unit 3: Concept of Self-Reliance Unit 4: Concepts of Peace and Conflict Resolution Unit 5: Concept of Social Problem 3.
Human Rights and Civic Unit 1: Definition and Origin of Human Rights Responsibilities Unit 2: 1999 Nigerian Constitution and Human Rights Unit 3: Classification of Human Rights Unit 4: Universal Declaration of Human Rights /African Union Charter Unit 5: Civic Responsibilities 8.0: ASSIGNMENT FILE Your assignment file will be available through your facilitator and Study Centre Manager.
In this course, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in the section on assessment in this course guide.
There are tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are expected to practice all but submit at most 4.
9.0: PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due dates.
You should guard against falling behind in your works.
10.0: ASSESSMENTS There are two aspects to the assessment of the course: first are the tutor-marked assignments (30%) ; and second is a written examination (70%).
7  In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of two hours duration.
11.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) There are fifteen (15) tutor-marked assignments in this course and you are advised to attempt all.
Aside from the course material provided, you are advised to read and research widely using other references which will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Ensure all completed assignments are submitted on schedule before set deadlines.
If for any reasons, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
The extension may not however be granted after the due date except with very genuine excuse.
12.0: FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination for this course will be of two hours duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
All areas of the course will be assessed and the examination will consist of questions, which reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Utilise the time between the conclusion of the last study unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your self-assessment exercises, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
13.0: COURSE MARKING SCHEME The work you submit will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will be required to sit for a final examination, which will also count for 70% of your total mark.
The table below shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Table 1: Course Marking Scheme ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 4 (TMAs) 4 assignments, best 3 will be used for C.A = 10 x 3 = 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks 14.0: COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units and the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignment that follow them.
8 Unit Title of work Week`s Assessment (end of activity unit) 1 Meaning of Social Studies 2 Historical Background of Social Studies 3 Philosophical Background of Social Studies in Nigeria Submission of TMA 1 4 Social Studies and other Disciplines 5 Values of Learning Social Studies 6 Concepts and Generalisations in Social Studies 7 Concepts of Growth and Development Submission of TMA 2 8 Concept of Self-Reliance 9 Concepts of Peace and Conflict Resolution 10 Concept of Social Problem Submission of TMA 3 11 Definition and Origin of Human Rights 12 1999 Nigerian Constitution and Human Rights 13 Classification of Human Rights 14 Universal Declaration of Human Rights /African Union Charter 15 Civic Responsibilities Submission of TMA 4 Revision Examination 15.0: HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units are specially developed and designed to replace the university lecturer.
Hence, you can work through these materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Visualize it as reading the lecture instead listening to a lecturer.
Each of the study units follows a common format as earlier explained under the section on `Working through the Course`.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading Section.
Working through the self assessment exercises will help you to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and the examinations.
You should do each activity as you come to it in the study unit.
9 The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your facilitator.
Remember that your facilitator’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In summary, • Read this course guide.
• Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the unit.
You need to gather together all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
• Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their coursework.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your facilitator know before it is too late for help.
• Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
• Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the dates) access the Assignment file.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due dates.
• Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your facilitator.
• When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your facilitator for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your facilitator’s comments.
Consult your facilitator as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives and the course objectives.
16.0: FACILITATORS AND TUTORIALS There are 20 hours of tutorials (ten 2-hour sessions) provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone number of your facilitator, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
10 Your facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter as they would provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your facilitator well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your facilitator and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary: when • you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
Meaning of Social Studies Historical Background of Social Studies Philosophical Background of Social Studies in Nigeria Social Studies and other Disciplines Values of Learning Social Studies Concepts and Generalisations in Social Studies Concepts of Growth and Development Concept of Self-Reliance Concepts of Peace and Conflict Resolution Concept of Social Problem Definition and Origin of Human Rights 1999 Nigerian Constitution and Human Rights Classification of Human Rights Universal Declaration of Human Rights /African Union Charter  Civic Responsibilities • you have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
• you have a question or problem with an assignment with your facilitator’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your possible best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participations in discussions.
7.0: SUMMARY In this course PRD 100, you have learnt about the foundations of Social Studies and some basic concepts that form the bedrock of the curricula content areas in the subject.
Specifically, you have interacted with topics such as: 11 Best of luck in your examinations.
We wish you every success in the future.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
16.0: TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCE MATERIALS Ainsworth, D. (2010).
Self reliance is a mindset http://www.backwoodshome.com Retrieved on the 16th March 2010 Ajiboye, J. O.
(1999).
Social Studies Curriculum In A. Dada, The Teacher and the Curriculum.
Ibadan: Tejama Gen Enterprise Audet, M. (2010).
25 ways to be more self reliant today.
http://hubpages.com Retrieved on the 5th January 2010 Convention on Human Rights, on UK citizens Law Teacher www.lawteacher.net Retrieved 17th March 2010 Coser, L.A. (1968).
Conflict: The Social Aspect.
New York: Fresh Press Deceeco, J. P. (1968) The psychology of learning and instruction, New York: Prentice- Hall English Bill of Rights (1689).
The Internet Modern History Source Book www.ask.com Retrieved 2nd April 2010 French Declaration on the Rights of Man and Citizen (1789).
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online Retrieved 20th April 2010 Frost, J. L. & Rowland, G. T. (1969).
Curricula for the Seventies.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company Good, C. V.
(ed.)
(1959).
Dictionary of Education New York: McGrawhill Book Co. Hicks, D. (1997).
Conflict resolution and human rights education, in G.J.
Andreapoulous and R.P.
Claude,.
(Eds).
Human rights education for the 21st century.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press Horton, P. B. and Gerald R. L. (1978).The Sociology of Social Problems.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall http://www.eruptingmind.com http://www.123helpme.com http://www.homeschoolresourcecentre.net Inyang-Abia, M. E. & Esu, A. E.O.
(1992).
Social Studies Technology, Methods & Media for Nigerian Schools and Colleges A Monograph Jack, S. (1998) Assess the impact of the Human Rights Act 1998, incorporating the European JDPC (2000).Know your Rights as a Nigerian, an African and a World Citizen Ijebu-Ode: JDPC Johan Burton (1990): Conflict: Resolution and Prevention.
London: Macmillan Pub.
Kissock, C. (1981).
Curriculum Planning for Social Studies Teaching.
New York: John Wiley & Sons Lawal, M.B.
(2002a).
Globalisation and Nigeria’s natural heritage: a curse or blessing?
Journal of SOSSAN (2) 2 Lawal, M. B. Ed.
(2002b)..
Citizenship Education: A General Studies Text for Tertiary Institutions Lagos: Leo Prints Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2003).
Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education.
Lagos: A Triads Associate Lawal, M. B.
& Raufu, S.A. (2007).
Peace Studies and Conflict Resolution: Basic Concepts and Issues.
Lagos: Raytel Comms.
Ltd. Magna Carta (1215).
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online Retrieved 20th April 2010 Marris, P.(1994).
Attachment across the life cycle London: Routledge 12 Morris, R.V.
& Obenchain, K. M. (2003).
Three Methods of teaching Social Studies through the Arts http://www.quasar.ca/css Retrieved 15th January 2010 NCSS (1992).
Testing and Evaluation of Social Studies Students Social Education55 (5) 284-293 NERDC (1998).
National Policy on Education Abuja: NERDC Press NTI (1992).
NCE/DLS Course Book on Social Studies Cycle 3 Module 7 Kaduna: NTI Obebe, J.
B.
(1990).
Development of Social Studies Education in the Nigerian School Curriculum Lagos Education Review 6(1) Dec. 124-134 Ogundare, S. F. (1988).
Curriculum development: A description of the development of national curriculum for primary Social Studies in Nigeria.
Educational Studies 14 (1) 45-50 Ogundare, S.F.
(2000).
Foundations of Social Studies: A Handbook of Concepts and Principles of Social Studies Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press Osakwe, E. O.
& Itedjere, P. O.
(1993) Social Studies for tertiary students in Nigeria, Enugu: New Age Publishers 16th March 2010 PWDAI (2009).
Human Rights www.newzealand.govt.nz Quartey, S. M. (1984).
A Method Book for Social Studies Teachers.
Lagos: Orit Egwa Ltd. Rodney, W. (1972).
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa London: Bogle L’Overtune Shanker, R. (1996).
Diversity and development.
Development Express 96-05 Canada: CIDA Shanker, R. (1998) ).
Culture and development.
Development Express 98-04 Canada: CIDA.
Sokefun, J.
A. et.al.
(2008).
Law 421: Human Rights Law Lagos: NOUN Udoh, E. N. E.(1989).
SOSAN and Development of Social Studies Education in Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Social Studies.
54 (1) Jan. 23-27 UN (2002).
Fact Shee ts on World Sustainable Development Paris: UN US Constitution and Bill of Rights (1791) Encyclopaedia Britannica Online Retrieved 20th April 2010 www.thinkexist.com (2010) www.thefreedictionary.com (2010).
The Freedictionary Retrieved on the 24th February 2010 Wikipedia (2010).
Social Problems http://www.wikipedia.org Retrieved on the 23rd April Zantman I. William (1999).
Conflict Resolution in Africa.
Washington: The Brookings Institution 13 PED 130: INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL STUDIES Course Developer: Dr. M. B. Lawal National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Writer: Dr. M. B Lawal School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor: prof B. J. Obebe Faculty of Education University of Lagos Akoka Nigeria Programme Leader: Dr Timothy James School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator: Dr F. F. Fatimeyin School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 14 MODULE 1: FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1: Meaning of Social Studies Unit 2: Historical Background of Social Studies Unit 3: Philosophical Background of Social Studies in Nigeria Unit 4: Social Studies and other Disciplines Unit 5: Values of Learning Social Studies UNIT 1: MEANING OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: Social Studies Defined 3.2: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Effective teaching and learning of Social Studies at any level demands a detailed but not lopsided understanding of the meaning of the subject in such a way that the bias of training does not influence the way a teacher ends up handling the subject in class.
In this Unit, which happens to be your first contact with this course material, it is expected that you will be familiarised with the definitions of the subject as supported by contemporary practitioners of the subject.
The various 15 confusions that have characterised the definitions of the subject based on the professional biases of teachers handling the subject in our schools will be cleared.
This will therefore give you the chance of getting acquainted with the details of what an ideal definition of Social Studies should be.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify definitions that are not compatible with the nature and focus of Social Studies.
2.
Give a concise definition of Social Studies which represents its value-laden nature and focus.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: What Social Studies is Not The circumstances surrounding the introduction of the subject, Social Studies into Nigeria can be identified as one major factor that has influenced the way the subject has been variedly defined in the past years.
The early practitioners of the subject allowed their professional background and preparation to influence what they perceived and taught as Social Studies.
Lawal and Oyeleye (2003) in support of this view remarked that the definitions, nature and scope of the subject became so restricted to the confinements of the single discipline purview of the Social Sciences.
To some of the practitioners in this category, Social Studies was defined as “amalgamation of all knowledge of the arts and social sciences, in terms of history, geography, political science and sociology.
Quartey (1984) remarked that the protagonists of this view argue that knowledge is one and indivisible and that it is only for convenience that it has been divided into subject compartments.
Curriculum labelled on this view only ended up departmentalising knowledge by selecting assortment of topics from the Social Sciences.
This can only compel the teachers holding this view to limit their selection of topics related to their discipline, with emphasis on such topics at the neglect of other topics unless other specialists can be found to handle other aspects of the curriculum.
16 Some other practitioners of the subject have equally defined Social Studies as the study of the relationship between man and his environment.
As an adjunct, they it is how man influences the environment and how the environment influences man.
Quartey (1984) observes that this view has strong geographical and sociological connotations.
These standpoints present the false notion that Social Studies has nothing new to offer.
By presenting Social Studies in subject compartments, it attempts to negate the importance attached to the attainment of unity of knowledge.
Teachers who had this perception of the subject’s definition, taught Social Studies purely for knowledge acquisition.
This approach to the definition of the subject does not adequately emphasise the affective domain of learning as it merely focuses on the cognitive orientations of the subject.
Though none of these definitions can be an acceptable definition of Social Studies, each contains some elements which an ideal definition of the subject should contain.
Again, one cannot deny that Social Studies deals with facts derived from interpersonal and man-land relationship, but it is wrong to assume that it focuses on a body of precise memorable facts about man and the environment.
This is because Social Studies is not a discipline in which academic selfishness is exhibited or promoted.
That is, a discipline in which a teacher seizes opportunity to emphasise his/her own area of specialisation at the expense of the real content of the subject (no compartmentalisation of knowledge).
This position will lead us into looking at what an ideal definition of the subject should read like.
3.2: What Social Studies is Notable scholars have defined Social Studies in ways that confirm the subject as a value-laden discipline.
For instance, Frost and Rowland (1969) defined the subject as essentially studies of human relationship, like human to human, human to institutions, human to physical environment and human to value systems.
This implies that the subject is one that encourages attention to be given to the process of living and working together, using of the environment to met basic human needs, customs, institutions, values and life situations, cultural heritage and its dynamic on-going characteristics.
17 Quartey (1984) in his own definition of Social Studies describes the subject as a “study that equips the youth with tools necessary in solving personal and community related problems”.
Thus defined, Social Studies will not mainly aim at giving out knowledge, but it will equally emphasise on inculcating a certain distillate knowledge which will assist humans in acquiring the tools necessary for life.
Such tools are knowledge, values, attitudes and skills.
These tools are expected to assist the learner in solving both personal and community related problems.
The National Council for Social Studies in the United States of America has officially defined subject as: An integrated study of the social sciences and humanities to promote civic competence and help young people develop the ability to make informed and reasoned decisions as citizens of culturally diverse, democratic society in an inter dependent world.
(NCSS 1992) This implies that the goal of Social Studies purely revolves around citizenship education, education for cultural integration and sustainable living.
Social Studies can therefore be described as a discipline which attempts to modify or change the learners’ behaviours in the directions of acceptable values and attitudes through a process of studying human beings relationship with his or her environment and with the desire to provide solutions to various complementing problems in order to ensure his/her survival, having been equipped with the necessary tools such as values, attitudes, skills and knowledge (Lawal,1993).
As a social subject, it is more inter-disciplinary, more concerned with skills development and more normative.
It is a field of study in which content and prupose focus on relationships.
It provides knowledge, attitudes, values and skills that enable people understand better their physical and human environments in order to act or behave as responsible citizens.
Its primary purpose is to help young people develop the ability to make informed and reasoned decisions for the public good as citizens of a culturally diverse, democratic society in an interdependent world.
18  3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Give any two definitions of Social Studies which you are convinced will unacceptable to the contemporary practitioners of the subject.
2.
What is Social Studies from your point of view as a teacher in training?
4.0: CONCLUSION The foregoing reveals that attempts at defining Social Studies can be fraught with misconceptions and professional biases.
However, the correct definition of Social Studies will basically present it as a discipline that deals with man’s problem of survival.
The focus of the definition should nevertheless not one that focuses on the problem per se but on how to prepare man to confront such problems.
Any definition of the subject that cannot make this happen should be regarded as one of those that depict what Social Studies is not.
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit you have learnt that the area of specialisation a teacher handling Social Studies in schools is capable of influencing his perception of what the subject is.
However, those who present the subject as amalgamation of social sciences and humanities could be described as scholars who stopped mid way while trying to do justice to the task.
Rather, Social Studies should be defined as a discipline that allows the learners to study people as they interact with one and other, as they meet their needs for survival and comfort, develop their unique life styles, work out problems of group living as they reflect on the knowledge, beliefs, environmental characteristics and tides of circumstances that have brought them to their present status and are likely to propel them into the future.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Convince a group of practicing teachers of Social Studies that some definitions of the subject exist which cannot be acceptable by experts and give them an opportunity to become familiar with some of those definitions that support the value-laden nature of the subject.
19 7.0: REFERENCES/SUGGESTED READINGS Frost, J. L. & Rowland, G. T. (1969).
Curricula for the Seventies.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company NCSS (1992).
Testing and Evaluation of Social Studies Students Social Education55 (5) 284-293 Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2003).
Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education.
Lagos: A Triads Associate Quartey, S. M. (1984).
A Method Book for Social Studies Teachers.
Lagos: Orit Egwa Ltd. 20 UNIT 2: HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in United States of America 3.2: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in Britain 3.3: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in Africa 3.4: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in Nigeria 3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Social Studies as a discipline of study cannot be described as a casually conceived subject that just happened by accident.
Rather, it is part of an inheritance and a tradition that requires citizens to function efficiently and effectively in a democratic society.
In this Unit you will have an opportunity to read about the development of Social Studies both from global and national perspectives.
This will involve a review of the discipline’s historical development in different key nations, the circumstance leading to its development in such nations and the interactive effects of such developments on the growth of the discipline in other countries across continents.
Social Studies within the past hundred years can be said to have developed in different parts of the world through relatively similar goal, but due to series of events which have been 21 peculiar to the different nations sharing the interest.
Social Studies has come to be seen in different countries as a tool for national development.
Some of the countries where the Social Studies thoughts have greatly developed and blossomed in the past years include United States of America, Britain and Africa with special reference to Nigeria.
2.0: BEHAVIOURAL OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe the origin of Social Studies in the United States of America.
2.
Describe the origin of Social Studies in Britain.
3.
Describe the origin of Social Studies in Africa 4.
Describe the origin of Social Studies in Nigeria.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in the United States The United States of America appeared to be the “mother” country of Social Studies, and no wonder Obebe (1990), commented that Social Studies first appeared as a curriculum of the educational system of United States of America (USA) within the first two decades of the 20th century.
He further remarked that although it was a stormy and difficult birth, distinguished scholars like John Dewey, George Counts, Edger Wesley, Harold Rugg and Earle Rugg, were the midwives.
Thomas Jesse who was the Chairman of National Education Association Committee on Social Studies which issued its final report as part of a major review of the re-organization of secondary education in (1917) has been identified as one of the first to use the term “Social Studies” in its present sense.
22 Social Studies thought started developing in the United States of America in the early 1900 as a reaction to the tremendous numerous human problems prevailing at that particular period.
Some of these problems were basically social and political but purely as a result of the civil wars which Americans went through and were just getting over.
Some of these problems were seen as cogs in the wheel of all efforts at ensuring the evolution of a pluralistic and modernized democratic state.
By 1921, a national association called National Council for Social Studies (NCSS) whose membership is opened to person or institution interested in Social Studies was formed.
This Council charged itself and its members with the responsibility of working towards a better understanding of Social Studies and its importance in developing responsible participation in social, political and economic lives.
The NCSS has since then been playing prominent roles in the development and wider acceptance of Social Studies across the world.
The organization has written several position statements on the basic rationale for Social Studies education and curriculum guidelines.
Through the effort of NCSS, various task forces were set up to review the scope, content and sequences of Social Studies.
This has really influenced the evolutionary development of Social Studies in American Schools.
Events in the world scene, such as the Russian launching of Sputnik (1957) and American internal social problems of the 1960s gave birth to the “new Social Studies” that began in the 1960s.
During this period, curriculum materials of this new Social Studies were designed to teach students both the concepts and methods of inquiry used by historians and social scientists for generating knowledge.
Many teaching aids were developed and employed in the teaching of concepts and in the formulation of generalizations to promote effective teaching of Social Studies.
By the seventh decade of the twenty century, the alarming rates of crimes, divorce and illegal use of drugs on large scale heightened the interest of the Americans in Social Studies.
At this time they had started seeing Social Studies as a catalyst of social change.
Hence, the discipline started focusing on relevance to social problems and self-realization.
They now felt there was 23 an urgent need for the school to prepare citizens to deal with some of the identified inevitable problems.
It is however, important to note that in the United States of America, there is no national Social Studies syllabus for all schools.
Each school district writes its own Social Studies syllabus.
Social Studies in American scene as observed by Obebe (1990) does not have a static structure.
It has transformed from citizenship education for national development by enlarging the vision and meaning of citizenship to include not only the local community, the state and the nation, but also the global community.
This is in recognition of the fact that all human beings live in a multi- boundary world; not simply a world of nation-states, but one with a diversity of worldwide systems in which all people affect and are affected by others across the globe.
The recognition of the dynamic nature of Social Studies in United States of America is also being influenced by the fact that humanity is increasingly threatened by problems that cannot be solved by actions taken only at the national level.
Social Studies in the United States of America today can therefore be said to be focusing on the reduction of, pressures, social and environmental problems which are of national and international concerns, with contents usually drawn from a variety of discipline-interdisciplinary approach.
Students are being taught to think globally as they act locally.
Learners are taught in ways that make learning active, interactive, hands on and engaging.
It must be noted that any society, which intends promoting democratic discipline through Social Studies education, requires individuals who are willing and able to participate effectively in the solution of common problems.
They must also be willing at times to take decisions which demand compromise among different points of view.
This is important for society to develop towards desired goals.
This is the idea of Social Studies in the United State of America.
While it is true, that other subjects also contribute towards the development of desirable goals in the youths, Social Studies is viewed as bearing the greater responsibility.
This is because Social Studies deals directly with human problems and tries to shape the behaviours of individuals.
24  3.2: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in Britain There is very little evidence of the existence of Social Studies before the 1930s in Britain and other European countries.
What could be regarded as the Social Studies content at that time included materials from the Economics and Political Science, which were then taught as Civics (Ogundare 2000).
This view is in line with what Lawton and Dufour (1914) as quoted by Obebe (1990) observed through a remark that, There is little evidence of the existence Social Studies in the curriculum at the beginning of twentieth century, although history and geography (which were fairly established in the elementary and grammar school by the1920s) would sometimes include materials generally referred to as “civics”.
The range was extremely restricted with much of the learning being by rote.
However, Social Studies thought itself was known to have had initial setbacks in the history of British educational system.
By 1926, there was a criticism of the content of the school curriculum through the Hadow Report.
The report pronounced that the general character of teaching should take account of the pupils’ natural and social environments.
This implies the desire for a curriculum that is socially relevant and capable of equipping the young ones to go out and become adults in an industrialized society.
The report also noticed some elements of indoctrination in what was being taught in schools, e.g, children were taught to “honour the queen” ‘run away from every police man, etc.
This therefore marked the beginning of a more dynamic and affective thought in the British Educational system, which Social Studies exponents later capitalized upon.
The advent of the Second World War which heralded some war problems that later had adverse effects on the British citizenry also heightened the chances of this dynamic thought.
The World War II raised the concern for constructing a better society from the 25  sad experiences of the war.
To resolve this post-war problem of adjustment being faced by the citizens, more interest was shown in Social Studies.
This was because the content of the school curriculum was identified as capable of helping to construct a better society out of the catastrophic one for the emerging Britons.
British educators therefore saw a liberal education as a way to bring about greater understanding of human kind.
The thought of Social Studies for inclusion in the school curriculum became more prominent as it was recognized as capable or helping the pupils and adults become socially conscious and responsible members of their society.
Hence, by 1944, the Social Studies curriculum emerged during the establishment of secondary education for all, when the school leaving age was raised from 14 to 15years and teachers had to be re-trained, as pointed by Lawton and Dufour 1974.
Between 1945 and the early 50s there was therefore a tremendous growth in the thought of Social Studies and British Schemes were developed on integrated approach to the subject.
These growing thoughts were reflected in the series of teachers’ handbooks that were produced in Social Studies.
For instance, by 1945, the movement produced a document in which Social Studies was going to be taught as a common core course for the younger ones.
The Social Studies programme that emerged during this period however faced a lot of resentment from subject specialists like the historians and geographers, who saw nothing special in the growing thoughts of subject.
They felt unsecured because of continuous spread of the subject.
This resentment did not allow the teaching of the subject to further develop especially between the late 1950s and 1960.
By the early 1960s there was a revival of interest in Social Studies as a result of the recommendations of the Crowther Report of 1959 and the Newton Report of 1963.
The two demanded that school curricula should be relevant to industrialised and changing society.
There therefore that thought which wanted Social Studies to focus on how to equip the youth to become well-trained adults in an industrialised society.
Since then Social Studies 26  has received more attention in the British school curriculum.
By 1968, an important year for Social Studies, key books and curriculum projects on the subject emerged.
The dynamic growth of the British society and advancement in technology have all combined to improve the thoughts of Social Studies in Britain to the extent that the focus of the discipline has shifted and subject is now seen as Modern Studies with its contents including living in the community, living with others, urban life and learning.
From the foregoing one could say that the general objectives of British Social Studies course may be seen as developing in children a more critical and balanced social awareness.
The new Social Studies in Britain emphasizes insights, concepts and generalizations partially derived from the social science.
3.3: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in Africa Discussion on Social Studies thought in the United States of America and Britain without Africa as a continent may be seen as an incomplete exercise because, Social Studies growth and development has been a universal phenomenal.
(Lawal & Oyeleye, 2003).
A close look at the development of historical thought of Social Studies in the U.S and Britain will reveal that, it has had a great influence on Social Studies thought in Africa (Lawal 2003).
Social Studies in Africa is a fairly recent curriculum innovation coming after 1960 in the wake of independence.
During this period, most African countries were European colonies.
They faced a problem of educating their citizens in European values, which had already been included in the curricula of African schools.
The educational policies of the colonial government were formulated to serve the needs of the colonial masters.
Teaching was geared towards training Africans who would be able to serve the interest of the colonial government.
Africa indigenous values, attitudes and skills were neglected.
However colonial education had some aspects of Social Studies.
These were in form of general knowledge, religion, and moral instruction.
These were taught as Civics and Government.
History, Geography and Government were considered paramount teaching 27  school subjects during the colonial period to achieve the goals and objectives.
Good children upbringing was emphasized by colonial masters as a tool making them submissive to colonial rule.
At the attainment of independence by some African countries in 1960, colonial education came under very severe attack by the same colonially educated Africans.
The British system of education was described as one geared towards separating the Nigerian child from his/her cultural values, instead of developing positive values in him/her.
The most important areas which were of greater concern to both the leaders and the generality of Africans were the educational systems and curriculum development.
By 1967, more concrete international concern was shown in the development of Social Studies thoughts in Africa, especially as a thing of continental concern.
So at an international conference held at Queen’s College, Oxford, United Kingdom, the introduction of Social Studies as a formal school subject was proposed, and this conference led to the important and historic 1968 Mombassa Conference held in Kenya.
The Mombassa Conference which was sponsored by Educational Development Centre (EDC) Newton, USA and Centre of Curriculum Renewal in Educational Development Overseas (CREDO), London, laid the foundation for an understanding of the meaning of Social Studies and an application of Social Studies in Africa.
The conference deliberated on the issues surrounding the development of a new Social Studies curriculum for different countries of Africa.
Some of the thoughts which the conference focused on included the philosophy of Social Studies, problem of teacher training, resource materials development and acquisition as well as evaluation techniques.
There were representatives from eleven African countries viz.
Nigeria, Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.
The major decision reached was that new curricula for Social Studies for schools in Africa, starting with the primary schools must be developed.
Each country representative in consultation with the permission of her government was to set up a Social Studies 28  committee to consider formulating content and developing materials for Social Studies in her country.
The conference also set in motion the creation a year later of a permanent African international Secretariat based in Nairobi, Kenya called African Social Studies Programme (ASSP) which was later renamed the African Social and Environmental Studies Programme (ASESP).
The organization was charged with the responsibility of co-ordinating further development of Social Studies in African continent.
Hence, it advocates an integrated approach to the teaching of Social Studies and this has greatly influenced future thoughts about the subject.
Such thoughts have included cultivation of national aspirations, love of ones’ country and responsible citizenship.
African countries that embraced these thoughts have been developing other thoughts in the discipline, depending on the nature of their national problems.
For instance, with the end of the civil war in Nigeria, and the complementary problems of such war, Social Studies has been seen as capable of playing a unique role in giving the new breed of Nigerians firm base in national consciousness and integration.
To crown it all, the new trends in the development of African Social Studies is the provision of opportunities for looking into the future while taking into consideration the global issues which involve international relations among nations of the world.
For example, African Social Studies has recognized the need to pay careful attention to the promotion of democratic and technological value in order to be able to move along with change in the political, economical and technological systems of many countries of the world.
29  3.4: Development of Social Studies Thoughts in Nigeria Discussion on developments generally in various countries of the world may have little or no significant meaning without particular reference to Nigeria; a country with the most populous black race in the African continent and the whole world.
Social Studies as an integrated discipline was not in existence during the colonial era in Nigeria (1840-1960).
What was found in the primary and post primary schools in the country was the teaching of a kind of curriculum called “General Knowledge” (Udoh, 1989).
Of course, the Nigerian child was therefore being educated outside his/her own environment, his/her society and culture.
It was more appropriate at that time to know and explain concepts from European examples.
The development of Social Studies in Nigeria however came earlier than those of other countries in Africa.
This was because as early as 1958, the Ohio state University in the United States of America had sponsored some Nigerians for training programmes in Social Studies.
The arrival of the recipients of such training programmes greatly influenced their thoughts about Social Studies.
For instance, they perceived the social ills that accompanied Nigeria’s transition from colonial era to independence.
They discovered the high rate of acculturation among Nigerians and the rate at which the nation’s cultural traditions were breaking down.
They therefore, felt that the only way to salvage the country was to train the young ones in a manner that would provide them with opportunities to catch up with the new problem of change (Lawal, 2003).
This pattern of Social Studies thoughts was also complemented with an earlier effort at introducing the subject on an experimental basis in the Northern Nigeria teacher training institutions as a formal school subject.
However, between 1964 and 1965, Social Studies had been introduced into Nigeria through the Northern Education Project and the Ayetoro Comprehensive High School Project of Western Nigeria.
During this same period, the then Western Nigeria Ministry of Education began preparation for the propagation of the subject by convening a conference and agreeing to an outline of the Social Studies 30  syllabus for secondary schools classes I and II.
This was later assigned to the Department of Social Studies in Ayetoro Comprehensive High School with the assistance of the Ford Foundation Aid and the Comparative Education Study and Adaptation Centre (CESAC).
The experimental teaching of Social Studies did not experience a total success in the Eastern Nigeria due to the civil war.
The Northern states’ education committee of the Interim Common Services Agency (after the creation of six states from the existing Northern States), however made a decision that Social Studies should be introduced into schools and colleges in the Northern states.. By 1969, Social Studies department was firmly established in the Institute of Education, Ahmadu Bello University in Zaria.
In that very year, a national curriculum conference was held in Lagos and this gave a better national recognition to the subject as a means of achieving national objectives of education.
1970 witnessed another tremendous position change in Social Studies as materials produced for primary and teacher’s colleges in the Northern states were out and the CESAC’s book were modified and refined.
More states such as Lagos, Kwara and Kaduna began to introduce the subject in 1971.
Representatives from the East Central State Ministry of Education also attended Social Studies Association of Nigeria (SOSAN) Conference in 1971 with the full support for the teaching and learning of the subject.
With the first National Curriculum Workshop held in Ibadan under the sponsorship of the Nigeria Education Research Council (NERC), the first ever National Social Studies Syllabus for primary schools was produced.
Concepts, nature, objectives, teaching strategies, teaching aids, evaluation techniques were discussed at the conference.
Based on the necessity for training of pre-service Social Studies teachers in primary schools, the Nigeria Education Research Council (NERC) produced syllabus for teachers colleges in 1972 and the Institute of Education, ABU Zaria introduced the subject into its Post Graduate Diploma in Education (PGDE) programme.
In the same year, a degree 31  course in Social Studies in ABU, Zaria and Nigeria Certificate in Education (NCE) programme in Advanced Teacher’s College Sokoto was introduced in 1973.
1974 and 1975 witnessed another development at the Institute of Education, University of Lagos, where the subject was introduced at Associateship and NCE levels.
1976 was another year when Universal Free Primary Education was launched throughout the country, and the teaching of Social Studies in the primary schools replaced separate subjects of the social sciences.
It became compulsory in teacher’s colleges.
In 1978, two- year Bachelor of Education (B.Ed) degree programmes in Social Studies was also introduced at ABU, Zaria.
By 1980, the discipline of Social Studies was offered at all levels of our educational system and the National Policy on Education made it a core subject in primary and junior secondary schools.
In 1981, the NERC now Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC), thought it wise to review the National Primary Social Studies Curriculum Guide which was produced in 1971.
The revised guide was published by the Federal Ministry of Education in 1983”.
1981 and 1984 witnessed another rapid development because many more universities started post-graduate degree programmes in Social Studies.
Typical example of such institutions included: Ife, Ibadan, Ilorin, Lagos, Nsukka and Jos.
The Joint Consultative Committee (JCC) also approved the Junior Secondary School Social Studies Syllabus.
(Udoh, 1989).
The National Teacher’s Institute did not only produce the Grade II Social Studies Syllabus and texts, it also went ahead to write course books on Social Studies for NCE for Distance Learning System, the distribution of which started in January 1990.
Almost all colleges of education now offer Social Studies in their current programmes.
Degree and post-graduate programme in Social Studies are now being offered in more than ten universities in Nigeria.
The skepticism on the nature, scope and philosophy of Social Studies has been over to some extent.
It is now a compulsory subject in the first nine years of a Nigerian child’s education courtesy of the new 9-year Basic Education Curriculum launched in 2007.
32  3.5: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Give the name of the “mother country” of Social Studies/ 2.
Highlight the role of NCSS in development and growth of Social Studies in the United Stated of America.
3.
Briefly highlight the relationship between the effect of the 2nd World War on Britain and the growth of Social Studies in the country.
4.
List some of the benefits of the Mombassa Conference on the growth of Social Studies in Africa.
4.0: CONCLUSION The growth of Social Studies across the different parts of the world has been informed by a variety of reasons and factors.
For instance, it has been used as a partial solution for social problem in many countries of the worlds.
In Germany, it was initiated after the Second World War, as a means of developing a new political order.
In British, Social Studies was used to legitimatize the teaching of social sciences particularly sociology, while preparing students for their role in the society.
By the Butler Act of 1944, Britain eventually looked up to the integrated Social Studies programme as an avenue for promoting in her youths the socio-cultural values which Britain tradition has held in esteem for a longtime.
In United States of America (USA), Social Studies has continued its primary function of preparing students for effective citizenship in democratic society and instilling patriotic ideals in the young ones (Kissock, 1981).
Among the African nations, Social Studies has been used to improve the self image of people in the society after a colonial rule and heritage.
In Sierra Leone, it was used to learn ways of improving the economy.
In Ghana, it was aimed at transforming the society, especially political culture.
In Ethiopia, it came to inculcate the concepts of nationalism, unity and inter-dependency 33 among citizenry of a new nation with diversed population.
In Nigeria, it is aimed at helping to build a foundation for a democratic society.
In spite of many conferences, seminars and workshops for Social Studies, the subject did not receive the blessing of so many schools in Nigeria immediately.
Some were scared because of its newness, or lack of understanding of its nature, scope, and dynamism.
Other saw the development as a great challenge to their discipline and therefore campaigned against it.
This necessitated the formation of Social Studies Association of Nigeria (SOSAN).
Several other organizations have since been formed to further promote effective teaching of the subject in Nigerian schools.
These organizations include National Association of Social Studies Educationists (NASSE) and Social Studies Teachers’ Association of Nigeria (SOSTAN).
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you have interacted with the various thoughts that influenced the development and growth of Social Studies as a discipline of study in schools in the different parts of the world with specific reference to the United States of America, Britain, Africa and Nigeria in particular.
The various factors that influenced such growth and development have been highlighted.
Chief of these factors were effect of wars on the content of nations’ educational system, the need to use curriculum content to emphasise and promote national and cultural values and build a firm base in citizens on issues of national consciousness and integration.
The role which the development of Social Studies in Africa played on its growth in Nigeria has equally been discussed with a remark that development of the subject in Nigeria came earlier than those of other countries.
Basically, the earliest recipients of Social Studies are Americans and ever since its development in the United States of America (USA), this has been instrumental to development of the subject in other parts of the world.
34 6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Establish the relationship between the history of Social Studies in Africa and the growth and development of the subject in Nigeria.
7.0: REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Kissock, C. (1981).
Curriculum Planning for Social Studies Teaching.
New York: John Wiley & Sons Lawal, M. B.
(2003).
Foundations of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2003).
Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education.
Lagos: A Triads Associate Obebe, J.
B.
(1990).
Development of Social Studies Education in the Nigerian School Curriculum Lagos Education Review 6(1) Dec. 124-134 Ogundare, S.F.
(2000).
Foundations of Social Studies: A Handbook of Concepts and Principles of Social Studies Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press Udoh, E. N. E.(1989).
SOSAN and Development of Social Studies Education in Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Social Studies.
54 (1) Jan. 23-27 35  UNIT 3: PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND OF SOCIAL STUDIES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Philosophical Background of Social Studies 3.2: Relationship between the Philosophical Background of Social Studies and the Realisation of the Objectives of Nigeria’s National Policy on Education 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Teaching Social Studies is a great and important responsibility.
Having become familiarised with the various thoughts that have influenced the development of Social Studies across the world and Nigeria in particular, it is also your responsibility to understand the philosophy behind the subject.
This is exactly what this Unit hopes to do for you.
It exposes you to the philosophical background of Social Studies in Nigeria- a philosophy that portrays a kind of discipline that has been very dynamic in nature and content ever since its introduction and your responsibility as teachers in 36 further this philosophy through your teaching of the recommended content areas and methodologies.
This Unit is also reflection of one’s belief in the fact that a relationship exists between the national goals of Nigeria and the objectives of teaching the subject Social Studies at all the levels of our educational system.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe the philosophical background of Social Studies in Nigeria.
2.
Establish the relationship between this philosophical background and the realisation of the objectives of Nigeria’s National Policy on Education 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Philosophical Background of the Social Studies Programme The introduction of Social Studies, all the world over, was usually characterized by the desire to use the subject to address contemporary national problems.
Likewise, the school as we all know has an obligation to provide a curriculum designed to develop effective living in the society.
Such a curriculum is expected to equip the leaner with skills, understandings, attitudes, habits and appreciations that will help contribute to this goal.
The Nigerian Social Studies Programme is not an exception in this as it shall be seen in this Unit.
It has a set of goals and objectives which one can confidently describe as being of direct relevance to the philosophy and objectives of Nigerian education.
The school, as an agency of the community and the society at large, supplements the home and other agencies, with which the child has contact.
To a greater extent than the other agencies, the school plans solely for the child.
In a democratic society, education must perform a positive and dynamic role in perpetuating and improving that society.
The school has an obligation to provide a curriculum designed to develop effective living in the society.
Such a curriculum 37  should equip the learner with skills, understanding, attitudes, habits and appreciations that will contribute to this broad goal.
All areas of the school programmes share the responsibility of advancing this objective, but the Social Studies has it as a primary function, to his/her environment; self-realization, human relationship, economic efficiency, and civic responsibility.
In this context, the Social Studies programme is defined in the school curriculum as the study of human beings and their interaction with their physical and social environments in the past, present, and emerging future.
Human relationships are studied as students investigate ways of developing their personalities and of living at home, in communities, and in other lands.
Emphasis is given to relationship among people, relationships between people and institutions, relationship between people and goods and services, and relationship between people and the earth.
Specific attention is given to ways of meeting basic human needs for food, shelter and clothing and to the efforts of humankind to solve social problem.
In short, the cultural heritage and its dynamic on-going characteristics are of primary concern in the Social Studies.
The philosophical background of the subject therefore emphasises that the teacher charges him/herself with the responsibility of forming citizens of localities, and the country.
By this, he/she is expected to package and deliver content areas that promote a balance between patriotism and citizenship.
This requires creating opportunities for learners to understand the world as a place full of people with different stories than their own and understand the conventions which bind them to others in order to participate fully politically and socially.
The open-ended nature of Social Studies encourages the discipline to accommodate social issues considered relevant to life.
By this opportunity, it emphasises integration and inter- relationship of knowledge.
Hence, Social Studies provides general education for social living through the processes it adopts, the social sciences and many other aspects of knowledge and learning from the primary sources of the content of the subject.
Furthermore, the dynamic nature of human environment is fortunately a major concern of Social Studies.
This also forms part of its philosophical background as it is meant to encourage learners to understand better and cope with the ever occurring changes in the political, social, 38  economic and other facets of life, so as to effectively face the challenges and opportunities in a world of rapid change.
The philosophical background of Social Studies equally creates vantage opportunity for the discipline to package a content that is integrated in nature, with its products becoming integrated individuals who can stand the test of time as traders, teachers, engineers, doctors, bankers, politicians, or whatever they choose to become.
It also encourages the making of learners to be socially relevant, economically viable and politically honest in a rapidly changing world.
The recognition of the importance of the foregoing is reflected in the process and content build up to the Social Studies curricula at most of the levels of Nigeria’s educational system.
For instance, the curricula of the subject has been spirally built using concentric cycles.
This is to reflect the fact that because the knowledge to be acquired by human beings do not come in separate fragments, they must therefore be passed on as a whole.
But this must be according to the level of maturity and capability of the learners.
3.2: Relationship between the Philosophical Background of Social Studies and the Realisation of the Objectives of Nigeria’s National Policy on Education The National Policy on Education (1998) Section 1, subsection 2 has vividly expressed the philosophy of Nigerian Education as being based on the integration of the individual into a sound and effective citizen with equal education opportunities for all.
Specially, the main objectives are aimed at building of: i. a free and democratic society; ii.
a just and egalitarian society iii.
a united, strong and self-reliant nation; iv.
a great and dynamic economy v. a land of bright and full opportunities for all citizens 39 In as much as one hopes that other subjects of study could play important roles in ensuring the realisation of this philosophy, we cannot overlook the specific and crucial role that Social Studies could play in laying a good and solid foundation for such task, particularly if you recall what makes the philosophical background of Social Studies as earlier highlighted in this Unit.
For instance, the NPE (1998) section 1 (2) emphasises that the quality of instruction at all levels has to be oriented towards inculcating some values which include: (a) respect for the worth and dignity of individuals; (b) faith in man’s ability to make rational decisions; (c) moral and spiritual values in interpersonal and human relations; (d) shared responsibility for the common good of society; (e) respect for the dignity of labour; and (f) promotion of the emotion, physical and psychological health of all children.
The recognition of these values in the National Policy on Education as being essential in the realisation of our national goals implies that a subject like Social Studies which is a value- oriented or affective based discipline, as presented in its philosophical background is capable of playing a key role in the task, especially if it is properly taught.
The question that needs to be asked here is, what happens to a child by the time most of the objectives of teaching Social Studies at the primary and post primary levels might have been achieved?
The answer cannot be far-fetched.
This is because as we all know the elements of Social Studies to include values and attitude acquisition; it becomes imperative that the subject can be regarded as one that would complement the quality of instruction emphasized by the policy.
For example, in order to achieve a Social Studies objective which concerns creating awareness and understanding of the evolving social and physical environment as well as its rational use and conservation, the teacher could be emphasising topics like physical environment, conservation of resources, our national economic life, human and resources management, etc.
The assumption 40 here is that if these topics are taught, cognitively and affectively, the learners can become more readily involved in the realisation of a national objective which concerns the building of a great and dynamic economy.
So also, teaching to achieve a Social Studies objective like developing a capacity to learn and to acquire certain basic skills, is also capable of helping to train a group of youths that can contribute to the building of a united, strong and self-reliant nation.
This is because some of the Social Studies topics they will be interacting with in the class are capable of making them become better observers, judges and analysts, and all these are essential for inter-personal relationship and communal co-operative living.
Again, in an attempt to teach to promote national identity and integration within Nigeria’s varied historical origins and inter-related cultures, a just and egalitarian society is being built, which incidentally is one of our national objectives.
This is because such the Social Studies teacher will teach to emphasize and inculcate the values of respect for the worth and dignity of the individuals in the learners.
Furthermore, in the course of teaching some Social Studies topics with the desire to contribute to the realisation of an objective which emphasises acquisition of relevant knowledge that is essential for personal development and positive personal contribution to mankind, the teacher will equally be contributing to the realisation of a national goal like the building of a free and democratic society as well as a strong and self-reliant nation.
This is because; students will learn that with freedom, one becomes more opportune to do a lot of things without a restraint condition which promotes self-development better.
With self development, self reliance is also being developed in the nation.
As for the national objective which emphasises the building of a land of bright and full opportunities for all citizens, the emphasis by a Social Studies teacher on the development of the right and positive attitudes and values, which can include, shared responsibility for the common good of all, respect for the dignity of labour, would facilitate the realisation of such national objective to a great extent.
41 However, it has to be pointed out that, Social Studies as a subject cannot single-handedly contribute to the realisation of the national objectives.
Rather, the realisation of its objectives can only contribute to the realisation of the national goals and objectives.
Hence, the philosophical background of the subject makes it one of the major subjects that can greatly influence the realisation of the nation’s philosophy of education and national goals as well as objectives.
The desire to relate the philosophical background of Social Studies to the NPE could therefore be said to be based on the recognition of the importance of establishing a link between the educational system of a given country and the fulfillment of the needs of the society.
The Nigerian National Policy on Education can be regarded as a by-product of the 1969 National Curriculum Conference which recognised among other things, the importance of Social Studies as a subject capable of being used to promote citizenship, knowledge about one’s community, nation and commitment to democratic rule.
3.3: Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What are the major features that can be used to describe the philosophical background of Social Studies?
2.
Highlight the objectives of Nigeria’s national Policy on Education.
4.0: CONCLUSION One could conclude that discussing the philosophical background of Social Studies demands a detailed understanding of factors that have influenced the introduction and growth of the subject.
The philosophical background of the subject therefore deals with the study of human relationships which encourage students to investigate ways of developing their personalities and of living at home, in communities and in other lands.
Emphasis is also given to relationship among people, relationship between people, relationship between people and institutions, relationship between people and goods and services and relationship between people and the earth.
Specific attention is also given to ways of meeting basic human needs for food, shelter and clothing and to the efforts of humankind at solving social problems.
42 5.0: SUMMARY This Unit has created a terrain for you to understand what makes up the philosophical background of Social Studies as a school subject.
The issue of relating the demands of a particular society, in terms of the problems it is aspiring to address, to the focus of Social Studies has been highlighted here as the major influence of the subject’s philosophical background.
The philosophical background of Social Studies emphasises that some problems exist which constrain the growth and survival of man and his society, and Social Studies as a subject requires the practice of problem solving, process of thinking and practice of citizenship skills such as gaining knowledge, processing information, examining values and beliefs as well as participation in problems resolution.
This philosophical background is equally capable of facilitating the realisation of part of the objectives of Nigeria’s national Policy on Education, especially if the practitioners of Social Studies allow themselves to be guided by such background.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Establish a relationship between philosophical background of the Nigerian Social Studies Programme and realization of the philosophy and objectives of Nigeria’s education as contained in the National Policy on education 7.0: REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Lawal, M. B.
(2003).
Foundations of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2003).
Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education.
Lagos: A Triads Associate NERDC (1998).
National Policy on Education Abuja: NERDC Press Ogundare, S.F.
(2000).
Foundations of Social Studies: A Handbook of Concepts and Principles of Social Studies Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press 43  UNIT 4: SOCIAL STUDIES AND OTHER DISCIPLINES CONTENTS 4.0 Introduction 5.0 Objectives 6.0 Main Content 3.1: Social Studies and the Social Sciences 3.2: Social Studies and the Arts 3.3: Social Studies and some other Disciplines 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION The discipline of Social Studies has been subjected to a variety of interpretations in terms of meaning, nature and scope over time.
This has been due to the circumstance of its introduction into the Nigerian educational system.
Its early recipients were either Arts or Social Sciences teachers who either saw nothing special in the subject or were afraid of what will later happen to their own areas of specialization once Social Studies becomes fully accepted.
This Unit therefore attempts to establish the similarities and dissimilarities between Social Studies and the other disciplines on one hand, and how these disciplines such as the Arts and Social Sciences have contributed to the building of the content areas of the new Social Studies.
44 This attempt will help clarify your thoughts either as practicing or pre-service teachers of Social Studies so as to promote better understanding of what the subject is and what its ideal focus and scope should be.
This is based on the writer’s belief in the principles of interconnectedness and interrelationship of academic disciplines.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to : 1.
Describe the relationship between Social Studies and the Social Sciences 2.
Describe the relationship between Social Studies and the Arts 3.
Describe the relationship between Social Studies and some other Disciplines 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Social Studies and the Social Sciences Good (1980) defines Social Sciences as the “branch of knowledge that deals with human, society, characteristic elements such as family, state, race, and with the relations and institutions involved in man’s existence, as a member of an organized community”.
It is a discipline in which subjects like Political Science, Economics, Geography, Anthropology, Sociology and even Psychology are distinctively studied.
They are policy sciences because they study and analyze the process of decision and choice with reference to available relevant knowledge and data as aid in the solution of peculiar and particular problems in the society.
In this situation, human beings are studied within a restricted perspective.
If our minds are quickly cast back to the synthesized definition of Social Studies earlier given, one would note that unlike the Social Sciences, Social Studies involves the investigation of human activity from a wider and more comprehensive perspective.
Political Science which is a Social Science is concerned with the study of the exercise of power.
Hence, the discipline is studied purposely to better understand the general principles on which government can be carried out successfully.
Learners are therefore exposed to those factors that impinge on the everyday life of every single inhabitant of the world.
Integration of political 45 science concepts in Social Studies provides students with the chances of learning about how people’s attitudes, idiosyncrasies and value judgment can be influenced.
Opportunities are provided through the discipline to study shades of political behaviours and theories that could be used to understand them.
If this knowledge is excluded from Social Studies content, the Social Studies students may become half-baked.
Concepts in Geography on the other hand allow Social Studies students to draw upon social and physical sciences while the students are studying distribution and spatial arrangements of natural and human phenomena.
The disciplines also afford the students the opportunity to study the functional relationship between human beings and land characters of areas and conditions as well as the processes of the earth’s surface, that is, air, water and the terrain.
When students offer the discipline, it assists them to understand alternatives available for future human settlement and demonstrate for them through maps, physical and human patterns on the earth’s surface.
Hence, the discipline of Geography can be described as one that is capable of helping Social Studies students to develop power of observation in field work and provides a context for understanding regional inter-relationships in Social Studies content.
The acquisition of geographical knowledge and skill assists Social Studies students greatly in the formation of enlightened opinions and making informed decisions on a wide range of community, regional and global issues.
Anthropology emphasizes human evaluation and systematic comparative analysis of socio- cultural data of ethnic groups.
Hence, concepts in anthropology avail Social Studies students the opportunity to have key insights into and understanding of, what it takes to be human.
Concepts from this discipline encourage Social Studies students to study all aspects of a culture system.
This is because culture is assumed to be an integrated whole.
Anthropology, therefore allows Social Studies students to collect data on all aspects of culture in terms of its history, religion, geography, economy, technology and language.
Economics concepts enable the Social Studies students to see human behaviour from a unique perspective.
They encourage them to focus on how people try to satisfy their virtually unlimited wants with limited resources.
Social Studies students are made to investigate the fact that there 46 are usually not enough natural and human resources to satisfy all of people’s wants.
Hence, the acquisition of skills of how people could use limited resources to produce, exchange and consume goods and services becomes a major rational for studying Economics concepts in Social Studies .
Sociology concepts are considered in Social Studies on the assumption that individuals need the group for their survival, and that their behaviour is largely shaped by group norms and sanctions It also assumes that the group equips individuals with the behaviour patterns and characters needed to adapt to their cultural and physical environments.
So students are afforded the opportunity of studying classes of phenomena and their common characteristics.
This encourages the students to avoid moral judgments about classes, cultures and societies being studied.
Lawal (2003) observes that a variety of subjects are related to Social Studies and the concepts which the subject draws from this multiplicity of discipline, help to improve the study of human beings which is the main focus of Social Studies.
This is because the discipline does not encourage the study of human beings in fragmented bits.
Hence, Social Studies as a single integrated subject borrows ideas from the Social Sciences, as well as the Arts and Humanities for the purpose of identifying human problems and making attempts to solve them.
The Social Sciences are primarily concerned with the building of theories, concepts and generalizations about human behaviours.
The interest here is purely academic with emphasizes on research.
Social Studies on the other hand, emphasizes the utilization of the built theories, generalizations and research findings through their integration and inter-relations with life experiences.
This implies that Social Studies tries to integrate the knowledge of Social Sciences with various experiences of life in an attempt to identify and provide solutions to societal problems necessary for human survival.
One could therefore say that, while the social sciences are concerned primarily with expanding the boundaries of knowledge and developing highly specialized scholars in fields like Geography, Economics, and Political Science, the Social Studies on the other hand is concerned with wide dissemination of information, the development of social and inquiry skills and the improvement of social attitudes as well as behaviours.
Although, Social Studies still draws its 47 materials/contents from the various social sciences, it also uses materials from the local community, current affairs and world problems that cannot be properly classified as belonging exclusively to any particular discipline in the Social Sciences.
It should be noted that Social Studies is by nature a practical-oriented discipline while social sciences are more theoretical in approach.
The purpose of Social Studies is not greatly concerned with learners acquiring what is done in Social Sciences but primarily to enable learners use information and knowledge to better understand the environment.
The medium of passing information and instructions in Social Sciences are highly specialized while Social Studies curriculum contents allow highest generous degree of flexibility, containing what is of paramount interest and of use to the learners.
Furthermore, the structure of Social Studies is integrated in nature, while Social Sciences are essentially of separate disciplines.
While the Social Sciences also deal with cultural heritage of skills, knowledge and understanding in the area of human relationship, the Social Studies through its teachers, link the growing boys and girls who are expected to maintain such heritage with it.
Social Studies is therefore a synthesis and a composite of the important generalizations, about human relationship and accrued problems, and instructions drawn from the Social Sciences together with facts needed to make these generalizations meaningful to learners (Ogundare, 2000).
Hence, one could not say that Social Science is Social Studies in totality or vice versa, rather Social Studies could be said to begin where the Social Sciences end.
3.2: Social Studies and the Arts Morris and Obenchain (2003) observed that individuals and societies reflect their humanity through cultures transmitted in the course of a multitude of artistic endeavours that often inspire and inflame emotions.
They however, feel that connecting students to the Social Studies through Arts may bring help, similar inspiration and emotion into the classroom.
By this observation and remark, it is not impossible to describe artistic endeavours such as visual and performing arts, music, dance and drama as part of the Social Studies curriculum.
This is because they could stand as models of the study of social phenomena in passionate, exciting and 48 highly educative ways.
They are also capable of encouraging reflective thinking which is a major goal of any good Social Studies programme.
By means of the arts in Social Studies, students connect to the topic under study in an emotion- filled genre.
The relationship between the Arts and the Social Studies could also be found in the fact that when Arts are brought into Social Studies, they facilitate learners’ ability to discover content and help them to interpret the past, compare it with the present and gather implications for the future in order to ensure human survival.
There is also a relationship between Social Studies and History as part of the Arts.
Ogundare (1990) opines that both subjects promote citizenship education and assist individuals with experiences from which they can plan intelligently as they develop mental discipline in learners.
They also assist in increasing learners’ awareness level about people and the importance of human relationship.
However, they could differ in their content areas.
For instance, while Social Studies study the community scientifically using a variety of inquiry-oriented techniques, with the ultimate goal of modifying noted inadequacies, History finds it difficult through its content to correct what is past, probably because of its focus.
This is why it is very difficult for history to teach current or impending socio-civic disabilities which fortunately can be handled by a discipline like Social Studies.
3.3: Social Studies and some other Disciplines The nature of Social Studies discipline which allows for human relationships to be studied through learners’ investigation into ways of developing individual personalities and ways of living at home, in communities as well as other lands, makes it quite multidisciplinary.
There is however, a great inseparable interrelationship among Social Studies, Social Sciences and other school subjects.
In Social Studies, emphasis is placed on the relationship among people, relationship between people and institutions, relationship between goods and services, and relationship between people and the Earth.
In short, the cultural heritage and its dynamic on-going characteristics are of primary concern in the Social Studies.
History, Geography, and Civics are therefore most 49 important in Social Studies with contents also drawn from economics, anthropology, sociology and other basic disciplines to deepen and broaden learners’ understanding of themselves and of people and their changing ways of living.
Thus, it is not out of place to say that Social Studies draws largely from a variety of other modern disciplines to make its learners have a good grasp of human beings’ problems of survival and attempt to provide corresponding solutions to such problems.
This is why Ajiboye (1999) observed that while it is easy to precisely talk about the content of geography, history economics, etc., it may be so easy to delineate the content of Social Studies.
The fact that any attempt to effectively teach Social Studies demands exposing learners to a variety of experiences about human being and his/her total interaction with his/her environment in its entirety implies that efforts will be made to relate with a variety of concepts to be drawn from various disciplines.
These disciplines provide relevant concepts, factors, generalization, theories, which are applied to human problems of survival in the course of learning Social Studies.
Some of the disciplines which provide the reservoir of contents for Social Studies to be used in an integrated manner are shown in the Figure 1 Anthropolo Geography gy Religious Philosophy studies Economics Health SOCIAL education STUDIES Political CONTENT Science Sociology Medicine Law Psychology History Sciences 50 3.4: Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Is there any relationship between the Social Sciences and Social Studies?
2.
Identify some of the concepts which the Arts and Social Sciences provide for the Social Studies learners in order to promote effective understanding and resolution of human problems of survival.
4.0: CONCLUSION The foregoing discussion is a reflection of the nature of relationship that exists between the Social Sciences and Social Studies.
It reflects that Social Studies learners make use of the concepts of Social Sciences in order to analyze and research into human problems within the society.
This is a view shared by both NCSS (1991) and Ogundare (2000).
They both affirmed that Social Studies education involves the acquisition of essential knowledge of history and social sciences with empahasis placed on information gathering from a variety of disciplines and experiences along with thinking, decision-making, communication, social integration and wise participation.
5.0: SUMMARY In this Unit, you will agree with the course material writer that you have been well groomed to understand that Social Studies as a discipline, has some relationships with the Social Sciences, Arts and the Humanities.
Their commonalities are in terms of concepts they provide for the Social Studies in order to get the learners to become more skillful in identifying and resolving human problems of survival.
It is therefore plausible to say that, in as much as any one of the Social Sciences, Arts or Humanities, can provide the core in the Social Studies curriculum; one can still conclude that none are adequate in themselves, hence, their integration to become Social Studies.
This helps to improve the study of human beings which is the main focus of Social Studies.
51 6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How useful can the Arts and Social Sciences be to a Social Studies teacher aiming to be highly functional in his or her teaching?
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajiboye, J. O.
(1999).
Social Studies Curriculum In A. Dada, The Teacher and the Curriculum.
Ibadan: Tejama Gen Enterprise Good, C. V.
(ed.)
(1959).
Dictionary of Education New York: McGrawhill Book Co. Lawal, M. B.
(2003).
Foundations of Social Studies.
A Monograph Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2003).
Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education.
Lagos: A Triads Associate Morris, R.V.
& Obenchain, K. M. (2003).
Three Methods of teaching Social Studies through the Arts http://www.quasar.ca/css Retrieved 15th January 2010 Ogundare, S. F. (1988).
Curriculum development: A description of the development of national curriculum for primary Social Studies in Nigeria.
Educational Studies 14 (1) 45-50 Ogundare, S.F.
(2000).
Foundations of Social Studies: A Handbook of Concepts and Principles of Social Studies Ibadan: Adesesan Graphic Press 52  UNIT 5: VALUES OF LEARNING SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Goals of Social Studies Programme 3.2: Objectives of Teaching Social Studies at Nigeria’s Primary School Level 3.3: Objectives of Teaching Social Studies at Nigeria’s Secondary School Level 3.4: Objectives of Teaching Social Studies in Nigeria’s Teacher Training Institutions 3.5: The Values of Social Studies 3.6: The Prospects of Social Studies 3.7: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION The circumstances surrounding the historical development of Social Studies in Nigeria created a lot of confusion as regards what the subject actually means and the purpose it has come to serve.
Majority of the teachers who initially embraced the subject at its inception did not therefore do much to make Social Studies interesting and attractive to the learners.
But you will agree with that your interactions with the preceding module and units have created a clearer picture of the subject is and how it should actually be defined to present its correct focus.
53 This Unit will further give an opportunity to appreciate the values and prospects of the subject so that while handling in the classroom you become more conscious of the need to teach it for both cognitive and affective learning.
The Unit therefore highlights the goals and objectives of the subject at the different educational level and explains the values and prospects of Social Studies which if properly understood and considered in the classroom would help increase students’ interest and sense of value in embracing the subject.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the goals and objectives of teaching Social Studies at different levels of Nigeria’s educational system.
2.
Highlight the values of teaching and learning Social Studies.
3.
Discuss the prospects of the subject.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Goals of Social Studies Programme Generally, the main goal of a Social Studies Programme should be to help students develop the ability to make decisions so that they can resolve personal problems and contribute to policy making processes.
But the goals might vary depending on what a nation wants her own Social Studies to achieve.
Social Studies is expected to help students find ways of acquiring the skills and values to deal with and shape the future, through the process of developing a positive perspective that will allow construction, planning, creativity and innovation.
The goals include: i. developing well informed and responsible citizen; ii.
developing children who would possess the ability to deal with questions of what ought to be?
And what can I do about it?
54 iii.
building attitudes and values that are consistent with society’s desires; iv.
developing in learners skills such as those involved in reporting, acquiring and classifying data (reflective thinking/inquiring skills).
v. developing the appreciation and understand of learners cultural heritage and its role in contemporary society.
vi.
acquisition of academic knowledge and skills related to the study of the human actions, and their consequences as they live individually as well as in groups and societies, in a variety of places and time tellings; and vii.
using the social sciences, humanities and the sciences to describe social phenomena.
3.2: Objectives of Teaching Social Studies at Nigeria’s Primary School Level Social Studies is being taught at the primary school level in Nigeria so as to: i. create an awareness and an understanding of the evolving social and physical environment as a whole, its natural man- made cultural and spiritual resources, together with the national use and conservation of these resources for development; ii.
develop a capacity to learn and acquire certain skills that are essential to the formulation of satisfactory professional life and the forming of sound judgment e.g.
(observation, analysis and inference); iii.
ensure the acquisition of knowledge that is relevant and regarded as an essential pre- requisite to personal and development as well as to a positive personal contribution to the betterment of mankind.
iv.
develop in the children positive attitudes to citizenship and a desire in them to make a positive personal contribution to the creation of a united Nigeria; 55 v. develop a sympathetic appreciation of the diversity and interdependence of all members of the local community and the wider national and international communities so that they would become aware of the problem of this country and the world in general; vi.
develop an appreciation in children, the nation’s cultural heritage and a desire to preserve such heritage.
3.3: Objectives of Teaching Social Studies at Nigeria’s Secondary School Level These include: i.
To develop a positive sense of cooperation, social and moral responsibility; ii.
To foster a basic understanding of the nation’s process of development through the study of the physical environment and social/political institutions, as well as the national economy and has it relates to other economies; iii.
To promote national identity and integration within Nigeria’s varied historical origin and inter-related cultures; and iv.
To develop an understanding of the world of science and of inter- relationship between nations.
3.4: Objectives of Teaching Social Studies in Nigeria’s Teacher Training Institutions Pre-service teachers are expected to learn Social Studies so as: i.
To develop in them the love of one’s country and positive attitudes to citizenship and a desire in them to lead others to a similar self awareness as teachers; ii.
To promote the sympathetic appreciation of the diversity and interdependence among peoples of all races, colours and creeds; iii.
To also use such opportunity to awaken the intellectual curiosity of students in identifying human problems of survival and trying to positively solve such problems.
56 iv.
To develop in students opportunities for inter-group actions in which people work for the common good of all, in order to build a healthy nation and world at large; v. To develop the inculcation of appropriate values of honesty, integrity, hardwork, fairness and justice at work and play, as ones contribution to the development of the nation.
vi.
To make learners became more responsive to the needs and problems of others so that they can act courageously towards bringing about changes that are in line with democratic ideals and processes of the society.
3.5: The Values of Social Studies Any discussion regarding the values of Social Studies demands a review of the set goals and objectives of the subject at the different levels of our educational system as earlier presented in this Unit.
The fact that these have earlier been highlighted makes the discussion here simpler to understand.
These goals and objectives could be seen as highly motivational for student’s interest in Social Studies to be increased.
The nature of Social Studies as a problem solving discipline makes it very essential for the development of any nation, especially if one accepts that no society is static.
This dynamic characteristic of every society is however fraught with so many alterations in the social system with accompanying problems that must necessarily be resolved if such society must progress.
Exposing learners to Social Studies content using the appropriate value – oriented strategies and techniques is therefore capable of promoting in them, the ethics of good and responsible citizenship.
In this case, students are more likely to commit themselves to active citizenship, particularly if they are effectively taught some concepts that are related and fall within the context of human problems of survival.
This will also prepare the learners for social responsibility within and outside the school environment.
Cognition of knowledge in Social Studies is capable of helping learners assess the implication of conditions within their immediate social environments face-to-face relationships such as friendship, family, school and religious, for making and implementing decisions to achieve their personal goals.
This could also be used to assess the implications of conditions beyond their 57 immediate social environments for the same purpose.
Learning the topics and concepts from which this knowledge is derived would provide avenue for the Social Studies students to learn how they choose to act now and in the foreseeable future, depending on the circumstances they find themselves.
Effective teaching of Social Studies can also assist learners greatly in the appreciation of the contributions of individuals and groups to human changing cultural heritage.
Consequently, it makes them develop the desire to foster attitudes that could help reduce tension and friction among groups and encourage cooperation among individuals as well as among groups and nations.
Learning Social Studies is a source of inspiration in children to love their country and appreciate their natural heritage.
The nature of learning activities in this case however matters.
The teacher who gives only opportunity for learners to recall the date of Nigeria’s independence would not facilitate the acquisition of this value in his/her students.
Rather, when students are exposed to our national symbols and heroes/heroines, with adequate analyses of their contributions conducted, students would normally grow up to want to show more appreciation for their country.
The nature of interaction and cooperative living recommended for use in Social Studies classrooms is capable of helping learners develop social attitudes and skills which promote conducive competition, self-respect, open-mindedness, tolerance and concern for the welfare of others.
Social Studies also provides its recipients with intellectual education which encourages the acquisition and utilisation of critical and reflective thinking as well as problem solving skills.
Learners are given opportunity to develop abilities needed for perceiving and investigating human actions systematically, consciously and adequately.
Through this kind of education students are able to conduct independent search for relevant information from a variety of sources (library, internet, directories, etc).
Inyang-Abia and Esu (1992) also observe that Social Studies as a school subject helps to evolve a just and human society.
That is, it develops learners who constitute a society where citizens can 58 act intelligently with respect to resolution of social problems.
They also maintain that the subject helps to meet the social needs of the leaners through the promotion of the development of social equilibrium and well integrated personality, relatively free of undue anxiety and who can tackle personal problems realistically.
Again, through Social Studies the child acquires knowledge of self, others, environment, community, state, country and world.
It provides learners with the chances of understanding the relationship between self, others and the environment, and unbiased attitudes towards self and others are also established through this.
Relationships between people are also improved, no matter what the location is from the neighbourhood scene to world scene.
Emotional stability is another value which Social Studies learners gain through their learning of the subject.
As they acquire academic knowledge and skills related to the study of motives, actions and consequences of human beings, actions and consequences of human beings’ actions in inter-group relationships, they learn and acquire what it takes to adjust, adapt and cope.
The subject also prepares the young ones on how to put into practice what they would have learnt in schools as they fulfill their obligations as citizens deciding and acting responsibly when confronted by personal and social issues and problems.
3.6: Prospects of Social Studies The foregoing values of the subject can be said to be susceptible to guaranteeing a better future for the subject if well taught.
This is because they reflect the fact that Social Studies is not a casually conceived subject that just happened by accident.
Rather, it is a discipline that came into existence as part of the nation’s history of development and growth.
It is therefore, possible to conclude that it reflects a nation’s traditions, and it shall continue to be redefined, modified and adapted to social forces that actually called it into creation, but with its original foundation remaining.
The field of Social Studies is changing and emerging, as are all other subject fields.
The Social Studies movements worldwide are expanding.
The objectives are becoming clearer.
Curricula now exist for different levels of educational system all over the world.
Classroom materials and activities continue to be refined at different educational fora.
59 The number of tertiary institutions offering Social Studies is increasing with more focus on teacher preparation unlike at the foundational stage.
The subject is also witnessing a variety of transformation.
While it is now modern studies in some countries, it is multi-cultural studies in others.
Some are even seeing it as Global Education and others are now calling it Citizenship Education.
New educational initiatives such as drug abuse education, population/family life education, consumer education and environment education are becoming major components of the New Social Studies order.
This pattern of transformation goes on to reiterate the readiness of a number of countries embracing Social Studies philosophy for use to address the problem that is peculiar to their own countries.
It is hoped that this reform will continue to evolve as more and more practitioners come up with reliable findings demanding integration into the existing Social Studies programmes.
3.7: Self Assessment Exercises 1.
State some of the goals of teaching Social Studies 2.
What are the values of learning Social Studies?
3.
State any two objectives of teaching Social Studies at the Junior Secondary level?
4.
Prepare a ten-item list of what you would have gained by offering Social Studies at the degree level in the university.
4.0: CONCLUSION The discussion on the values and prospects of Social Studies cannot but be said to have far reaching implications for its teacher.
It is therefore expected that teachers would have these values at the back of their minds while preparing and delivering the contents of the subject at whatever level they find themselves operating.
When introducing a topic, it will be important to identify for students several ways in which the subject matter of the topic can be relevant to their personal goals and the goals of the subject.
Get students to articulate the connections between their lives and the content of the lesson.
They would surely learn over time to perceive those connections on their own.
60 Interviews, surveys, case studies, fantasy trips, small-group research projects, role playing and future’s wheels are some of the instructional activities that could be employed to make learners gain fully the benefits of the subject.
5.0: SUMMARY The Unit has presented you with information relating to what makes the subject Social Studies quite important for both teacher and the learner.
The goals and objectives of teaching the subject at the different levels of Nigeria’s educational system have also been shared with you as essential components of meaningful teaching in the classroom.
The values and prospects of Social Studies were highlighted and it is ones belief that these will guide you as teachers to better handle the subject in your classroom.
6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Convince a history teacher in your school that your discipline Social Studies will be of high value to the students if they are allowed to offer it in the senior secondary level.
7.0: REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Inyang-Abia, M. E. & Esu, A. E.O.
(1992).
Social Studies Technology, Methods & Media for Nigerian Schools and Colleges A Monograph Lawal, M. B.
& Oyeleye, A. S. (2003).
Foundations and Principles of Social Studies Education.
Lagos: A Triads Associate 61  MODULE 2: SOME BASIC CONCEPTS IN SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1: Concepts and Generalisations in Social Studies Unit 2: Concepts of Growth and Development Unit 3: Concept of Self-Reliance Unit 4: Concepts of Peace and Conflict Resolution Unit 5: Concept of Social Problem UNIT 1: CONCEPTS AND GENERALISATIONS IN SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENTS 1.0: Introduction: 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Nature and Definition of Concepts 3.2: The Nature and Definition of Generalisations 3.3: Importance of Concepts and Generalisations 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 62 1.0: INTRODUCTION This Unit is an overview of the concepts and generalization from the field of Social Studies.
It is designed to provide the students with a conceptual fluency that will allow them to effectively develop and teach any Social Studies curriculum, and wherever possible students will be required to accurately apply these concepts.
As Social Studies in training you be in better position to understanding meanings of both concepts and generalisations; explore their relationship and use them in your class in the fruitful manner.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this unit, you should be able to: (i) Describe what concepts and generalizations actually mean.
(ii) distinguish between concepts and generalization (iii) List some examples of concepts and generalisations that can be used for effective teaching and learning of Social Studies (iv) mention the importance of concepts and generalisations in Social Studies teaching and learning.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: The Nature and Definition of Concepts Fraenkel (1973) defined concepts as mental construction invented by human actors to describe the characteristics that are common to a number of experiences.
Concept is a broad idea, an abstract word or phrase that needs developing by discussing and identifying its attributes.
A concept is a big idea.
Concepts are the categories we use to cluster information.
Concepts organize specific information under one label.
They are building blocks and links between facts and generalizations.
63 Mehlinger (1981) also defines a concept as the term used to group objects, events and processes which share essential characteristics.
It is also a category that makes a general case from any special instances.
ASESP (1994) further describes, concepts to be complex and abstract images and ideas, usually expressed as a single word, which concentrates and symbolises a large amount of information and generalisation considered to be important in a given field of study.
Simply put, concepts are abstract words employed in the categorisation of group of subjects, ideas, peoples, or events.
Concepts can be classificatory or connotative.
Classificatory concepts are those that refer to certain sets of characteristics which works on the premise that certain object, events, and individuals have some attributes in common.
There are two kind of classificatory concepts –conjunctive and disjunctive.
3.2: The Nature and Definition of Generalizations Closely related to concepts are generalisations.
Social Studies scholars have made several attempts to explain generalization.
Taylor (1941) attempted to define generalization as “a statement of a principle that is based upon the apparent relationship existing between or among a number of specific instances or experiences”.
Brownell and Hendrickson (1950) defined a generalization as “any verbalized formulation of a relationship which is of broad applicability.” These definitions stress that generalizations apply to more than one specific instance, but its vagueness renders it nearly useless to teachers.
Later, Hanna (1957) defined a generalisation in relation to concepts.
He wrote that a generalisation was “a descriptive statement of broad applicability indicating relationship between two or more concepts.” This definition of generalisations as statements that identify a relationship between two or more concepts has remained the dominant one (Jarolimek 1990; Maxim 1991; Van Cleaf 1991).
Generalisations are statements about relationships between and among concepts.
Generalisations are formed by synthesising facts (or data).
Although concepts are embedded in the facts, learners do not form generalisations by examining concepts alone.
Generalisation formation can occur only after learners see a relationship between facts.
A generalisation is a statement of broad applicability that shows a relationship between two or 64 more concepts.
Generalizations are true and verifiable for all cases on the basis of the best evidence available.
Generalizations organize and summarize information obtained from the analysis of facts.
These are statements expressing relationship between two or more concepts.
They provide ample opportunities for learners to understand and articulate better the relationship between two or more concepts and learner’s experiences.
They help to promote better chances of information, servicing application of interpretation and syntheses of information needed by learners for understanding and providing rational solution to the daily problem of survival.
Furthermore, the term generalisation is closely related to concept.
However, unlike concept which is usually represented by a single word or expression, generalisations are expressed in declarative statements.
They are statements of general principles, including models, systems and theories, which describe trends, tendencies and relationships that are important to the subject under study.
Generalisations are also statements indicating relationships between two or more concepts.
They can take many forms.
They appear as descriptions, interpretations, rules, hypotheses and predictions.
The fact that the Social Studies teacher needs to develop and impart knowledge implies that he/she needs some content.
It is the relevant concepts and generalisations identified and formulated respectively that will facilitate the transmission of such content.
Hence, he/she must be ready to develop these generalisations outside the learners’ experience and make sure that the concepts constituting such generalisations are well understood in terms of the relationship being expressed.
It is only when this has been properly grasped that the Social Studies teacher can begin to think of using such content to map out learning activities that will encourage the acquisition and development of relevant positive values and attitudes in the learners.
65 Typical examples of generalisations include: a.
Honesty is the best policy for successful living.
b.
Every neighbourhood has special features, such as buildings and traffic signs.
c. Families around the world have common needs and meet them in different ways.
d. Goods and services are found in local communities.
They are combinations of some concepts.
A fact is a statement that supports a concept and a generalization.
A fact is a onetime occurrence about an event, a place, or a person.
Several facts can provide enough supporting evidence to create a generalization.
Helping students generalise, is a higher level thinking skill.
3.3: Importance of Concepts and Generalisations Dececco (1968) cited by Osakwe & Itedjere (1993) highlights the importance of concepts in learning.
Concepts help to: (i) deal with the complexity of our environment and to reduce it to manageable proportions (ii) fit any new occurrence, event, object, individuals or ideas into our concept filing system.
(iii) classify and catalogue events, individuals, objects into their appropriate classes (iv) identify and make sense out of various objects we find around us (v) reduce the ordeal and necessity for continual re-learning.
(vi) solve problems.
Correct classification of object is an aid in problem solving (vii) make more complicated instruction and explanation possible (viii) represent our picture of reality which helps us in describing our environment and all that it contains.
66  Concepts in Social Studies engender the teacher’s ability to effectively define his/her different subject matters being handled in the classroom.
Concepts therefore help greatly in the amplification and application of attributes and appreciation of reality vis-à-vis the learner’s environment.
They serve as framework of easier organisation and expatiation of facts and knowledge in a teaching-learning situation.
The consideration of concepts and generalisations for use in Social Studies class, will provide ample opportunity for the learners to think or reason reflectively so as to draw useful meanings from their own experiences through the instruction provided.
Concepts for example will assist learners to interpret experience by linking unique events to others.
Generalisation on its own will encourage learners to describe and explain their experiences, judge their significance and predict their future impact.
Through all these, learners are able to perceive and experience ideas, which incidentally are major epistemological issues.
However, there could be learning situations, which will demand that the students would have to conceptualise things and they will not be opportune to experience it directly.
Typical example is feudalism, which is a practice that no more exists.
All that the teacher could do as part of getting the learners to understand the concept in its entirety is to get them to raise questions which are then clarified.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 1.
What is a concept?
2.
What is a generalisation?
3.
Is there any relationship between concept and generalisation?
4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of some teaching and learning tools, such as concepts and generalisation, in the course of processing knowledge by human beings for a better understanding and resolution of their numerous problems of survival is very essential for effective delivery of Social Studies curriculum content in our classrooms.
Concepts are part of generalisations.
An attempt to use both in the Social Studies class assures both cognitive 67 and affective teaching and learning which incidentally, is the main focus of Social Studies.
5.0 SUMMARY Certain aspects of the subject in terms of concepts and generalisations, values and attitudes which the teacher must necessarily emphasise appropriately in the course of teaching the subject have been highlighted in this Unit.
The roles of the teacher in handling them were equally explained with special emphasis on their importance in the teaching and learning of Social Studies.
Therefore teachers of Social Studies aspiring to promote effective teaching and learning in their classroom must allow him/herself to guided by a conscious desire to use concepts and generalisations to build the content areas.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Of what importance are the concepts and generalisations to Social Studies teaching and learning in the classroom?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Deceeco, J. P. (1968) The psychology of learning and instruction, New York: Prentice- Hall Osakwe, E. O.
& Itedjere, P. O.
(1993) Social Studies for tertiary students in Nigeria, Enugu: New Age Publishers 68 UNIT 2: CONCEPTS OF GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0: Introduction: 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Concept of Growth 3.2: The Concept of Development 3.3: Relationship between Growth and Development 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION This Unit focuses on the concepts of growth and development.
The concepts are difficult to explain and so care will be needed by you in explaining each and their distinguishing features for students of differing abilities.
Nevertheless, you need to remember that there cannot be growth without development, neither can there be development without growth.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this unit you should be able to: 1.
Explain the concepts of growth and development.
69 2.
Mention the characteristics of growth and development 3.
Establish the relationship between growth and development 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: The Concept of Growth The Freedictionary (2010) defines growth in different but related forms.
It defines it as a progression from simpler to more complex forms; and a process in which something passes by degrees to a different stage (especially a more advanced or mature stage).
Growth is also seen as a process of becoming larger or longer or more numerous or more important.
www.thinkexist.com (2010) describes growth as the gradual increase of an animal or a vegetable body; the development from a seed, germ, or root, to full size or maturity; increase in size, number, frequency, strength, etc.
; augmentation; advancement; production; prevalence or influence; as, the growth of trade; and the growth of power.
3.2: The Concept of Development Shanker (1996) remarks that the idea of development evolved from Wolff’s 1959 understanding of transformation towards the appropriate form and to Darwin’s 1859 concept of transformation towards the ever more perfect form.
He further observes that during this period, evolution and development began to be used as interchangeable terms.
Since then the concept of development has become a multifarious concept characterized sometimes by ambivalent and wildering array of meanings.
While quoting Sahlin (1994) Shanker also describes the concept of development from two major perspectives.
Firstly, development is seen as a process of economic growth, a swift and sustained increase of production, productivity, and income per head.
Secondly, it is seen as a process that enhances the effective freedom of the people involved, to pursue whatever they 70 have reason to value.
This perception of development is a culturally conditioned view of economic and social processes.
Development is empowerment: it is about local people taking control of their own lives, expressing their own demands and finding their own solutions to their problems.
Development means “improvement in a country's economic and social conditions”.
More specifically, it refers to improvements in ways of managing an area’s natural and human resources in order to create wealth and improve people's lives.
This definition is based on the more obvious distinctions in living standards between developed and less developed countries.
It is therefore, not going to be out of place to view the concept of development as an ideologically loaded concept which means different things to different people at different times.
Shanker (1996) gives a general view of the concept of development by describing it as a process through which the potential of an object or organism is realised until it reaches full-fledged form.
It is a gradual process of social change; a favourable change, and a step from worse to better.
On the other hand, scholars like Rodney (1972) Adams Smith and Robert Reich have described the conceptualisation and practice of development as innovations of the West which have not done so much in the resolution of the problems of mass poverty, hunger and alienation.
They opine that development is a tool that has been used to destroy the cultures and autonomy of developing nations.
This could be confirmed with Shanker’s (1998) contextual situation of development in the North and South phenomenon perspective.
He is of the opinion that underdevelopment of the South is the inverse of the North’s own development process and has primarily been impelled from outside, rather than being a transformation from the inside.
Furthermore, he observes that underdevelopment signifies that some societies are backward and they are being evaluated by the standards of the dominant cultures.
Hence, development is seen as a concept and process that upholds the commitment to liberty and affluence for all, unlimited knowledge and technological progress and infinite possibilities that would free the individual from underdevelopment.
71 Walter Rodney (1972) also commented that development in the past has always meant the increase in the ability to guard the independence of the social group and indeed to infringe upon the freedom of others.
This reiterates often came about irrespective of the will of the persons within the societies involved.
The foregoing does not however, imply that most societies have not been experiencing development.
Rather, it is the rate that has differed from continent to continent, sub-region to sub-region and country to country.
The argument here is that, the dominance of the western model, which associates the western world to “development”, is due not to its intrinsic superiority but to the political dominance of believers in its superiority, who have devoted attention and resources to legitimising modernisation as westernisation (Banuri and Marghi, 1992).
Development could be exogenously (externally) or endogenously (internally) induced.
Any development that is endogenously induced is known to be built from indigenous values.
It exerts lower social costs and imposes less human suffering and cultural destruction than the exogenously induced ones.
This is because it is from the indigenously-rooted values that people derive meaning in their lives, a sense of identity and cultural integrity and the reassurance of continuity with their environment and their past, even amid change (Marris, 1994).
The current globalisation wind blowing across the continents of the world is an indicator of the continuous nature of the process called development.
Lawal (2002a) observes that the globalisation paradigm driven by the industrialised North and its corporations is aimed at facilitating faster growth, higher living standards and new opportunities.
UN (2002) remarks that it was fuelled by government decision around the world to liberalise trade and capital markets; a phenomenon accompanied by privatisation and deregulation of economic activities and rapid development of information and communication technologies.
Globalisation as a development process therefore involves the integration of final and national economies into an increasingly interlinked world economy.
In environmental context, Lawal, (2002b) observes that development is a process targeted at improving the welfare of human being while at the same time showing concern for social 72 equality as well as ensuring the sustainable utilisation of renewable natural resources.
This can simply be called ecologically sustainable development.
It is a development, which meets the needs of present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs.
It embraces all aspects of environmental change, that, is, social as well as physical 3.3: Relationship between Growth and Development Where growth is referred to as quantitative expansion in the scale of physical dimensions of the economic system, development should be referred to as the qualitative change of a physically non growing economic system in dynamic equilibrium with the environment” (Daly 1989, 71).
Growth is therefore a stage of development.
It is somewhat easier to say which countries are richer and which are poorer.
But indicators of wealth, which reflect the quantity of resources available to a society, provide no information about the allocation of those resources-for instance, about more or less equitable distribution of income among social groups, about the shares of resources used to provide free health and education services, and about the effects of production and consumption on people’s environment.
Thus, it is no wonder that countries with similar average incomes can differ substantially when it comes to people’s quality of life: access to education and health care, employment opportunities, availability of clean air and safe drinking water, the threat of crime, and so on.
With that in mind, how do we determine which countries are more developed and which are less developed?
This is only possible when we try to establish the relationship between the concept of growth and development.
Shanker (1996) goes further to observe that the first promoters of the concept of development actually reduced it to economic growth, i.e.
an increase in the income per person in economically underdeveloped areas.
Then, it later became growth plus change leading to improved quality of life and subsequently shifted to a more unified conception which integrates the economic and social components with the basic human needs.
73 This new conception presents the concept of development as one which promotes sustainability for our common future.
Hence, development cannot be seen as a race to catch up to more fortunate nations, but as a continuing effort by developing societies of opportunities to realise their potential at both the national and international levels.
It is a continuation of growth, distribution, and rising consumption; a fulfillment of basic needs or the level of individual functioning and capabilities.
3.4: Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What is development?
2.
What is growth?
3.
Outline any two statements in paragraph 3.3 that can be used to establish the relationship between the concepts of growth and development.
4.0 CONCLUSION Discussing the concepts of development and growth demands a thorough understanding of the fact that both of them are essential in any society.
Development as a concept is a dynamic process of improvement.
It involves implementing a change.
It is related to growth and advancement of an urban area.
It is a phenomenon in which people can improve the living conditions in the world.
It implies that as a country is improving in her day to day operations she can be said to be growing or vice versa.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, the writer opines you have been provided opportunity to learn about those two concepts which people have had several causes to use interchangeably where as they do not mean the same thing.
Rather the meaning of one complements that of the other.
A good understanding of the concept of growth for instance, will reveal that a growing nation is developing and this is not necessarily in terms of age but in terms of economic development, infrastructural facilities and other indicators.
74  6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Attempt a definition each of growth and development.
b.
Establish the fact that growth is essential for any up to date discussion about the development of a nation, using Nigeria as a typical example.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Lawal, M.B.
(2002a).
Globalisation and Nigeria’s natural heritage: a curse or blessing?
Journal of SOSSAN (2) 2 Lawal, M. B. Ed.
(2002b)..
Citizenship Education: A General Studies Text for Tertiary Institutions Lagos: Leo Prints Marris, P.(1994).
Attachment across the life cycle London: Rouledge Rodney, W. (1972).
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa London: Bogle L’Overtune Pub.
Shanker, R. (1996).
Diversity and development.
Development Express 96-05 Canada: CIDA Shanker, R. (1998) ).
Culture and development.
Development Express 98-04 Canada: CIDA UN (2002).
Fact Shee ts on World Sustainable Development Paris: UN www.thinkexist.com (2010) www.thefreedictionary.com (2010).
The Freedictionary Retrieved on the 24th February 75  2010 76  UNIT 3: CONCEPT OF SELF RELIANCE CONTENTS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Self Reliance 3.2: Self Reliance in Education 3.3: Ways of Promoting Self Reliance 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous Unit, you learnt about the concepts of growth and development as part of those useful concepts for effective and meaningful Social Studies teaching and learning.
You are about to learn another useful concept which is self reliance.
It is a concept that you will be expected to promote in the classroom because of its focus, which emphasises the fact that we all need to be individuals and put ourselves before anyone else with little or no dependence on others.
77  2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this unit you should be able to: 1.
Explain the concept of self reliance.
2.
Explain what self reliance in education means 3.
Identify some of the ways of becoming self reliant as individuals.
3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Self Reliance Self-reliance is a simple concept that encourages each of us to take responsibility for our own needs—physical, emotional, spiritual, social, and economic.
It involves reliance on one's own capabilities, judgment, or resources; independence.
(www.answers.com 2010) It is the capacity to manage one's own affairs, make one's own judgments, and provide for oneself.
It emphasises freedom from control or influence of another or others.
It implies personal independence, self-direction, self-sufficiency, and autonomy.
Self reliance is also ones strong belief that one is capable of successfully dealing with the challenges which life throws at one, taking ones guidance from oneself, rather than from other people or things.
Put another way, www.eruptingmind.com (2010) describes self reliance as having the ability and courage to listen to yourself, and act by yourself, rather than letting other people, things or events decide what you should be, do or have.
A self reliant person therefore realises and accepts that they are completely responsible for their life, and that, if they want something done, they must do it themselves.
This does not however mean that getting help from other people is necessarily a bad thing, as everyone needs a little help sometimes.
This implies that it is not possible to be totally 78 self reliant.
For instance, as a teacher you might want to claim that because you keep a large farm in addition to your primary assignment, you are a farmer.
The point however is that you cannot also claim to be a trader who will go market your farm products.
Likewise, it is going to be practically impossible for you as a teacher not to depend on others in the quest for knowledge.
You just must consult books and reference materials written by others.
Nevertheless, it is important to remark that people would want to self reliant because it builds the kind of character needed to live both independently and freely in community with others.
This is particularly so when we remember that unnecessary dependency dulls character, and in the community, it destroys personal freedom and creates social dysfunctions.
This view is supported by Dorothy Ainsworth (2010) when she describes self reliance as a mindset.
She opines that if you have it, you are on your way to independence.
It requires a conscious effort of replacing an “I need help” attitude to an “I can do it myself” attitude.
When we accept the responsibility for our own and our family’s well-being, we are better able to sustain ourselves in our everyday lives.
We are better prepared to endure times of adversity without becoming dependent upon others and are better to serve others.
This is the essence of self reliance.
3.2: Self Reliance in Education Self reliance in education has been described by www.homeschoolresourcecenter.net (2010) as doing all that one can as a parent to control and guide the education of one’s children.
It means a parent has real control, not just involvement, over the education of their children.
In societies where it is practiced, it engenders trust, respect, and love.
Children are more likely to be more obliged to value their parents more as they will feel their parents’ struggle in seeking the best for them.
Moreover, they will tend to reflect these important values in their own lives as they grow up.
Children are likely to grow to learn that their own future lies in their own hands and therefore tend to be self-motivated, curious, adventurous and loyal.
79  Self reliance in education requires the determination of a parent wants for his or her children.
The children also need to know what they want so that both can work towards the realisation of a common goal.
Self reliance in education is hard work as it demands a huge commitment from parents.
While one may conclude that it is a phenomenon that is difficult to practice as parents have to devote more time to their children’s education by staying more with them, it is still possible to practice it to some degree.
Parents can decide on plans regarding how to alternate their stay with their children in order to give them the best of education.
On the other hand, parents could also insist on education for self reliance in their children’s school by contributing to the building of curriculum contents in the school subjects of offering.
The outcomes of such interventions would be reflected in the inclusion of entrepreneurship education and acquisition of vocational skills which can assure the children a more qualitative living on graduation.
3.3: Ways of Promoting Self Reliance We can become self-reliant through obtaining sufficient knowledge, education, and literacy; by managing money and resources wisely, being spiritually strong, preparing for emergencies and eventualities; and by having physical health and social and emotional well- being.
Robert D. Hales outlines ways we can become self-reliant, and these include: • Readiness for rainy-day emergencies by working and saving.
• Avoiding excessive debt; being content with what we have.
• Using the resources of the earth wisely; and not being be wasteful • Preparing for the future by making spending and savings plans • Keeping a family or personal budget 80 • Teaching children wise spending habits and helping them save for the future • Obtaining an education or vocational training • Finding gainful employment As we become self-reliant, we will be prepared to face challenges with confidence and peace of mind.
3.3: Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What is self reliance?
2.
What does it take to practise self reliance in education?
3.
State any five ways through which self reliance can be promoted.
4.0 CONCLUSION Self reliance means a strong belief in one’s ability to achieve success and happiness in life.
It does not support a “lean on me” kind of lifestyle; neither does it accept clinging onto another person for survival.
It emphasises freedom, and if we want to be free in our life and achieve those things we set for ourselves, we need to cut the strings of dependency and over dependency.
Self reliance is learned.
It is a process of acquiring the knowledge and skills necessary to enable an individual to take calculated risks and achieve one’s goals in life.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have learnt about the concept of self reliance, its importance and ways of promoting the concept in our society.
The concept of self reliance in education was also discussed with a clause that it is not possible to have an ideal state of it, rather we expect that parents need to be more devoted to the education of their children, thereby putting less stress on government and making education more functional.
81 Becoming independent is therefore not an overnight thing but everything starts somewhere.
The more independent one can be, the better off one is going to and the better the quality of life one will have overall.
That is self reliance.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the concept of self reliance and those ways you will recommend for its promotion among growing children.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ainsworth, D. (2010).
Self reliance is a mindset http://www.backwoodshome.com Retrieved on the 16th March 2010 Audet, M. (2010).
25 ways to be more self reliant today.
http://hubpages.com Retrieved on the 16th March 2010 http://www.eruptingmind.com http://www.123helpme.com http://www.homeschoolresourcecentre.net 82 UNIT 3: CONCEPTS OF PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 1.0: Introduction: 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Concept of Peace 3.2: The Concept of Conflict 3.3: The Concept of Conflict Resolution 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0: INTRODUCTION Peace is human’s central pursuit and yet paradoxically there is less peace in our home, in our communities, in our countries and the world than before.
The human race is even threatened with annihilation at its own hands.
Here in this Unit we shall examine the meaning of peace, conflict and conflict resolution with view to making you appreciate the need for these concepts.
You will also be given an opportunity to understand the relationship of among these concepts and their importance to human survival and the society.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of this Unit you should be able to: (i.)
Explain the concept of peace (ii.)
Explain the concept of conflict (iii.)
Describe some of the steps carrying out conflict resolution in our society 83 3.1 The Concept of Peace The word “peace” has been defined by Saint Augustine (1952) as tranquility of order.
He describes order in this sense as the distribution which allots things equal or unequal, each to its own place.
He suggests that peace is not only the absence of hostilities but tranquility in order.
This implies that peace could range from absolute to relative peace.
Lawal & Raufu (2007) quoting Onah (2007) also observes that peace is the totality of well- being, fullness of life here and thereafter.
Peace is equally a precondition for progress because where there is moral, social and cosmic disorder one cannot expect true progress.
Peace should not therefore be conceived in relation to conflict and war but in relation to order, harmony and equilibrium.
Peace is simply having a feeling of security, calm and restfulness.
We often tend to think of peace as being an international issue, far from our daily life, but we do not realize that global peace can only be achieved if each country is settled and at peace.
The peace and happiness of each country can only be achieved if every citizen is at peace.
This follows therefore that a country can be peaceful and progressive if her people live tolerantly.
We all want peace of mind.
When there is no peace among the persons, then peace in society is threatened.
Sometimes this leads to chains of violence.
Lack of peace destroys the identity of a country; the mental and creative energies of her citizens are diverted from useful activities to destructive one.
The need of the hour is to develop the young generation with peace consciousness and the importance of conflict resolution.
3.2 The Concept of Conflict Zantman (1991) suggest that conflict is an inevitable aspect of human interaction, an unavoidable concomitant of choices and decisions.
He further stressed that conflict stems from the basic fact of human inter-dependencies – as for individuals to meet their basic needs they depend on active participation of other individuals.
84  Conflict essentially means a confrontation between individuals, or groups over scarce resources.
It may range from the use of physical force to litigation or intimidation through threat of physical harm or war.
The aim of conflict is to win at all costs.
Conflict can also be seen as incompatible behaviour between parties whose interests are or appear to be incompatible or clashing.
This implies that conflict emanates from social relationships.
Human goals and aspirations will always clash.
It is therefore unreasonable to think that we could have a world without conflict.
It will always occur where there are more than one people or group.
Conflict may surface at many levels, it could be between husband and wife in the domestic setting, between workers and management in the factory and it may manifest itself between larger collectivities like conflicts between classes, religious communities and gender groups or between state and society.
Conflicts in both role expectations and perceptions tend to make difficult the performance of individual roles.
Conflict leads to dysfunction of the system.
If war begins in the minds of men it is because of conflict.
Conflicts are of different nature: personal conflict, interpersonal conflict, communal conflict etc.
Some theorists have distinguished between conflict and dispute.
First, a dispute is about negotiable interests that can be settled by compromise, while conflict is about human needs and involves addressing underlying causes for effective resolution.
For a situation to be seen as a conflict, four conditions must exist: i) there must be two or more parties with distinct interest, ii) there must be struggle by each party to control the existing object or space of the struggle, iii) the objective of each party is to neutralise, injure or eliminate the other party, and iv) it is important to recognise that conflict is a form of interaction and a way of achieving some kind of unity even if it involves annihilation of the conflicting parties.
85  Conflict resolution can simply be defined as a process of analysing a problem and strategising a solution to sort out the differences between two parties in discord.
It can also be referred to as the method used to solve problems between two parties, individuals, community or nations.
The process of resolution brings an agreement between the parties involved in the conflict.
The youth are a very important factor in peace and conflict resolution as they stand the chance of being used as elements for violence, hooliganism and conflict-making.
We have seen such cases in countries where terrorism is the order of the day.
Also, the elites and power monger politicians make the youth in their communities cause problems so that they can achieve their own selfish interests in government.
The youth are vulnerable to these proposals because they don’t have the right education.
There are various approaches to conflict.
Two of such approaches are discussed here.
First, is the melioristic approach, which is based on the assumption that organisation conflict is amendable to resolution through rational process such as problem solving and persuasion.
In this view a well ordered system with an enlightened set of managers or board plus dedicated and reasonable staff can resolve their differences in free and open discussions for the mutual benefit of all.
Supporters of the melioristic approach to conflict resolution believe that sanctions and strike by workers/staff are unjustified, except possibly in extreme cases where administrators and board are pathologically unreasonable and intractable.
The second is adversary approach.
The adversary approach to conflict resolution assumes that conflict exists, and will continue to exist in the organisation where groups have different self-interests.
It argues that it is only sensible to institutionalise the means for reconciling differences.
Supporters of the adversary view believe that conflict is both necessary and desirable from the maintenance of a viable organisation.
86 3.3: Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What is peace?
2.
What is conflict?
3.
What is the relationship between peace and conflict?
4.
Identify any two approaches for resolving conflict.
4.0 CONCLUSION Conflict is an essential element in the life of any organisation and helps to establish and maintain group identity.
Conflict resolution then can serve to bind staff together and build esprit de corps.
The resulting group cohesiveness will strengthen the organisation.
Peace and conflict resolution are therefore very important in the world today.
We would all need to do our best to be part of that group that works tirelessly to ensure both prevail in our society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit you were provided opportunity to learn about the concepts of peace, conflict and conflict resolution.
Conflict as a concept was discussed as one phenomenon that cannot be avoided within our society.
You were advised to accept the fact in virtually all social relationships conflict is inevitable because it is a critical mechanism by which goals and aspirations of individuals and groups are articulated.
The need for parties to ensure that conflicts are resolved was also discussed through different approaches.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Attempt a description of the concepts of peace and conflict.
b.
Briefly establish a relationship between the two concepts and highlight any two approaches you will suggest for resolving conflict in your locality.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Coser, L.A. (1968).
Conflict: The Social Aspect.
New York: Fresh Press Hicks, D. (1997).
Conflict resolution and human rights education, in G.J.
Andreapoulous 87 and R.P.
Claude,.
(Eds).
Human rights education for the 21st century.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press Johan Burton (1990): Conflict: Resolution and Prevention.
London: Macmillan Pub.
Lawal, M. B.
& Raufu, S.A. (2007).
Peace Studies and Conflict Resolution: Basic Concepts and Issues.
Lagos: Raytel Comms.
Ltd. Zantman I. William (1999).
Conflict Resolution in Africa.
Washington: The Brookings Institution 88 UNIT 4: CONCEPT OF SOCIAL PROBLEM 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Definition of Social Problem 3.2: Types of Social Problems 3.3: Causes of Social Problems 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Anti-social behaviour, homelessness, drugs, mental illness are all problems in today’s society.
But what makes a problem social?
This Unit will help you to discover how these issues are identified, defined, given meaning and acted upon.
In this Unit you will also learn about the different types of social problems that exist among various individuals and groups in the society.
These social problems concern all aspects of human life and occur anywhere in villages, towns and cities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
State a concise definition of social problem 2.
Identify the different types of social problem 3.
Identify and discuss the causes of social problems and 4.
Suggest ways by which social problems could be tackled in our society.
89 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: The Meaning of Social Problem A social problem is a condition which some people in a community view as being undesirable.
It is an undesirable condition in the relationship among persons.
It is a problem in human relationships which seriously threatens the society itself.
Horton and Gerald (1978) described a social problem as a condition affecting a significant number of people in ways considered undesirable, about which it is felt something can be done through collective social action.
The identification of a social problem depends on the belief system and values of people living in the relevant society.
NTI (1992) therefore remarks that a social problem is always defined in a subjective manner; it is also not static.
The subjectivity in conceptualisation arises because of what constitutes a social problem in a community may not constitute a social problem in another community depending on the values of the people.
In order to recognise a problem as being social in nature, there must first be a social standard, and second, there must be a significant discrepancy between the social standard and social reality, that is, what is actually happening.
Everyone would agree about some social problems, such as murders and road accidents.
Other social problems may be viewed as such by certain groups of people.
Teenagers who play loud music in a public park obviously do not view it as a problem, but some other people may consider it an undesirable social condition.
Some non-smokers view smoking as an undesirable social condition that should be banned or restricted in public buildings.
Every newspaper is filled with stories about undesirable social conditions.
Examples include crime, violence, drug abuse, and environmental problems.
Such social problems can be found at the local, state, national and international levels.. 90 3.2: Different Types of Social Problem Nigeria society is bedevilled with multidimensional and multifarious social problems.
The problem of the rural community is distinct from that of urban not just in terms of magnitude but in its dimension.
It must be noted that not all social conditions become elevated to the status of "social problem."
For example, here are some "objective conditions" which exist today, and as you will see, not all of them are considered to be social problems.
The social problems that are plaguing our society today could hardly be catalogued.
They are very uncountable in the true sense of the assertion.
Prominent among them are: • Poverty • Students Unrest • Prostitution • Cultural Violence • Divorce • Religious Intolerance • Abortion • Examination Malpractices • Teenage Pregnancy • Gross Indiscipline • Bribery and Corruption • Results racketeering • Crime – armed robbery, • Disease and Hunger arson, murder, pick- • Widespread Illiteracy pocketing, gambling fraud; • Discrimination and Ethnic drug peddling; currency Jingoism trafficking; embezzlement of • Cultism public funds etc.
• Human trafficking and child • Juvenile Delinquency labour, and a host of others • Child Abuse too numerous to enumerate.
All these have in one way or the other contributed to the low level of growth and development of our dear country.
Each of the above represents an existing condition which threatens the well-being of people in Nigeria and, in some cases, the entire world.
Also, they are all objective conditions that really exist.
But we need to realise that not all of them draw relatively high public concern.
For any 91 situation to become a social problem, it must meet some conditions.
Some of these conditions have influenced the categorisation of the above listed problems as being social.
The conditions are: a.
The objective condition must be perceived to be a social problem publicly.
That is, there must be some public outcry.
People must become actively involved in discussing the problem.
Public attention becomes directed towards that social condition.
b.
The condition must involve a gap between social ideals and social reality.
That is, the condition must run counter to the values of the larger society.
For example, at the beginning of the 20th Century, alcohol abuse was perceived to be a very serious social problem, responsible for family breakdown, abandonment of children, accidental death at work, and violence in society.
c. A significant proportion of the population must be involved in defining the problem.
(A large proportion of the population must be concerned about the condition.
It must have national attention.
If only a small segment of the population gets involved you have an interest group pushing for the general public to do something about the condition-- not a social problem).
d. The condition must be capable of calling for a solution through collective action by people.
If no solution is perceived possible, people will resign themselves to their fate.
Other factors which will determine the degree, to which something comes to be perceived as a social problem, include: a.
If people affected by a condition are influential, or powerful, the condition is more likely to be considered a social problem than if those affected are not influential.
When a condition begins to affect the middle class, particularly those 92 able to influence government policy, or the content of the mass media, the chances of its being considered a social problem increases substantially.
b.
A rapid increase in the number of people affected by a social condition is also important-- perhaps even as important as the number of people affected.
For instance, people become accustomed to the prevailing levels of crime, pollution, and urban congestion.
But a sharp increase in the intensity of any of these leads to elevated public concern.
One airline crash every year is a ground for concern, but not for the definition of a social problem.
But, five crashes in one month get the public's attention.
c. The mass media also plays an important role in the selection and definition of social problems.
It gives selective attention to certain conditions.
The liberal press will highlight certain issues while the conservative press will select others.
A good example is the controversy over former President Yar Adua’s illness and the need to invoke Sections 144 and 145 of the Constitution.
The liberal press lamented it, but maintained that the larger issue was the quality of the job that the President was doing.
The conservative press saw it as a basic flaw in the moral/constitution fabric of the Presidency and counter to the values of the larger society.
On this issue, the general public seems to have sided with the conservative position.
d. Ideology also determines how a social problem is defined.
Conservatives and liberals agree that America has a poverty problem-- but they do not agree on a specific definition of the problem, nor do they agree on how the problem should be solved.
Example: Conservatives will perceive poverty as being caused by lack of intelligence, lack of motivation, lack of the ability to delay gratification, and other personal characteristics of those who are poor.
Thus, they will tend to defend the system, or in the case of radical conservatives, who will argue for a dismantling of the "welfare state" and a return to the free market system.
Liberals emphasize the 93 lack of opportunity and structural factors in the system.
The system must be adjusted to open up opportunity.
Radical liberals will advocate overthrowing the current system of government and establishing something entirely new.
3.3: Causes of Social Problem What are the causes of social problems like divorce, armed robbery, examination malpractices, and gangsterism among others?
The answers are diverse and numerous as the problems.
The conclusion from many scholars who have attempted to address the question has been that society creates the problems.
There are many social problems which vary from one society to another and the possible causes of such social problems are also many and varied.
The following are some of the broad causes of social problems: Ignorance: Closely related to this is the issue of apathy.
People are known to be involved in creating some social problems just because they either care less or do not even know that their actions are major contributors to these problems.
Greed and selfishness: Greed is wanting and taking more than one morally deserves.
Greed can take the form of seeking undeserved subsidies or privileges, or protection from competition.
Greed also motivates dictators, politicians, and government officials to seek and maintain their power.
The perpetuation of acts associated with these behaviours can create social problems Poor physical planning: In situations where infrastructures have been poorly planned and made available to a group or groups of people there is that tendency for such infrastructures to be an avenue for social vices like robbers den, gambling spots, violent protests etc.
Lack of good education: Education is powerful tool for liberation.
In communities where level of education is low or the quality of education being delivered is poor, there is that possibility for its recipients to become half-baked, the effect of which could be disastrous.
They are not likely to be trained to develop positive values that can promote less stressful social interaction.
94 Uneven development: This is a major source of social problem.
Let us look at the Niger Delta and the issue of militancy and kidnapping in Nigeria today.
The people of South-South Nigeria have been complaining about serious neglect in the area of development in recent years.
They have demonstrated their dissatisfaction through aggressive actions which have created serious social problems for the nation and even in the international circle.
Poverty: Poverty itself is a crime.
This does not however mean that it is a crime to be poor.
Murder is a crime; but it is not a crime to be murdered; and a man who is in poverty, can be looked upon, not as a criminal in himself, so much as the victim of a crime for which others, as well perhaps as himself, are responsible.
That poverty is a curse, the bitterest of curses, we all know.
The curse born of poverty is not confined to the poor alone; it runs through all classes, even to the very rich.
They, too, suffer; they must suffer; for there cannot be suffering in a community from which any class can totally escape.
The vice, the crime, the ignorance, the meanness born of poverty, poison, so to speak, the very air which rich and poor alike must breathe.
Poverty is the mother of ignorance, the breeder of crime.
Other causes of social problem include; abuse of office, moral laxity and so on.
4.0 CONCLUSION The term social problem is used in public and political discussions and refers to very different social situations, conditions, and forms of behaviour, like crime, racism, drug use, unemployment, poverty, exclusion, , sexual abuse a host of other social vices.
Social problems emerge when social reality does not live up to these expectations about quality of life, health, opportunity, prosperity, security, etc.
Social problems, then, are social conditions that have been identified as negatively impacting people’s lives.
Social problems therefore come in different forms depending on where they are occurring and the magnitude.
95  5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit you will agree with the writer that a social problem exists when some event or condition doesn’t live up to our expectations, when there’s a gap between expectation and reality.
It could be in form of norm violations which assume that a standard of behavior exists.
It could also come in form of conditions that cause psychic and material suffering for some category of people.
It is caused by a variety of factors which we have highlighted in some sections of this Unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Defining the concept of social problem could be a herculean task but this should not stop you as a teacher from convince your students that its causes are numerous.
Discuss 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Horton, P. B. and Gerald R. L. (1978).The Sociology of Social Problems.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. NTI (1992).
NCE/DLS Course Book on Social Studies Cycle 3 Module 7 Kaduna: NTI Wikipedia (2010).
Social Problems http://www.wikipedia.org Retrieved on the 23rd April 2010 96 MODULE 3: HUMAN RIGHTS AND CIVIC RESPONSIBILITIES Unit 1: Definition and Origin of Human Rights Unit 2: 1999 Nigerian Constitution and Human Rights Unit 3: Classification of Human Rights Unit 4: Universal Declaration of Human Rights /African Union Charter Unit 5: Civic Responsibilities UNIT 1: DEFINITION AND ORIGIN OF HUMAN RIGHTS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Human Rights.
3.2: Origin of Human Rights 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 97  1.0: INTRODUCTION You might be wandering as a Social Studies teacher in training what your business is with human rights and the origin.
This should not be, because the subject you are being trained to teach has some direct relevance to human rights issues.
In order to assist the children you are teaching to learn how to be appreciative of the rights protected by their own society and state; to bring them to a recognition that other people have the right to expect similar freedoms and to be sympathetic to those still struggling to acquire basic rights, learning about human rights then become very important for you as you shall later see in this Unit.
2.0: OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Give a concise meaning of human rights.
2.
Explain the origin of human rights 3.0: MAIN CONTENT 3.1: Meaning of Human Rights Discussing the concept of Human Rights requires a detailed understanding of the concept of “right”.
Eze (1992) describes right as justice, ethical correctness, or consonance with the rule of law or the principles of morals.
This view is shared by Mezieobi (1999) where he defines rights as “interests, benefits, advantages, rules of conduct and forbearance in a given social setting, which are recognised and protected by law and capable of enforcement by a legal process in event of a breach, negation and non-observance”.
Rights are therefore a reasonable claim of freedom in the exercise of certain activities.
Human rights are rights inherent to all human beings, whatever our nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, language, or any other status.
We are all equally entitled to our human rights without discrimination.
These rights are all interrelated, 98 interdependent and indivisible.
Human rights are ideals for democratic government as formulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948.
They are values expression relating to human beings by virtues of their humanity and are normative ideals of human life.
Jack (1998) defines human rights as “those rights that one has simply because one is a human being.
They are the social and political guarantees necessary to protect individuals from the standard threats to human dignity posed by the modern state and modern market.
Ezejiofor (1999) also describes human rights as rights which every civilised society must accept as belonging to every person as a human being.
Human rights have been further defined by PWDAI (2009) as fundamental rights and freedoms that are intrinsic to every person by virtue of their status as a human being.
Human rights are universal norms in the sense that they are recognised by the international community as intrinsic to every person irrespective of their national, cultural, political, geographic, social, religious or temporal context, and any other personal characteristics, such as gender, race, sexuality, age, or disability.
They are norms applicable to all persons, at all times, in all societies.
The ultimate source of all human rights is the dignity of the person.
Human dignity refers to the inherent worth, uniqueness, equality and autonomy of all human beings, and our ability to realize our potential.
Dignity might also be conceptualised as the end goal of human rights.
Human rights express the conditions necessary for human dignity to be fully realised.
From the foregoing, it is clear that human rights are rights of individuals to enjoy what every human being deserves, and the State, through the police and other agencies, has a responsibility to ensure that this is attained by all and sundry without discrimination.
Human rights belong to human beings as such they are universal and inalienable and cannot be overridden, except by other moral consideration.
Let us examine the characteristic features of human rights.
99 3.1.1: Universal and inalienable The principle of universality of human rights is the cornerstone of international human rights law.
This principle, as first emphasized in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights in 1948, has been reiterated in numerous international human rights conventions, declarations, and resolutions.
The 1993 Vienna World Conference on Human Rights, for example, noted that it is the duty of States to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms, regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems.
All States have ratified at least one, and 80% of States have ratified four or more, of the core human rights treaties, reflecting consent of States which creates legal obligations for them thereby giving concrete expression to universality.
Some fundamental human rights norms enjoy universal protection by customary international law across all boundaries and civilizations.
Human rights are inalienable.
In this sense, human rights are said to be ‘inalienable’ because they can neither be given to a person, nor can they be taken away from them, except in specific situations and according to due process.
For example, the right to liberty may be restricted if a person is found guilty of a crime by a court of law.
3.1.2: Interdependent and indivisible All human rights are indivisible, whether they are civil and political rights, such as the right to life, equality before the law and freedom of expression; economic, social and cultural rights, such as the rights to work, social security and education, or collective rights, such as the rights to development and self-determination, are indivisible, interrelated and interdependent.
The improvement of one right facilitates advancement of the others.
Likewise, the deprivation of one right adversely affects the others.
3.1.3: Equal and non-discriminatory Non-discrimination is a cross-cutting principle in international human rights law.
The principle is present in all the major human rights treaties and provides the central theme of some of the international human rights conventions such as the International Convention on the Elimination of 100 All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
The principle applies to everyone in relation to all human rights and freedom and it prohibits discrimination on the basis of a list of non-exhaustive categories such as sex, race, colour and so on.
The principle of non-discrimination is complemented by the principle of equality, as stated in Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: “All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.” 3.1.4: Entail Both Rights and Obligations Human rights entail both rights and obligations.
States assume obligations and duties under international law to respect, to protect and to fulfil human rights.
The obligation to respect means that States must refrain from interfering with or curtailing the enjoyment of human rights.
The obligation to protect requires States to protect individuals and groups against human rights abuses.
The obligation to fulfil means that States must take positive actions to facilitate the enjoyment of basic human rights.
At the individual level, while we are entitled our human rights, we should also respect the human rights of others.
Universal human rights are often expressed and guaranteed by law, in the forms of treaties, customary and international laws, general principles and other sources of international law.
International human rights law lays down obligations of Governments to act in certain ways or to refrain from certain acts, in order to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms of individuals or groups.
3.2: ORIGIN OF HUMAN RIGHTS Human rights is not just a local advocacy initiated from Nigeria or any single country in the world, but has an international origin and coverage.
101 Human rights is a concept that has been constantly evolving throughout human history.
They have been intricately tied to the laws, customs and religions throughout the ages.
It was in ancient Greece where the concept of human rights first began to take a greater meaning than the prevention of arbitrary persecution.
Human rights became synonymous with natural rights, rights that spring from natural law.
According to the Greek tradition of Socrates and Plato, natural law is a law that reflects the natural order of the universe, essentially the will of the gods who control nature.
Although the term “human rights” is commonly used today, it is only after the Second World War (1939-1945) that it was used because of the atrocities and horrors that characterised that war, the international communities strongly felt that such violations of human dignity should never happen again.
In addition, documents asserting individual rights, such as the Magna Carta (1215), the English Bill of Rights (1689), the French Declaration on the Rights of Man and Citizen (1789), and the US Constitution and Bill of Rights (1791) are the written precursors to many of today’s human rights documents.
Yet many of these documents, when originally translated into policy, excluded women, people of colour, and members of certain social, religious, economic, and political groups.
Nevertheless, oppressed people throughout the world have drawn on the principles which these documents express to support revolutions that assert the right to self-determination.
Following these developments, by 1948, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) which is still recognised as one of the most important sources of human rights standards.
These were later incorporated in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESRCR).
The UDHR, ICCPR, and ICESRCR are collectively known as the International Bill of Rights.
The International Bill on Rights was however a mere resolution of the United Nations which therefore did not have a binding force on member countries.
The enlargement of the UN 102 membership in the late 1940s to early 1960s through the process of decolonization accelerated the interest and culminated into another significant step in 1965, which saw the bill being opened for signature and ratification by member countries.
This document formed the most authoritative statement of international human right standards and norms, upon which all member nations including Nigeria, have patterned their human right norms.
Since 1966 to date, the UN has adopted numerous other conventions and treaties that protect and promote human rights.
The key ones include: • The Convention Against Torture (CAT) (1980) • The Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) (1979) • The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) (1989) • The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (2006) At the level of the African Union, member states have adopted other international documents that further protect human rights.
The main human rights documents of the African Union are: • The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights (ACHPR) (1980) • The African Charter on the Rights of the Child (ACRC) (1990) • The Protocol to the African Charter on the Rights of Women Protocol (Maputo) (2005) These international human rights laws envisage two sets of actors: rights-holders, who are the individuals in the society and duty bearers, who are the States that sign and ratify treaties.
4.0: CONCLUSION The inclusion of concepts like civil and moral rights and obligations, citizenship, freedom and justice among others, in the content of Social Studies Programme implies that issues of citizenship education and human rights education are essential in the discipline.
Teachers of Social Studies are therefore expected to be conscious of the need to lay emphasis on this component in the appropriate content areas of the subject curriculum at the different levels of the nation’s educational system.
Sokefun et.al.
(2008) definition of human right should guide our explanation of 103 the concept to our students.
This says ‘Human Rights’ mean the freedoms, immunities and benefits that according to modern values, all human beings should be able to claim as a matter of right in the society in which they live.
In developing our thinking and practice in the field of human rights education and empowerment as Social Studies teachers, we must draw upon the dual traditions of civil political education and education for international understanding.
JDPC (2000) remarked that in Africa generally, this should mean not just teaching about civil liberties, the constitution, habeas corpus etc.
; but also the rights of nomadic people, migrant fishermen, oil polluted communities and immigrants, to be protected against discrimination and the interest that the Africa Charter has in the problem of religions and intolerance.
5.0 SUMMARY Human rights meaning and origin have been discussed in this Unit.
The concept emphasises the fact that human beings are endowed with an inalienable dignity which should promote improvement in their quality of life without discrimination.
The Unit has equally provided you with an education on the characteristic features of human rights and how they came to be part of life as political beings in Africa.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the concept of human rights and trace its historical development 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS English Bill of Rights (1689).
The Internet Modern History Source Book www.ask.com Retrieved 2nd April 2010 French Declaration on the Rights of Man and Citizen (1789).
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online Retrieved 20th April 2010 Jack, S. (1998) Assess the impact of the Human Rights Act 1998, incorporating the European 104 Convention on Human Rights, on UK citizens Law Teacher www.lawteacher.net Retrieved 17th March 2010 JDPC (2000).Know your Rights as a Nigerian, an African and a World Citizen Ijebu-Ode: JDPC Magna Carta (1215).
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online Retrieved 20th April 2010 PWDAI (2009).
Human Rights www.newzealand.govt.nz Sokefun, J.
A. et.al.
(2008).
Law 421: Human Rights Law Lagos: NOUN US Constitution and Bill of Rights (1791) Encyclopaedia Britannica Online Retrieved 20th April 2010 105 Unit 2: Classification of Human Rights 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Civil and Political Rights 3.2: Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 3.3: Group or Peoples’ (Solidarity) Rights 3.4: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall in one of our previous units in this Course Material that we discussed the concept of human rights and their fundamental nature.
This is another opportunity for you to learn more about the concept.
This is in terms of the main classification of human rights and the international regulations and laws backing such classification.
According to Sokefun et.al.
(2008), there are different categories of rights which pertain to human beings.
Some are immediately enforceable binding commitments.
These latter rights are reflective of the values of the community.
Others are regarded as merely specifying possible future patterns of behaviours.
106  2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the different classification of human rights 2.
Describe these identified classification of human rights 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Human rights can be classified in a number of different ways.
Some rights may fall into more than one of the available categories.
One of the most widely used classifications distinguishes two general categories: civil and political rights, and social rights that also include economic and cultural rights.
There is also another category which is the group or people’s rights.
3.1 Civil and Political Rights Sokefun et.al.
(2008) remarked that in the hierarchy of human rights, civil and political rights have taken primacy being usually referred to as the “first generation rights”.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 (UDHR) contains provisions for both civil and political rights and economic and social rights, but the western European countries in the United Nation lobbied for a separation: • purely “legal” rights which are enforceable, and • “programme” or manifesto rights (i.e.
economic and social rights), which were considered unenforceable, depending on the relative capability of government to support its realization.
The civil and political rights generally restrict the powers of the government in respect of actions affecting the individual and his or her autonomy (civil rights) and confer an opportunity upon people to contribute to the determination of laws and participate in government (political rights).
Some of the civil and political rights as highlighted in the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights are: 107 • The right of self-determination.
By virtue of that right citizens can freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development.
• All peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of their natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any obligations arising out of international economic co-operation, based upon the principle of mutual benefit, and international law.
In no case may a people be deprived of its own means of subsistence.
• The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all civil and political rights set forth in the present Covenant.
• In time of public emergency which threatens the life of the nation and the existence of which is officially proclaimed, the States Parties to the present Covenant may take measures derogating from their obligations under the present Covenant to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with their other obligations under international law and do not involve discrimination solely on the ground of race, colour, sex, language, religion or social origin.
• Every human being has the inherent right to life.
This right shall be protected by law.
No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life.
• Anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to seek pardon or commutation of the sentence.
Amnesty, pardon or commutation of the sentence of death may be granted in all cases.
• Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age and shall not be carried out on pregnant women.
• No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.
For the purpose of this paragraph the term "forced or compulsory labour" shall not include: 1.
Any work or service, not referred to in subparagraph (b), normally required of a person who is under detention in consequence of a lawful order of a court, or of a person during conditional release from such detention; 2.
Any service of a military character and, in countries where conscientious objection is recognized, any national service required by law of 108 conscientious objectors; 3.
Any service exacted in cases of emergency or calamity threatening the life or well-being of the community; 4.
Any work or service which forms part of normal civil obligations.
• Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention.
No one shall be deprived of his liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with such procedure as are established by law.
.
Anyone who is arrested shall be informed, at the time of arrest, of the reasons for his arrest and shall be promptly informed of any charges against him.
3.
Anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge shall be brought promptly before a court of law.
3.2 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights These are rights are related to social equality.
They are positive rights in that they enhance the power of government to do something to the person to enable her or him in some ways.
They are generally interpreted as programmatic clauses, obligating governments and legislature to pursue social policies, but do not create individual claims.
They require the affirmative action of government for the implementation.
Social rights require the governments to act in a positive, interventionist manner so as to create the necessary conditions for human life and development.
The governments are expected to take active steps toward promoting the well-being of all its members out of social solidarity.
It is believed that everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realization of the economic, social and cultural rights (ESCR) indispensable for his or her dignity and the free development of his or her personality.
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ESCR) relate to the conditions necessary to meet basic human needs such as food, shelter, education, health care, and gainful employment.
They include the rights to education, adequate housing, food, water, the highest attainable standard of health, the right to work and rights at work, as well as the cultural rights of minorities and indigenous peoples.
109 Some of the ways of promoting individuals’ ESCR include: • Investigating abuses of economic, social and cultural rights.
• Strengthening the legal recognition of economic, social and cultural rights, including by campaigning for a new international complaint mechanism to provide victims of economic, social and cultural rights violations with an international remedy.
• Demanding justice for individuals, families and communities who face discrimination and abuses of their economic, social and cultural rights.
This could be by signing up for urgent actions on cases involving ESCR abuses, and • Campaigning for economic, social and cultural rights to be recognized in decisions related to trade, resources, finances and the environment, and to hold both state and non-state actors accountable for abuses of these rights 3.3 Group or People’s (Solidarity) Rights Group rights are rights held by a group rather than by its members separately, or rights held only by individuals within the specified group; in contrast, individual rights are rights held by individual people regardless of their group membership or lack thereof.
Group rights have historically been used both to infringe upon and to facilitate individual rights, and the concept remains controversial.
Group rights are associated with social control unlike individual rights which are often associated with political and economic freedom.
These rights have received increasing rhetorical affirmation at the international level though “only the people’s rights to self-determination and to disposal of natural wealth, included in the international covenants have received authoritative acceptance in international law.
Other group rights include “the right to development, the right to peace, the right to environment, the right to ownership of the common heritage of humankind, and the right to communication.
Group rights may aim to ensure equal opportunity and/or attempt to actively redress inequality; a case in point is the Niger Delta issue relating to the perceived deprivation of the people (the Ijaws) from such part of Nigeria.
110  3.4 Self Assessment Exercises 1.
List the three classes of human rights discussed in this Unit.
2.
Describe any two of the listed classes of human rights 3.
Highlight the four ways of promoting economic, social and cultural rights 4.0 CONCLUSION Having become more familiar with the classification of human rights through this Unit, it is important to note that each of these classes has its own destructive characteristic but it suffices to note that the civil and political rights are negative rights or immunity claims in citizen towards the state, in the sense that they limit the power of a government and protect peoples’ rights against its power.
They relate to the sanctity of the individual and his rights within the socio-political milieu in which he is located.
They imply that no government or society should act against individuals in certain ways that would deprive them of inherent political or personal rights, such as the rights to life, liberty, and security of person, freedom of speech, press, assembly and religion.
Furthermore, one can conclude that all human rights carry corresponding obligations that must be translated into concrete duties to guarantee these rights.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, attempts have been made to get you to understand that human rights can come in different forms which include; civil and political rights, economic, social and cultural rights as well as group or people’s right which can equally be called solidarity right.
You have also been made to understand the fact that while the first two classes of rights discussed here relate more to individual rights, the third which is the last one relates more to groups and can be argued for as an instrument to actively facilitate the realisation of equality in a given society.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT To what extent will it be politically correct to say that human rights can be discussed under three major classes?
Support you position with concrete examples.
111 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amnesty International (2010).
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights www.amnestyusa.org Retrieved 24th April 2010.
Sokefun, J.A.
et.al.
(2008).
Course Guide Law 241 Human Rights Law Lagos: NOUN Wikipedia (2010).
Individual and Group Rights www.en.wikipedia.org Retrieved 24th April 2010 Wikipedia (2010).
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights www.en.m.wikipedia.org Retrieved 16th March 2010.
112 UNIT 3: NIGERIAN CONSTITUTION AND FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Constitution 3.2: Provisions of Fundamental Human Rights as Contained in the Nigerian Constitution 3.3: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you learnt about the three main classifications of human rights.
This Unit is another opportunity for you to find out about the concept of constitution and the provisions of fundamental human rights contained in our own constitution, that is, the Nigerian Constitution.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this unit, you should be able to: 1.
State the meaning of constitution 2.
Explain the provisions of fundamental human rights as contained in the Nigerian Constitution 113  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Constitution To some people, a constitution refers to a specially written document which outlines the principles and basic political institutions by which a state is governed.
However, not all constitutions are written in single document.
A constitution is an agreed fundamental principles and rules determining the structure and power of a State.
Such principles or rules embodied in the constitution show the custom, conventions and law of a given State.
Thus, the constitution is concerned with how decisions are reached and prescribes how power of the State is to be allocated between the various organs of state and provides methods by which this distribution can be changed.
Most constitutions define the limits of a government’s authority thereby automatically establishing the various rights of a state’s citizens.
3.2 Human Rights Provisions in the Nigerian Federal Constitution Background: After several years of military rule, Nigeria returned to civil rule in 1999 with a constitution tagged the 1999 Nigerian Constitution.
The constitution adopted the presidential system of government on the belief that it is essential to effective leadership in a country with a federal system of government.
Human Rights Human Rights are those rights which the international community recognizes as belonging to all individuals by the very fact of his humanity.
These are rights naturally accruable to every person by virtue of his/her existence as a human being.
The fundamental human rights are a chapter in the constitution of Nigeria.
The constitution is the basic law in the country, which sets out how the country is governed.
Fundamental human rights are those rights that every person is entitled to by virtue of the fact that they are human beings.
No laws can take away any of those rights, unless the Declaration of Human Rights itself allows such laws to be made.
Any laws, which already exist that take away any of the rights may be declared to be null and void.
The constitution starts out by stating that 114 everyone is entitled to individual rights and freedom.
But these rights and freedoms may be subjected to limitations.
These limitations are there to ensure that the rights and freedom of the individual are not a hindrance to public interest or infringe on the rights and freedom of other people.
The Nigerian Constitution under Chapter IV enumerates the following as fundamental rights: * Right to life: Every citizen has a right to life.
No person may kill or take away the live of a citizen.
The only exception to this however, is those who have been tried and sentenced to death by a competent court of law * Right to dignity of human persons: Every individual has the right to and respect for the person.
Thus, a person should not be subjected to any form of torture or any inhuman and degrading treatment.
* Right to personal liberty: A citizen cannot be detained unlawfully.
Anybody detained by law should be informed promptly in the language he understands the reasons of his/her arrests or detention.
He should be brought to court for trial or granted bail within a reasonable time.
* Right to fair hearing: A person is entitled to fair hearing within a reasonable time by a court or tribunal whenever he/she is charged with violation of the laws of the land.
* Right to compensation for property compulsorily acquired.
* Right to private and family life: Individual citizens are entitled to the privacy of their lives, their homes, correspondence, and telephone conversations.
Individual has the right to marry and rear children.
Couples have right to run the affairs of their homes the way they deem fit without external interference.
* Right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
A citizen is entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
He may change his religious belief.
A pupil/student may not be forced to receive religious instructions or attend religious ceremonies and observances other than his own.
Every religious denomination may provide religious instructions for their children.
115 * Right to freedom of expression: This freedom includes the right to hold opinions, receive and impart ideas, information without interference.
* Right to peaceful assembly and association.
This includes the right to form and belong to associations, clubs, cultural unions, trade union and other organisations.
* Right to freedom of movement.
This is the right which every citizen has to move freely throughout Nigeria and to reside in any part of it.
Under this freedom, a Nigerian citizen cannot be expelled or deported from Nigeria nor refused entry into Nigeria.
* Right to freedom from discrimination on the grounds of ethnic group, place of origin, circumstance of birth, sex, religion or political opinion.
The above rights are classified under Chapter IV of the Constitution as Fundamental Rights.
However, there are other rights under the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy provided under Chapter II of the Constitution.
These include the right to: (i) Free and compulsory education.
(ii) Adequate health care, gainful employment.
(iii) Shelter, food etc.
The former are justiceable rights, i.e.
citizens could go to court to enforce them if denied.
There are however some limitations to the enjoyment of these fundamental human rights.
In the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health or for the purpose of protecting the rights, reputations and freedom of other persons and so on, the government may take away from an individual some of these rights.
3.3: Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What do we mean by constitution?
2.
Recall the meaning of human rights.
3.
What are those provisions in the Nigerian Constitution that emphasise the promotion of human rights?
116  4.0 CONCLUSION The Constitution of every country should emphasise specific provisions on human rights.
This is particularly so because there is an international consciousness gets every country to promote the rights of their citizens.
These rights are expected to further assure the citizens those rights needed for establishing and promoting positive social interactions among themselves.
It is therefore expected that all agencies of government and individuals would need to strive to regularly promote these fundamental human rights in our daily interactions within and among ourselves.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have learnt about what constitution means.
Your knowledge of the concept of human rights has been further improved.
The Unit has equally drawn your attention to the fact that the Nigerian Constitution, even as it is presently being reviewed has specific provisions on human rights.
Our rights in the areas of movement, association, worship, education, adequate health, shelter and gainful employment, to mention just but a few are therefore contained in the nations’ constitution even when it is reviewed severally.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give a simple meaning of the concept of constitution and identify any five rights which Nigeria’s Constitution has provided for you as individual hoping to promote the best of interaction amongst your kith and kin.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS African Commission on Human and People’s Rights.
(1993).
Resolution on Human and People’s Rights Education.
Brysk, A.
(Ed).
(2002).
Globalization and Human Rights.
USA: University of California Press.
Claude, R. (1996).
Educating for Human Rights, The Philippines and Beyond.
Quezon City: University of the Philippines Press.
117 Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999) 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Lagos: Federal Government Press Orend, B.
(2002).
Human Rights: Concept and Context.
Canada: Broadview Press.
Organisation of African Unity.
(1986).
African Charter on Human and People's Rights.
118 UNIT 4: UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS/ AU CHARTER 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Universal Declaration of Human Rights 3.2: The Origin of the African Union 3.3: The Objectives and Organs of African Union 3.4.: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit, our main concern is to study the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Africa Union Charter.
This is another opportunity for you to relate the human rights provisions contained in Nigeria’s Constitution with those prescribed at the international level.
The Unit also creates avenue for you to relate the issue of human rights to the activities of a major continental organisation such as the African Union.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2.
Mention some of the provisions of the Declaration 3.
Explain the origin of the African Union 4.
Mention the objectives and organs of African Union 119  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights Adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the United Nations on December 10, 1948 gave a global thrust to the Human Rights.
Rane Cassin, the distinguished French Jurist who drafted United Nations Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1968 for his works on Human Rights.
The United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, the two Covenants – the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights(ICESCR) and the Optional Protocols taken together are known as the International Bill of Rights.
All of them have been ratified by Nigeria.
The United Nations Human Rights Norms include the following: 1.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 (select) Article 3: Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.
Article 5: No one shall be subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 7: All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law.
Article 8: Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent National Tribunals for the acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him by the constitution or by law.
Article 9: No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.
Article 10: Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal in the determination of his rights and obligations and of the criminal charge against him.
Article 11: (i.).
Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defence.
(ii.)
No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offence under national 120 or international law, at the time when it was committed.
Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the penal offence was committed.
Article 12: No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interferences with his privacy, family, home or correspondence.
Article 14: (i.)
Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.
(ii.)
This right may not be invoked in the case of prosecutions genuinely arising from non-political crimes or acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
3.1 THE AFRICA UNION CHARTER: HISTORICAL OVERVIEW The Organisation of African Unity was established on 25 May 1963 in Addis Ababa.
It was involved in pressing forward the process of de-colonisation of the continent, particularly through the United Nations Special Committee, but then became less active.
Originally with 32 members, it had 53 members in 2006 with South Africa becoming the 53rd member in 1994 (all African countries except Morocco, which withdrew in 1985 following the admission of Western Sahara are members).
The organization changed its name to the African Union (AU) in 2001, following the model of the European Union, with the aim of giving Africa a stronger voice in world affairs, and increasing its ability to deal with such issues as the effects of globalisation, the status of women, internal conflict, and human rights.
The African Union was launched in Durban on July 9, 2002, by its first President, South African Thabo Mbeki, at the first session of the Assembly of the African Union.
At the second summit meeting of the AU (Mozambique, July 2003), the decision to form a Pan-African Parliament was adopted; it held its inaugural session in Addis Ababa in March 2004.
The body will eventually have 265 members, five from each of the AU’s 53 member states.
In May 2004, the AU officially launched a 15-member Peace and Security Council designed to intervene in African conflicts.
The Council is empowered to mandate peacekeeping missions in areas where ceasefire accords have been signed.
121 The AU is governed by the AU Assembly of Heads of State and the Pan-African Parliament, which are both assisted by the AU Commission which constitutes one of the secretariats of the Pan African Parliament.
The current President of the Pan African Parliament, Gertrude Mongella, is the Head of State of African Union.
Alpha Oumar Konare is the current Chairman of the African Union Commission, which serves as the Secretariat of the Pan African Parliament and a civil service of the African Union.
The objectives of the African Union, as contained in the Constitutive Act, are to: • achieve greater unity and solidarity between the African countries and the peoples of Africa; • defend the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of its Member States; • accelerate the political and socio-economic integration of the Continent; • promote and defend African common positions on issues of interest to the continent and its peoples; • encourage international cooperation, taking due account of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; • promote peace, security, and stability on the continent; • promote democratic principles and institutions, popular participation and good governance; • promote and protect human peoples' rights in accordance with the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and other relevant human rights instruments; • establish the necessary conditions which enable the continent to play its rightful role in the global economy and in international negotiations; • promote sustainable development at the economic, social and cultural levels as well as the integration of African economies; 122 • promote cooperation in all fields of human activity to raise the living standards of African peoples; • coordinate and harmonise the policies between the existing and future Regional Economic Communities for the gradual attainment of the objectives of the Union; • advance the development of the continent by promoting research in all fields, in particular in science and technology; and • Work with relevant international partners in the eradication of preventable diseases and the promotion of good health on the continent.
3.3 ORGANS OF THE AFRICAN UNION General Assembly: The Constitutive Act is very specific about the functions and powers of the Assembly as the supreme organ of the AU comprising of Heads of State and Government.
South Africa has participated in the development of the Rules of Procedure for the Assembly, and the same process has taken place at SADC level.
Executive Council: The Executive Council is a meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs or other Ministers charged with the responsibility of dealing with the AU.
The issues discussed by the Executive Council will have to feed into the Assembly.
Permanent Representatives Committee: The Permanent Representatives Committee (PRC) is composed of Permanent Representatives and other Plenipotentiaries to the Union.
This structure was not formally recognised under the OAU, even though the Ambassadors do meet on an ongoing basis.
The PRC, amongst other things, work closely with the Commission; be involved in the process of nomination and appointment of Commissioners; look into the selection and appointment of consultants and follow-up on the implementation of Summit decisions.
The work of the PRC feeds into the Executive Council.
123 Commission: The Commission is based at the Headquarters of the AU and headed by the Chairperson of the AU.
The Chairperson is assisted by a Deputy Chairperson and Commissioners, as well as other members of staff.
Specialised Technical Committees: There is also be Specialised Technical Committees (STCs) established within the Secretariat and headed by Commissioners.
The STCs deal with issues such as Rural Economy and Agricultural Matters, Monetary and Financial Affairs, Trade, Customs and Immigration Matters, Science, Technology, Transport, Communications, Education, Culture, amongst other things.
Pan-African Parliament (PAP): The Protocol establishing the Pan African Parliament was adopted in 2000 during the OAU Summit in Lomè, Togo.
The Protocol is now open for signature and ratification.
So far 21 member states have signed and three have ratified.
Article 22 of the PAP protocol provides for the Protocol to enter into force after deposit of the instruments of ratification by a simple majority of the member states.
Though the Constitutive Act of the African Union does not elaborate on the functions and powers of the Pan African Parliament, the Protocol provides that, for the first five years of the Parliament's existence, it will have advisory and consultative powers only.
Economic, Social and Cultural Council (ECOSOCC): This is one organ of the AU that will provide for civil society participation.
The Lusaka Summit decision on ECOSOCC directs that member states will have to decide on the structure, functioning, areas of competence selection criteria, Rules of Procedure and work programme of the ECOSOCC.
Court of Justice: The Constitutive Act of the AU provides for the establishment of the Court of Justice and for a Protocol on its statute, composition and functions.
It is still unclear what the exact functions and powers of the Court will be, and whether it will have jurisdiction over states or nationals.
The functions and powers of the Court will be elaborated upon in a Protocol, which will clarify what the impact on domestic legislation will be.
124  Financial Institutions: Article 19 of the Act provides for the establishment of financial institutions whose rules and regulations shall be defined in protocols relating thereto.
The institutions are: The African Bank, The African Monetary Fund and African Investment Bank 4.0 CONCLUSION A detailed understanding of the relationship between the fundamental human rights and the provisons of both Nigerian Constitution as well as those of the Universal Declaration Charter will go a long way in promoting a better understanding of the concept.
Likewise, it will facilitate your preparation as Social Studies teacher for effective delivery of the content relating to human rights in your subject curriculum.
This is with the assumption that the learners so taught will become more conscious of their rights as well as other peoples’ rights with less chances of infringement occurring.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have learnt about the Charter on Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the origin of the African Union as well their goals and objectives with particular reference to human rights protection.
The various organs of the African Union and their responsibilities with reference to human rights have also been highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Highlight some of the provisions of the Charter on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
b.
To what extent will you agree with the fact that respecting some of these rights has been a major problem among African nations?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
(1948).
UNESCO (1998).
Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A history of its creation and implementation.
UNESCO: Paris.
125 UNIT 5: CIVIC RESPONSIBILITIES 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Civic Responsibilities 3.2: Types of Civic Responsibilities 3.3: Importance of Fulfilling our Civic Responsibilities 3.4.: Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this Unit our main concern is to study the meaning of civic responsibilities, the responsibilities of citizens towards their country, fellow citizens and themselves.
Every right we enjoy as a citizen of a given country implies a responsibility or obligation which we must be ready to carry out or fulfil.
The fact that each and every one of belongs to society, town, village, city, or nation implies that we should be able to identify with such polity.
It is therefore expected that we need to do a lot in order to make such polity grow and thereby contribute to our own growth and development as citizens.
126  2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of your interaction with this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Give a simple meaning of civic responsibilities 2.
Identify the different types of civic responsibilities 3.
State the importance of fulfilling our civic responsibilities and obligations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Civic Responsibilities Civics is the study of government and politics.
Students in civics classes study the rights and responsibilities of citizens and residents.
Civic responsibilities are the responsibilities of a citizen.
Self (2010) describes civic responsibility as comprising of actions and attitudes associated with democratic governance and social participation.
They include paying taxes, voting, registering for military service, serving on a jury, participation in government, volunteering, memberships of voluntary organisations and obeying the laws of the land.
The power of the government comes from the people, so it is important for people to understand their civic duties and responsibilities.
Civic Responsibility can also be defined as the "responsibility of a citizen.
Actions of civic responsibility can be displayed in advocacy for various causes, such as political, economic, civil, and environmental or quality of life issues.
Civic responsibility dates back to ancient Rome whose citizens wanted to contribute to Roman society.
Civic responsibility is said to have existed for centuries in society but it was not officially sanctioned as a blueprint for democracy in 1787 by the ratification of the United States Constitution.
In the 18th and 19th Centuries and through the 1930s civic responsibility in America was tied a commonwealth perspective.
Citizens participated in projects that shaped communities and ultimately the nation.
127 3.2 Types of Civic Responsibilities The development of civic responsibility can be considered to be an important component of healthy adolescent development.
They are expected to be exhibited through various actions and behaviours as citizens interact among themselves and within the nation.
Some of the ways by which citizens are expected carry out their civic responsibilities and fulfil their civic obligations and duties include the following: Payment of taxes and charges: To tax means to impose a financial charge or other levy upon a taxpayer (an individual or legal entity) by a state or the functional equivalent of a state such that failure to pay is punishable by law.
A tax may be defined as a "pecuniary burden laid upon individuals or property owners to support the government […] a payment exacted by legislative authority”.
A tax "is not a voluntary payment or donation, but an enforced contribution, exacted pursuant to legislative authority" and is "any contribution imposed by government […] whether under the name of toll, tribute, impost, duty, custom, excise, subsidy, aid, supply, or other name.
(Wikipedia, 2010).
One of the duties of a citizen is the payment of taxes both national and local.
It must be realised that taxes paid by citizens provide the bulk of the income every government needs for effective execution of projects.
Taxes are also imposed by many sub-national entities.
Taxes consist of direct tax or indirect tax, and may be paid in money or as its labour equivalent (often but not always unpaid labour).
From the view of economists, a tax is a non-penal, yet compulsory transfer of resources from the private to the public sector levied on a basis of predetermined criteria and without reference to specific benefit received The legal definition and the economic definition of taxes differ in that economists do not consider many transfers to governments to be taxes.
For example, some transfers to the public sector are comparable to prices.
Examples include tuition at public universities and fees for utilities provided by local governments.
Governments also obtain resources by creating money (e.g., printing bills), and by imposing penalties (e.g.
traffic fines).
128 Voting at election and Standing for election: Voting is a method for a group such as a meeting or an electorate to make a decision or express an opinion—often following discussions, debates, or election campaigns.
It is often found in democracies and republics.
Voting is a social structure in which classes are abolished and property is commonly controlled, as well as a political philosophy and social movement that advocates and aims to create such a society (Wikipedia, 2010).
In modern usage, voting is often used to refer to the policies of the various communist states, which were authoritarian governments that had centrally planned economies and ownership of all the means of production.
"Pure voting" in the Marxian sense refers to a classless, stateless and oppression-free society where decisions on what to produce and what policies to pursue are made democratically, allowing every member of society to participate in the decision-making process in both the political and economic spheres of life.
Most communist governments based their ideology on Marxism-Leninism (Wikipedia, 2010).
The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (2009) also describes voting as “a formal expression of preference for a candidate for office or for a proposed resolution of an issue”.
It is a means by which such a preference is made known, e.g.through the raising of hands or a marked ballot.
The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia (2007) gives an expanded definition of voting by describing it as the method of registering collective approval or disapproval of aperson or a proposal.
The term generally refers to the process by which citizens choose candidates for public office or decide political questions submitted to them.
It may also describe the formal recording of opinion of a group on any subject.
In either sense it is a means of transforming numerous individual desires into a coherent and collective basis for decisions.
Voting is also the right to participate in elections as well as in all other political undertakings aimed at ascertaining the will of the electorate such as referenda, plebiscites and recalls.
The right to vote is granted, as a rule, only to those citizens who meet the age, residence, and other legal requirements (Mishin, 2010).
129 Volunteering This is described by Self (2010) as a form of civic responsibility, which involves the giving of time or labour without the expectation of monetary compensation.
Volunteering allows citizens the opportunity to share their skills and talents as well as learn new skills while helping those in need of assistance.
It involves doing charitable or helpful work without pay.
Defend the country against external aggressors Every citizen has a pressing duty to come to the defence of his country in time of war.
A country’s armed forces may be organized as standing forces (e.g.
regular army), which describes a professional army that is engaged in no other profession than preparing for and engaging in warfare.
It is however part of a citizen’s civic responsibilities to be ever ready for drafting if need be.
Obedience to law: The citizens have an important duty to obey the laws of the land if they want to see an orderly society and not an anarchical society.
If citizens fail to obey the laws of the country, there will be insecurity and government will not be able to guarantee the rights of individuals.
Loyalty: The main duty of a citizen is that of giving allegiance or loyalty to the community to which he/she belongs.
Every government requires the loyalty of its citizens to be able to rule effectively and create the atmosphere of peace and tranquillity.
A fair day’s work: It is part of our civic responsibilities to make sure that we contribute our best to whichever establishment we find ourselves as citizens of a country.
Other civic responsibilities include honesty and opposition to corruption, tolerance and respect.
130  3.3: IMPORTANCE The importance of civic responsibility is paramount to the success of democracy and philanthropy.
By engaging in civic responsibility, citizens ensure and uphold certain democratic values written in the Nigerian Constitution and the Human Rights.
Those values or duties include justice, freedom, equality, diversity, authority, privacy, due process, property, participation, truth, patriotism, human rights, rule of law, tolerance, mutual assistance, self restraint and self respect.
Schools teach civic responsibility to students with the goal to produce responsible citizens and active participants in community and government.
In a representative government, voting which is part of our civic responsibility commonly implies election is a way for an electorate to select among candidates for office.
In politics, voting is the method by which the electorate of a democracy appoints representatives in its government, thereby feeling more confident and better assured of dividends of democracy.
When citizens pay their taxes it becomes easier to fund every programme that it operates.
The fulfillment of our obligations as citizens is major contributing factor to the likelihood of a better understanding the responsibilities of citizenship.
Through civic responsibilities, citizens become freer to pursue their inalienable rights as well as respect the same pursuits by other individuals.
3.4 Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Give a simple definition of civic responsibility.
2.
List some of the civic responsibilities discussed in this Unit.
3.
State any two importance of performing your civic responsibilities as a Nigerian citizen.
131 4.0 CONCLUSION Civic responsibility involves addressing social problems in an informed, committed, and positive manner.
It is not merely a matter of voting or obeying the laws, it includes citizenship for democracy, participatory democracy and social responsibility.
As a Social Studies teacher in training, you will be expected to create opportunities for learners to learn how to participate in a democracy.
Civic responsibilities that should be encouraged among learners also include; promoting positive images of their country, and home town, whether inside it or away, offering assistance, and calling for assistance when they notice that someone needs help which they cannot provide.
They need to be made to understand that anything that improves or maintains the status quo of the citizenry is part of one’s civic responsibilities.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit has discussed the concept of civic responsibilities and the different types of civic duties expected of a citizen in order to effectively take healthy role in the life of one’s’ nation and resultantly help in the promotion of good governance.
This is based on the belief that the only way a civilized society can move forward is if its members inidividually and collectively perform their civic responsibilities.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you understand by the concept of civic responsibility and in what forms can a citizen demonstrate such responsibilities?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (2009) Dictionary.com (2010).
Meaning of civic responsibility www.dictionary.com Retrieved 14th April 2010 Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia (2007) 132  Mishin A.A. (2010).
Voting The Great Soviet Encyclopedia Farlex Inc. Self, J.
(2010).
Civic responsibility www.LearningToGive.org Service Learning (2000).
Fostering civic responsibility Service Learning Network Spring (18) 1 Wikipedia (2010).
Voting www.en.wikipedia.org Retrieved 14th April 2010 133
