 Course Code PED261 Course Title Primary School Social Studies Curriculum and Methods Course Team Funsho Olatunde Ph.
D. (Developer/Writer) - LASU NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2006 Reprinted 2010 ISBN: 978-058-243-6 All Rights Reserved Printed by: Goldsworth 2 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Introduction to Social Studies…………………......... 1 Unit 1 Meaning, Nature and Rationale for Social Studies Education................................................................. 1 Unit 2 Aims, Objectives and Functions of the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum…………….…… 12 Unit 3 An Overview of the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum.................................................... 20 Module 2 Planning and Implementing the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum …………………..…… 29 Unit 1 Patterns of Curriculum Organization……………..… 29 Unit 2 Factors that Influence Social Studies Curriculum development and Implementation ……….. ……..… 37 Unit 3 Planning the Social Studies Lesson………………... 45 Module 3 Teaching and Learning Social Studies in Primary School ….................................................... 53 Unit 1 The Teacher’s Role in Facilitating Learning……….. 53 Unit 2 The Expository and Activity Teaching Methods ..................................................................... 63 Unit 3 The Inquiry and the Discussion Teaching Methods..................................................................... 73 Module 4 Resources for Teaching Primary School Social Study........................................................................... 83 Unit 1 Selection and Functions of Instructional Materials....... 83 Unit 2 Instructional Materials for Schools ……………….
95 Unit 3 Sourcing for Instructional Materials ……………… 107 Module 5 Evaluation of Social Studies Programme …….… 116 Unit 1 The Nature of Evaluation ……………………….… 116 Unit 2 Models of Evaluation …………………………….. 124 Unit 3 Techniques of Evaluating Social Studies Programmes............................................................. 136 3 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1 Meaning, Nature and Rationale for Social Studies Education Unit 2 Aims, Objectives and Functions of the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum Unit 3 An Overview of the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum UNIT 1 MEANING, NATURE AND RATIONALE FOR SOCIAL STUDIES EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Social Studies 3.2 Nature and Scope of Social Studies 3.3 Rationale for Teaching Social Studies in Nigeria 3.4 Traditional Social Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to the first Study Unit.
This study unit will lay the foundation for what you will learn in other units of this book.
First, you will learn some basic definitions of Social Studies.
Second, you will learn why Social Studies were incorporated in the primary school curriculum and finally, you will learn about the nature and scope of Social Studies.
I believe you will find this unit interesting and urge you to attempt the two exercises contained in the unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define Social Studies and discuss issues surrounding the definition(s)  explain the nature and scope of Social Studies 4 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS  justify the rationale for introducing Social Studies in the Nigerian school system  discuss the traditional social education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Social Studies Social Studies is a difficult concept to define.
This is largely because of the complex nature of the subject.
Over the years, experts in the field have attempted to define Social Studies, resulting in variations of the definitions in different countries.
We shall take a look at some of these definitions below.
One of the earliest definitions of Social Studies was by Wesley (1950) who defined Social Studies as “those aspects or portions of the Social Sciences that have been selected and adapted for use in schools”.
Another definition was presented by Barth and Shermis (1970) who defined Social Studies as “a discipline in which teaching and learning of attitudes, values and skills overshadow the acquisition of facts and information”.
In the views of Dubey and Prokupek (1980), Social Studies is a process of education, which utilizes the study of human life for the purpose of giving children the opportunity of solving problems of crucial importance both for the individual and for the society”.
In his own opinion, Mansaray (1984) defines social studies as “the study of the interactions between man and his physical and social environments, of the problems and issues posed by these interactions and of the way by which man seeks solution and clarification to them”.
In Nigeria, the same definition is provided by the Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme (1971) and the Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERDC 1983) who defined Social Studies as “common learnings of man’s interaction with his or her social and physical environment”.
Explaining further, the Committee states, “Social Studies is not only a study, but a way of life; of how man influences, and is being influenced by his physical, social, political, economic, psychological and cultural environments.
It is the totality of experience and understanding a child gets having been exposed to a course of study based on man’s problems in his or her environment, the factors that are normally responsible in man’s interactions with this environment, and the resulting ways of life of man”.
5 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Social Studies: The study of human beings within his/her environment Other definitions by experts from Nigeria include that of Adaralegbe (1975) who defined Social Studies as “the modern attempt at interdisciplinary and interrelated study of a topic, a problem, an issue, and a concern”.
In his views, Social Studies is a problem-approach through which man studies and learns about problems of survival in his environment.
On the other hand, Omoshehin (1988) defined Social Studies as “the study of man within his or her environment, and how he or she deals with the multitude of factors that bare on man’s existence.” Explaining further, Omoshehin says, “Social Studies provide ways of looking at the society in order to understand its structure and problems and to find ways of solving the problems of the society.
From the diverse definitions of Social Studies above, you can see that there is no standard definition of Social Studies.
However, the definition by the Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme/NERDC may be considered as the standard definition of Social Studies in Nigeria.
In spite of the various view point of what Social Studies should be about, experts appear to agree on what Social Studies is not.
These views were listed in the UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies (1981), quoted below: 1.
Those who believe that Social Studies should focus on ‘problems’ do not include purely individual problems or problems that are peculiar to a given individual.
For instance, the study of prescription for the medical treatment of an individual would not typically be conceived as a Social Studies problem.
But the study of whether medical prescriptions should be issued under a state-controlled or privately conducted practice would be a proper area of investigation in the Social Studies.
6 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
Social Studies is not concerned with the natural or physical world except as these relate to humankind.
For example, the study of the nucleus of an atom is within the domain of the physical sciences.
The proper use and control of nuclear energy is a legitimate topic for the Social Studies.
3.
Social Studies is not synonymous with indoctrination or with the uncritical acceptance of beliefs.
All societies have some fundamental values and beliefs, which they convey and reinforce through their social institutions, including the schools.
But to ascribe to the Social Studies programme the major responsibility for such enculturation is to assign it a burden which must be shared by all social institutions –including the family, the political system, the economy and institutions catering to the human spirit.
The Social Studies curriculum and the Social Studies teacher have a primary obligation to ‘teach’, not to ‘preach’.
3.2 Nature and Scope of Social Studies Social Studies is viewed by many experts as being primarily concerned with the study of human being within his or her environment.
According to Jarolimek and Walsh (1974) Social Studies focuses on man’s relationship with his natural and man made environments.
This view is also expressed by Olatunde (1998) who believes that the central theme of all social studies curriculum in different cultures or countries has been man in the society This implies that Social Studies deals with multiple factors that influence man’s existence including his activities, behaviour, believes and attitude, problems and how they are solved, relationships, kinds of institutions that are established and a host of other factors.
The scope of Social Studies therefore is enormous.
This is because it is seen as a body of knowledge that prepares learners to function as effective citizens that have the ability to solve the problems of their society.
Its ‘ability’ to extract from other subjects, concepts that enable it to study man as an entity also makes it a unique subject.
For instance, Social Studies include issues around how people live in a community (Sociology), who decides the allocation of resources (Political Science), information about what people produce, how they produce and distribute their products (Economics) people’s ways of life (anthropology) etc.
This further justifies Lawtons statement that “Social Studies is a unified integrated subject which draws appropriate knowledge and experiences from the social sciences and other disciplines, about man and the environment for the purpose of citizenship education”.
7 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS AArrttss && MMuussiicc Economics Geography Anthropology Religion Social Studies PPssyycchhoollooggyy Political Science LLiitteerraattuurree Science SSoocciioollooggyy Figure 1: Conception of Social Studies Adapted from Kenworthy L.S.
(1973).
Guide To Social Studies Teaching (4th Edition).
Belmont, California Wadswort Publishing Company.
In the views of Lawton (1981), “A good Social Studies curriculum is one which helps young individuals to develop into responsible adults by relating them to their society by means of appropriate knowledge and experience selected from the social sciences and other disciplines.
Therefore, one can conclude that the scope of a well-planed Social Studies programme consists of man’s past, present, and future life, including experiences encountered, reactions to the experiences/situations and solutions to future experiences.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
How was Social Studies defined by the Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme?
2.
How did Omosehin define Social Studies?
3.
According to many experts, Social Studies is primarily concerned with.
4.
Why is Social Studies different from other subjects?
5.
Mention four other subjects from which Social Studies is developed.
3.3 Rationale for Teaching Social Studies in Nigeria Social Studies was introduced into the Nigerian school system decades ago, with the goal of breaking down regional, ethnic and religious allegiances, in order to promote national unity.
In 1960, immediately 8 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS after independence, the elites started ‘fighting’ amongst themselves at regional and national levels over their share of the ‘national cake’.
Conflicts and wars, which broke out at the time, were hinged on religion and ethnicity.
Eventually, in 1966, Nigeria experienced its first coup d’ etat.
Within a decade of independence, Nigeria was embroiled in a civil war.
A lot of lives were lost, and it was against this background that Nigeria introduced Social Studies into the school system immediately after the war.
According to the report of the 1969 National Curriculum Conference, Social Studies was one of the subjects that would contribute to the attainment of the Nigerian educational goals including self realization, better human relationships, self and national economic efficiency, effective citizenship, national consciousness, national unity, social and political progress, scientific and technological progress and national reconstruction.
Other reasons for introducing Social Studies in the school system include: (a) To reduce the influence of colonial education on children.
Before the development of the Social Studies Curriculum, children in primary and secondary schools were made to study history, which at that time contained elements of colonialism.
Core values and cultural orientation was relegated to the background resulting in the inculcation of foreign values and culture.
It therefore became important to introduce a new subject that would assist children to understand their traditional values and culture hence the introduction of Social Studies.
(b) Influence of the African Conference in Mombassa, Kenya.
In 1968, an African Conference was organized where important issues pertaining to education and African development were discussed.
A call was made for educational reforms in Africa, which inspired the Nigerian Curriculum Conference organized in 1969.
At this conference, participants emphasized the need for Social Studies as a tool for national unity and citizenship education.
3.4 Traditional Social Education in Nigeria Before the advent of Social Studies, society had its traditional way of supporting a child’s development within its socio-cultural environment.
The entire society becomes the child’s school.
He or she learned customs, religion, language, norms and rules governing relationships, traditional practices etc as practiced in the community where he/she grew.
Such education is from birth to death, as he/she learns to assume 9 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS new roles from one age to another.
In effect, traditional social education in Nigeria attempts to fully integrate the child into the society.
In childhood and adulthood, the traditional Nigerian society contributes to the well being of the child by giving him or her opportunities for acquisition of skills relevant to his/her immediate environment.
Members of the community mentor young ones to learn survival and economic skills.
The traditional trades and vocations of the community are passed down from one generation to another hence, the acquisition of skills including trades and vocations such as agriculture, cattle, rearing, tie and dye, fishing, weaving, carving, sewing, poultry etc.
The term ‘traditional social education’ therefore refers to education, which Nigerians pass down to succeeding generations as distinct from the western type of education.
Prior to exposure to formal education, everybody is exposed to this type of traditional social education, through a variety of means.
It takes place everywhere at all times and through varying means.
It is an education, which makes everyone contribute to nation building and improvement of the society.
Gradually, the entire environment forms the child’s learning experiences.
Since Nigerian communities differ greatly from one another, the details of the context and methods of inculcating traditional social education in learners also differ.
However, the aims, methods and content of such education remain the similar to a large extent.
This education is considered the most important, because nobody can escape its influence.
The main objective of this education is always to enable the child grow into a functional member of the family and the society.
3.5 Introduction of Social Studies in its Present Form and Scope Social studies in its present form, scope and content was introduced into the primary school curriculum in the 70s.
Before then, a similar subject under different titles was taught in primary schools.
Some called it “General Knowledge”, while others called it “General Studies”.
Some others called it “Civic Education”.
These subject titles were used interchangeably between the late 1940s until the 1960s.
In the middle of the seventies, the faculty of Education of the University of Ife, (now Obafemi Awolowo University), Ile-Ife, ran seminars/workshops for teachers of social studies in Ogun, Ondo and Oyo states.
The participants worked on curriculum guides for the primary school grades starting from primary 1 through primary 6.
Each year, the group worked on a project for a particular class, went ahead to introduce it in their schools, and the next year, they came to discuss prospects and problems of what was done the previous year.
This became the systematic approach for introducing the social studies curriculum into schools.
10 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS The seminars/workshops stressed the need to socialize a child in such a way that he/she develops the potentials for the acquisition of skills, understanding of values, and development of attitudes needed to survive and excel in the society.
It was hoped that through the social studies programme, the child will become more aware of his/her social and physical environment, become learned, develop thinking abilities, become curious about his/her experiences within the community and seek to impart his/her environment positively.
Eventually, Social Studies was introduced to the school system as a panacea to specific national problems.
It was believed that the exposure of young people to the subject would instill in them a love for their country and a sense of loyalty to the Nigerian government.
It was also believed that if the subject exposed them to the problems in our society, they become better equipped through the acquisition of necessary skills needed for survival.
Therefore, it can be said that social studies was introduced to serve two closely related purposes: 1.
To guide learners towards understanding people from different social backgrounds and the methods they use for coping with their problems and conditions 2.
To guide learners in developing skills for interacting with people, reacting to situations and conditions in order to ensure their survival and growth as well as that of their society.
In conclusion, although Social Studies take its roots in many disciplines, its principal focus is on social action that can bring about desirable changes in the society.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
State the specific problems that led to the need for the introduction of social studies into the Nigerian school system?
2.
It is expected that the solution to these problems would bring about __________ in Nigeria?
3.
What was the traditional way of supporting a child’s development before the introduction of Social Studies?
4.
How did the Nigerian society contribute to the well being of a child?
5.
What is the main objective of traditional social education?
4.0 CONCLUSION The overall theme of Social Studies is the study of human beings within his/her environment.
The nature of the subject centers on all activities 11 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS relating to man’s existence within the society and its scope is enormous.
It draws its content from other disciplines in order to adequately study man in relation to his/her environment.
Social Studies is an important subject that has been introduced to inculcate positive values and promote indigenous culture among children.
It is also a field of study that fosters unity among individuals through better relationships, acquisition of skills including communication and problem solving skills, with a view to enhancing peace and development within the society.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has laid the foundation for all you will learn in the next couple of Units.
You have learnt about the diverse definitions of Social Studies from experts within and outside Nigeria.
You also learnt about the nature and scope of the subject.
You were presented with reasons why the subject was considered important for the Nigerian school system and how it was introduced as part of the school curriculum.
Finally, you learnt that the society had its own traditional social education even before the existence of modern Social Studies programme.
You learnt about how the traditional education was passed to children and the merits of the education.
In the next study unit, you will learn more about the Primary School Social Studies curriculum.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
The Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme defined Social Studies as “common learning of man’s interaction with his or her social and physical environment”.
2.
Omoshehin defined Social Studies as “the study of man within his or her environment, and how he or she deals with the multitude of factors that bare on man’s existence.” 3.
According to many experts, Social Studies is primarily concerned with the study of human being within his or her environment.
4.
Social Studies is different from other subjects because of its ‘ability’ to extract from other subjects, concepts that enable it to study man as an entity.
Social Studies is developed from several subjects including anthropology, Political Science, Economics and Sociology.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 12 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.
Lack of unity in the country after independence, influence of colonial education on children, lack of African education that promote values and culture 2.
It is expected that the solution to these problems would bring about unity in Nigeria 3.
A child received traditional social education from the entire society by learning about customs, religion, language, norms and rules governing relationships, traditional practices etc as practiced in the community where he/she grows 4.
The entire Nigerian society contributes to the well being of the child by giving him or her opportunities for acquisition of skills relevant to his/her immediate environment.
5.
The main objective of this education is to enable the child grow into a functional member of the family and the society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State three definitions of Social Studies?
2.
Discuss three areas that Social Studies experts agree is not a focus of the subject?
3.
What is the rationale for introducing Social Studies into the school system?
4.
What is the traditional social education about?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful.
Adaralegba, A.
(1980).
The Nigeria Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect NERDC, Social Studies Teaching: Issues and Problems.
Benin: City Ethiope.
Akinlaye F. A, et al (1981).
The Concept and Scope of Social Studies Education for School and Colleges.
Ibadan: Onibonoje Publishers & NERC.
Akinlaye, F. A.
& Adekoya, S. O.
A.
(eds.).
Readings in Social Studies Education.
Lagos: OACE Publishing Co. Barr, R. D. et al (1979).
Defining Social Studies.
Bulletin 51.
Virginia, National Council for The Social Studies.
Bonstingi, J. J.
1980).
Introduction to the Social Sciences.
USA: Allyn & Bacon, Inc. 13 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Federal Ministry of Education (1981).
The National Policy on Education.
NERDC Press.
Lagos.
Kenworthy, L.S.
(1973).
Guide to Social Studies Teaching (4th Edition).
Belmont, California Wadswort Publishing Company.
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
Primary School Curriculum Modules (Primary 1-5).
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
Onyabe, V. O.
(1979).
Defining Social Studies for Nigerian Social Studies.
NERDC: Benin Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
Osakwe, E. (1996).
Introduction to Social Studies.
JAAP Alero Publishers.
Warri: Nigeria.
14 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 2 AIMS, OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Social Studies’ Curriculum Aims and Objectives 3.2 Function of the Social Studies Education 3.3 Contributions of Primary School Social Studies Curriculum to Child Development 3.4 Specific Objectives for Primary School Social Studies Teachers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last study unit, you were introduced to the meaning, scope and background to the introduction of Social Studies in the school system.
This study unit will follow-up on this information by presenting to you the aims, objectives and functions of the Primary School Social Studies curriculum.
The overall goal of this unit is to assist you to become acquainted with the expected outcomes of the curriculum.
As you can see, you are building up knowledge on the Social Studies Curriculum and this unit offers you another stimulating learning experience.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  list the aims and objectives of the primary school social studies curriculum  enumerate the contributions of the social studies curriculum to a child’s development  discuss specific objectives for teachers at various levels and ages in Primary school.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Social Studies’ Curriculum Aims and Objectives 15 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS No subject can be included in the national school curriculum without clear aims and objectives and the Social Studies curriculum is no exception.
When introducing a subject into the curriculum, it is expected that the learners will derive some benefits from learning the contents of the curriculum.
Therefore, there are specific objectives that are set out to be achieved when teaching and learning Social Studies.
In this context, ‘aims’ refer to general statements of the purpose or intentions of the curriculum.
Some of the key aims of social studies include: 1.
Developing an understanding of the immediate surroundings 2.
Developing skills that will enable a child to deal with and manage the forces of the world in which they live 3.
Educating young citizens about harmonious living and promoting an understanding of the different peoples who make up the society.
Objectives are more precise statements of purpose.
They indicate what should be taught in order to achieve the aims of the subject.
Before formulating the objectives of the Nigerian Social Studies Curriculum, three factors were considered: the nature of society, the nature of learners, and the nature of knowledge.
Therefore, Social Studies offer education that is relevant to life at every stage of an individual’s development.
According to the Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme (NERDC 1971), the key objectives of the primary school social studies curriculum includes: 1.
Creating awareness and understanding of the evolving social and physical environment as a whole, its natural, man-made, cultural and spiritual resources, together with the rational use and conservation of these resources for development.
2.
Developing capacity to learn and acquire certain basic skills, including listening, speaking, reading, writing, calculation, observation, analysis and inference which are essential to the forming of sound judgment.
3.
Ensuring the acquisition of relevant knowledge as part of the pre- requisite to personal development as well as making personal contributions for the improvement of mankind.
4.
Developing a sympathetic appreciation of the diversity and interdependence of all members of the local community, and the wider national and international community.
16 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 5.
Developing in children, a positive attitude to citizenship and a desire to make positive contributions to the creation of a united Nigeria.
Social Studies education aims at creating awareness and understanding of the evolving social and physical environment 3.2 Functions of the Social Studies Education Social Studies is said to contribute to the development of several skills essential for survival.
It is concerned not only with intellectual development, but also with the attitudes and beliefs that influence people’s behaviour.
Some of the specific functions of Social Studies include: 1.
Giving Social Experience to the Learners: Social Studies provides an opportunity for children and young adults to have various social experiences and obtain relevant information that will enable them to benefit from interaction with other members of the community.
2.
Providing learners with skills: Every individual need to learn core skills that would assist them to build positive relationships and foster national unity and development.
3.
Helping learners develop essential skills: Social Studies derives its content from all fields of study which contributes to an individual’s acquisition of critical thinking, problem-solving and decision-making skills.
17 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 4.
Contributing to the formulation of positive attitudes and values: The subject tends to inspire standards for developing positive beliefs, attitudes and behavior.
5.
Creation of Awareness: The contents of the Social Studies curriculum exposes learners to an understanding and appreciation of their environment - both its physical and socio-cultural diversities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List three key aims of the primary school social studies curriculum 2.
State two objectives of the Nigerian Social Studies that relates to the nation’s unity 3.
Mention three factors that were considered before formulating the objectives of the Nigerian Social Studies 4.
List four functions of social studies education 3.3 Contributions of Primary School Social Studies Curriculum to Child Development Apart from the aims and objectives stated above, the Social Studies curriculum is expected to contribute to a child’s development.
The Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme has identified some of the contributions of the subject to the development of a child.
These include: a) Self-confidence and initiative, based on an understanding of one’s own accomplishments, potentialities and sense of self worth.
b) Power of imagination and resourcefulness.
c) Desire for knowledge and continued learning.
d) Appreciation of the dignity of man and labour.
e) Sense of compassion for the less fortunate.
f) Sense of respect for and a tolerance of the opinions of others even in disagreement.
g) Willingness to accept necessary changes within a system of law and order deriving from the will of the people.
h) Attitude that is favourable to social, physical, cultural and economic development which will enable the child to participate in the life of the community, and when he/she leaves school, to be able to function as innovators and doers of good in society.
i) Social attitudes and values including co-operation, participation, inter-dependence on others, open-mindedness, honesty, integrity, trustworthiness, hard work, obedience etc.
18 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS j) A spirit of national consciousness and patriotism through interest and involvement in our local, national and world heritage.
k) The creation of their social awareness, critical judgment, and constructive effective thinking.
3.4 Specific Objectives for Primary School Social Studies Teachers It is important to identify what a child ought to learn from a particular subject/lesson.
In Nigeria, the Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme has identified some objectives for teachers who teach the subject.
These objectives are divided into three parts having put into consideration the child’s class level, age and the needs that should be addressed at such age and level.
Primary Levels One-Two (6-7 years) In Primary one and two, teachers should be guided by the following objectives: a) To introduce children to life at home, in school, and in the local community.
b) To develop in children the ability for self-expression and self- fulfillment through creativity.
c) To develop in children a sense of duty and responsibility to oneself and others.
d) To introduce children to their cultural heritage and to develop their sense of imagination.
e) To train their power of observation and expression.
Primary Levels Three-Four (8-9years) At this stage, teachers should build upon what had been gained in the early primary levels (i.e.
one-two) Teachers should: 1.
Consolidate and intensify the objectives of the previous stage.
2.
Introduce children to life in the District, Division, LGA or State.
3.
Assist children to discover facts about their District, Division, LGA or State by themselves.
4.
Develop a systematic appreciation of the diversity and interdependence of members of our District, Division, LGA or State.
5.
Develop in children the attitude and value of togetherness.
Primary Levels Five – Six (10-11+years) 19 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS As you are aware, this is the last two years of primary school.
At this stage, the child’s mental and physical abilities have been broadened and he or she can reason more intelligently than the six year old.
Therefore, teachers should be guided by the following objectives: 1.
To intensify and consolidate previous objectives 2.
To foster the habits of inquiry 3.
To develop in children awareness of the evolving social, cultural and economic aspect of the nation 4.
To help children to understand the interrelationship between Nigeria and the rest of the world 5.
To strengthen national consciousness and the spirit of common and active citizenship 6.
To inculcate in children the spirit of belongingness SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Enumerate at least six contributions of the social studies curriculum to a child’s development 2.
Which objectives should guide the Social Studies teacher at the lower classes when the learners are between 6 and 7 years old?
4.0 CONCLUSION If you reflect on the content of this unit, you will agree that the aims and objectives of introducing Social Studies into the Nigerian national school curriculum are worthwhile and will help in the achievement of the educational aims of the country.
The Social Studies curriculum was introduced into the school system to achieve specific aims and objectives for both teachers and learners and the curriculum also contributes to the learners’ developmental process.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learned that there is no subject that does not have its aims and objectives.
You have identified the aims and objectives of social studies at the primary school level and what the learners are expected to benefit from studying the contents of the curriculum.
You have also increased your knowledge about what teachers should strive to achieve during social studies classes at various class levels.
Finally, you now know that social studies contributes to the all-round development of a child.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Three key aims of social studies include: (a) The need for children to develop an understanding of their immediate surroundings.
(b) Developing certain skills, which will enable a child to deal with and manage the forces of the world in which they live.
(c) Educating young citizens in harmonious living and understanding the different peoples who make up the society.
20 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
Two objectives of the Nigerian Social Studies that relates to the nation’s unity are: (a) Developing a sympathetic appreciation of the diversity and interdependence of all members of the local community, and the wider national and international community.
(b).
Developing in children, a positive attitude to citizenship and a desire to make positive contributions to the creation of a united Nigeria.
3.
The three factors considered before formulating the Nigerian Social Studies objectives were (a) the nature of society (b) the nature of learners (c) the nature of knowledge.
4.
Four functions of Social Studies education include: (a) Providing learners with skills (b) Helping learners develop essential skills: (c) Contributing to the formulation of positive attitudes and values (d) Creation Of Awareness ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Six contributions of social studies to the development of a child are: (a) Self-confidence and initiative, based on an understanding of one’s own accomplishments, potentialities and sense of self worth.
(b) Power of imagination and resourcefulness.
(c) Desire for knowledge and continued learning.
(d) Appreciation of the dignity of man and labour.
(e) Sense of compassion for the less fortunate.
(f) Sense of respect for and a tolerance of the opinions of others even in disagreement.
2.
Teachers at the lower primary classes, when learners are between 6 and 7 years old should be guided by the following objectives: (a) To introduce children to life at home, in school, and in the local community.
(b) To develop in children the ability for self-expression and self-fulfillment through creativity.
(c) To develop in children a sense of duty and responsibility to oneself and others.
(d) To introduce children to their cultural heritage and to develop their sense of imagination.
(e) To train their power of observation and expression.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 21 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.
Discuss the key objectives of the primary school social studies curriculum formulated by the Committee on Primary School Social Studies Programme.
2 State any three objectives that should guide the Social Studies teacher of learners of 8-9 years in the Primary school.
3 List and discuss the contributions of the Social Studies curriculum to a child’s development 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful.
Federal Ministry of Education (1981).
The National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC Press.
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
Primary School Curriculum Modules (Primary 1-5).
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
NERC (1973).
Guidelines on Primary School Curriculum.
Nigeria Educational Research Council.
Osakwe, E. (1996).
Introduction to Social Studies.
Warri, Nigeria: JAAP Alero Publishers.
22 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 3 AN OVERVIEW OF THE PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum 3.2 The PSSS Curriculum Modules and its Benefits 3.3 Presentation of the PSSS Curriculum Modules 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Have you ever seen the Nigerian Primary School Social Studies Curriculum?
Are you familiar with its contents?
Do you know why teachers are encouraged to use Curriculum Modules in primary schools?
If your answer to any of these questions is “No”, then you need not worry.
This is because you have an opportunity to learn all that you need to know about the Primary School Social Studies (PSSS) Curriculum and the Curriculum Modules in this study unit.
You will be provided with detailed description of the curriculum and how it was re- packaged into Modules.
You will also have the privileged of learning about the key contents of the Modules.
This promises to be an exciting Study Unit that you will find very informative.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the evolution of the PSSS Curriculum  explain why teachers are encouraged to use the PSSS Curriculum Modules  list the items that make up the Primary School Social Studies curriculum  explain what each aspect of the curriculum module entail 23 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evolution of the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum In the previous units, you were informed that before the introduction of the Social Studies Curriculum in schools, a similar subject was taught at the primary school level under a different title such as General Knowledge, General Studies or Civil Education.
These titles were frequently used interchangeably.
In the late 70s Social Studies in its present form, scope and content was introduced as a part of the primary school curriculum, and in the early 80s, the Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC), now known as the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) published the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum.
A curriculum is defined as a series of planned experiences offered to the learner under the guidance of the school.
(Wheler G.K.C.
(1979).
The PSSS Curriculum adopts a conceptual approach whereby each class is required to study certain concepts, which have been carefully organized into units of study.
Most of the units are arranged across classes (primary one – six) in spiral sequence.
This means that most of the concepts are repeated in varying forms and complexity throughout the primary school classes.
For instance, you may have a topic on ‘Family’ in Primary One, which provides basic information about who and what makes up a family.
In Primary Two, the topic may be repeated as ‘Family Relationships’.
This topic will reiterate what was learnt in Primary One and provide additional information such as the role of children and adults in a family, expected behaviour and expression of rights in family relationship etc.
The idea is to build on previous knowledge as the learner increases in age and social experience, using a variety of situations and settings.
This way, the learning of basic concepts becomes easier to comprehend.
Between 1981 and 1985, Curriculum Guides were produced for primary school subjects (including Social Studies) by the NERDC in collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Education and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
This led to some measure of harmonization in teaching the subject across the country.
However, teachers still had the challenge of adopting new teaching methods that would enhance learning.
Majority continued to teach passively without engaging learners in discussions and learning activities.
In order to further support teachers in improving teaching/learning through the adoption of new teaching methods and practice oriented continuous assessment, the Social Studies Curriculum, along with some other primary school subjects were reproduced into Modules in the late 80s.
24 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS With the new composition and structure of the Modules prepared under the auspices of the National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education, it is expected that teachers across the country would teach the same topics in detail, achieve the same objectives and practice the same learning activities.
Thus maintaining uniformity and harmonization of teaching/learning across the federation, and generally improving the quality of education at the primary school level.
3.2 The PSSS Curriculum Modules and its Benefits The first draft of the Primary School Social Studies modules was written in 1977/78 at a writing and critique workshop attended by retired and practicing teachers, parents who are specialists in field of education and other experts.
The current copy is an improved version after pre-testing it in some schools and after another critique conference held in 1988.
The Primary School Social Studies curriculum module is a structured scheme of work based on the national syllabi for primary schools.
Modules break the contents of the syllabi down to the basics, defining objectives, learning activities etc.
The curriculum module contains a list of themes that should be covered by a teacher within a specified period of time.
It also includes learning objectives, contents and content elements, activities, suggested assessment techniques and periods for each of the theme.
The modules are structured in a way that would ensure uniform mode of teaching.
This means that each primary Social Studies teacher in Nigeria is expected to teach the same topics, have the same teaching and learning objectives and activities, and assess learners using the same assessment instruments.
There are twenty-four (24) modules in Primary 1 Curriculum, twenty-seven (27) modules in primary two, thirty (30) Modules in primary 3, twenty-nine (29) modules in primary 4, thirty-two (32) modules in primary 5, and thirty (30) modules in primary 6.
(See Table 1 below for an example of the structure and content of the primary school curriculum modules).
The modular instruction is useful for a number of reasons.
Following are some of the benefits derived form the use of modules: (1) Standardization of Teaching/Learning Across The Country: The composition of the PSSS Curriculum modules provides a standard for uniformity in curriculum contents, teaching methods, and assessment of learners’ performance across the federation.
This will go a long way in regulating classroom practices and raise the quality of Social Studies education at the primary school level.
25 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (2) Enhances the Attainment of Learning Objectives The structure of the PSSS curriculum modules simplifies instruction in such a way that the teacher has access to relevant information and the necessary guidance (including list of materials) that would enhance effective learning resulting in the achievement of the objectives (2) Facilitates Effecting Teaching and Learning The modules recommend a variety of teaching methods and learning activities, which actively engages pupils.
Learners no longer regard their teachers as ‘boring preachers’ because they are allowed by their teachers to participate in their own education.
They introduce interesting activities, which inspires learners to be a part of the learning process.
Some of the learning activities contained in the modules include research, practical work, experiment, group work and discussions etc.
(3) Promotes Oriented Continuous Assessment of Learners Learners’ performance is assessed relative to each of the objectives, and they get a feedback of the result of each assessment immediately.
Continuous assessment will be easy, since the module can be used as a unit of measure for learner’s progress.
Since a learner must master an objective before moving on to the next, immediate remediation is ensured and if objectives are not achieved, guidance and counseling is introduced.
(4) Facilitates Discovery and Development of the Individual Learner’s Talents and Capabilities The use of modules helps to facilitate educational measurement for prescribing the mastery responses in the performance objectives.
With the inclusion of suggested assessment techniques (A/T), the teacher has the opportunity of a variety of instruments with which to assess learners in the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains.
He/she can get the learners to demonstrate their skills rather than write answers to questions in Social Studies.
(5) Encourages Learners to Search for Knowledge Modular instruction encourages learners to search for knowledge, thereby making use of the library and cultivating extensive reading habits.
26 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the current name of the national agency that published the PSSS curriculum in the early 80s?
2.
What were some of the problems that led to the adoption of the curriculum modules?
3.
Mention the names of the three groups that partnered to produce the PSSS curriculum modules 4.
List five benefits of the PSSS curriculum module 3.2 Presentation of the PSSS Curriculum Modules The Curriculum Modules are presented in a booklet format for each class (i.e.
primary one – six) Each modules booklet contains modules for several subjects taught at the primary school level, including Social Studies, English Language, Mathematics, Science, Cultural Arts, Christian Religious Knowledge, Islamic Studies and Home Economics.
This is to carter for the material requirement of every primary school teacher who is assigned to a class and is expected to teach all the subjects in that class.
The Curriculum Modules are simple and easy to read.
Each module consists of columns (a) to (h) discussed below: (a) Number of the Module: For instance in the first term of Primary One there are module numbers 1-7; and in the second term there are module numbers 8-15 and finally module numbers 16 – 24 in the third term.
These indicate the number of each Module to be taught in each Term.
This means that a teacher is expected to have covered 24 modules of the Social Studies curriculum by the end of primary one.
(b) The Topic, content or subject matter: This gives you an idea about the topic, content or subject matter dealt with in the Module.
(c) Curriculum Elements: The module or theme is usually broad, therefore, to make it easier, to teach, the module is broken down into small separate units or content elements that form the subject matter.
Each PSSS curriculum module has a minimum of 3 units and a maximum of 8 units.
(d) Objectives: The objectives include the knowledge or skills that each learner ought to have acquired by the end of the teaching of each module.
These are stated in terms of what the learner is expected to do, the expected changes in behaviour after exposure to the lessons.
This makes it easier to measure the quality and extent of pupil’s learning.
27 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (e) Pupil’s Activities: These are activities that teachers need to engage learners in, in order to achieve the objectives.
By participating in the activities, learners will be able to gain the knowledge or acquire skills stated in the objectives.
(f) Teaching Aids/Hints: This aspect of the curriculum provides guidance to the teacher in regard to preparations and materials that could be used to facilitate learning.
For instance the teacher may be reminded to use a map, a picture or real objects, to further enhance pupils’ learning.
(g) Suggested Assessment Techniques (A/T): These are suggestions on the instruments to be used for assessment.
The A/T tells the teacher to know what to look out for and how to do 28 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS so, while the ACT stands for the number of each activity assessed.
The teacher is provided with a variety of instruments with which to assess the learners in the cognitive (knowledge), affective (feelings/attitude) and psychomotor (skill) learning domains.
For instance the teacher can get the learners to demonstrate skills rather than write answers to questions.
Other ways of assessment could be through tests, take home assignments, exams etc.
Each assessment should be relative to each of the objectives and learners’ ought to get a feedback from their teachers to know how they are performing.
Therefore, marks need to be awarded.
(h) Period: This refers to the time allotted for teaching each module.
For instance, each module is supposed to be taught for a minimum of one week and a maximum of two weeks, depending on how simple or complex it is.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
The Primary School Social Studies curriculum module is a structured based on the national syllabi for primary school.
2.
The curriculum module contains the following.
3.
Explain how the implementation of the Social Studies curriculum module is standardized in Nigeria.
4.
How is the PSSS curriculum module presented?
4.0 CONCLUSION The Primary Social Studies Curriculum is a rich subject, which engages learners in purposeful activities.
This is achieved through a well- structured curriculum module prepared for teachers.
The document spells out in great details themes/ topics, contents, activities, teaching hints and assessment.
As a teacher follows through the steps, he/she should be able to assist learners increase knowledge, and acquire skills, and behaviour change as intended by the curriculum objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY By now, you should be able to describe the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum Module and its contents.
You have also learnt that learners across the country are exposed to the same information, learning activities and assessment methods.
Since the curriculum sets a national standard for its implementation, teachers are expected to comply by adhering to the recommendations made in the document.
However, this does not mean that teachers should not be creative in providing additional teaching materials where necessary or substituting 29 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS recommended materials with new ones when they are not available.
On the whole, every teacher should ensure that the specific objectives listed in the curriculum are achieved.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
The current name of the national agency that published the PSSS curriculum in the early 80s is the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) 2.
Some of the problems that led to the adoption of the curriculum modules are: (a) poor teaching skills which affected learners’ performance, (b) Poor assessment of learner’s performance and progress, (c) lack of uniformity in the teaching of Social Studies at the primary school level across the country 3.
The three groups that partnered to produce the PSSS curriculum modules are (1) NERDC (2) The Federal Ministry of Education and (3) the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
4.
Five benefits of the PSSS curriculum module are: (1).
Standardization of teaching/learning across the country, (2).
Enhancement of the attainment of learning objectives, (3).
Facilitation of effecting teaching and learning, (4).
Promotion of oriented continuous assessment of learners, (5).
Facilitation of discovery and development of the individual learner’s talents and capabilities ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
The Primary School Social Studies curriculum module is a structured scheme of work based on the national syllabi for primary school 2.
The curriculum module contains a list of themes that should be covered by a teacher within a specified period of time, contents, content elements, objectives, activities, suggested assessment techniques and periods 3.
This means that each primary Social Studies teacher in Nigeria is expected to teach the same topics, have the same teaching and learning objectives and activities, within the same period of time, across the country 4.
The Curriculum Modules are presented in a booklet format for each class.
Each module booklet contains subjects for several subjects including Social Studies and is simple and easy to use.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the items that make up the Primary School Social Studies curriculum.
30 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
Discuss each item (A- H) that made up the PSSS curriculum module.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Akinlaye, F. A.
& Adekoya, S. O.
A.
(eds.).
Readings in Social Studies Education.
Lagos: OACE Publishing Co. National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
Primary School Curriculum Modules (Primary 1-5).
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
NERC (1973).
Guidelines on Primary School Curriculum.
Nigeria Educational Research Council.
Onyabe, V. O.
(1979).
Defining Social Studies for Nigerian Social Studies.
NERDC: Benin Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
31 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 2 PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTING THE PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM Unit 1 Patterns of Curriculum Organization Unit 2 Factors That Influence Social Studies Curriculum Development and Implementation Unit 3 Planning the Social Studies Lesson UNIT 1 PATTERNS OF CURRICULUM ORGANIZATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Patter of Curriculum Organization 3.2 Four Strands of Curriculum Organization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION I applaud you for completing the first module of this course material.
One of the important things you need to know in your study of the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum is the principle behind curriculum formation and structure.
In this study unit, you will learn about trends and patterns of curriculum organization in Social Studies, especially as it relates to the primary school curriculum in Nigeria.
I believe you will find the unit as fascinating as others.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define and explain the meaning of patterns of curriculum organization  list the three patterns of curriculum organization  define and explain the four strands of curriculum organization.
32 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pattern of Curriculum Organization A pattern is a model or guide for making something, so that it can be reproduced in large quantity.
It is a specific way of doing things, or a manner that a thing has been done over and over again.
Just as Muslims have patterns for building their mosques, so also do Christians have patterns for building their churches.
The word “pattern” indicates an enduring method of structuring or organizing things.
In defining patterns of curriculum organization therefore, we will be referring to specific models of curriculum organization.
In order to have a better understanding of the different approaches to the pattern of the social studies curriculum organization, you must first of all appreciate how the subject derives its content from different fields of study.
For instance some people view Social Studies as either History or Geography or Economics or Sociology or Political Science or Government or Civics etc.
These categories of people hold the unidisciplinary or single subject pattern as the most appropriate structure.
Some view Social Studies as a combination of forms of knowledge, where each unit is clearly identifiable.
These groups of people look at Social Studies from a multidisciplinary approach.
The people who view Social Studies as an integrated subject sees a structure where materials from the social sciences are included in the Social Studies topics, but they are treated without reference to their principal discipline.
There are various ways of organizing curriculum materials in order to ensure effective delivery of a subject.
To be a successful Social Studies teacher, you need to know the various modes of organizing teaching materials for effective utilization.
We can arrange all this different ways or approaches on a straight line or continuum.
This is illustrated in the figure below.
The beginning point of this continuum is marked A in, while the far end of the continuum is marked C and the mid-point is marked B.
Figure 2 : Social Studies Curriculum Patterns of Organization Beginning Mid-Point End (A) (B) (C) 33 Integrated PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Each of the marked point is called an organization box.
Each box describes a pattern of organization or a way of arranging the content of Social Studies.
The first organization box “A”, where the continuum begins is called the “unidisciplinary” approach.
It can also be referred to as the “separate subject” approach.
The organization box at the mid- point of the continuum is called the “multidisciplinary” approach, while the organization box at the end of the continuum is called the integrated or unified approach.
The descriptions of these patterns of organization can be seen as alternative ways of arranging the same curriculum.
However, sometimes, it may not be possible to describe the organization of the curriculum in one of the terms shown above because it is possible to have a pattern that combines two or three of these approaches.
For example, you can have an approach that combines B and C; C and A; A and B or all the three approaches A, B and C. The choice of a pattern is an important factor in the selection of instructional materials for Social Studies.
That is why a teacher must have a clear understanding of the various alternative patterns available to enable him/her make an appropriate choice of pattern(s).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define the term “curriculum Pattern” and list the three patterns of Curriculum Organization 2.
Discuss the meaning of each of the three patterns of Curriculum Organization 3.
The choice of a pattern is an important factor in the selection of for social studies.
3.2 Four Strands of Curriculum Organization 34 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS What is to be taught and how it will be taught is largely influenced by the basis on which the curriculum is structured.
You have learnt above that there are various approaches to the organization of the contents of a Social Studies curriculum.
Here, you will learn about the four components or strands that make up the Social Studies content.
If you pick up a rope, you will notice that it has two, three or four stands.
A strand is a thin thread such as one of those twisted together to form a rope, string or knitting wool.
The strength of a rope depends on the strength of each of the strands used, the number of strands in the rope and how the strands are twisted together to make the rope.
These strands of a rope can be compared to the contents of Social Studies.
The strands need to be strongly and neatly twisted or plaited together to ensure the strength of the Social Studies curriculum.
Four of such strands have been identified below: 1.
The conceptual strand 2.
The thinking strand 3.
The skill strand 4.
The values stand To ensure maximum learning, these four strands must be adequately represented in the selection and organization of learning experiences.
The arrangement must provide for ‘cumulative and spiral’ learning.
To achieve this, instructional materials must be organized into some logical form called unit.
Cumulative learning provides for a constant and systematic revisit to particular topics in the course of instruction to ensure in-depth study of the issues and make sure that adequate learning impressions have been registered in the minds of learners (N. F. Aina, 1982).
On the other hand, Spiral learning refers to revisiting topics, but at each repetition, a wider area is covered.
This implies that both Cumulative and Spiral learning build a new store of knowledge based of previous knowledge already acquired in a logical way in order to provide linkages and continuity with previous experiences.
Each of these strands are discussed in greater details below.
1.
The Conceptual Strand The Conceptual strand refers to the method of building units of instruction around main ideas or concepts.
Concepts in this regard relates to meaning or concrete places, objects or instructions.
Examples of concepts are culture, values, freedom, equality, island, flood, democracy, fruits, vegetables etc.
Concepts are made up of different parts referred to as concept components.
These are: a) Concept clusters: Such as resources, factors of production, human elements etc.
35 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS b) Themes: Such as the growth of industry, marriage in Yoruba land, the growth of ideas etc c) Generalizations: Such as the statement ‘culture is a primary determiner of how people use their environment’.
2.
The Thinking Process Strand The thinking process strand refers to the method of developing units through classifying, categorizing, generalizing and similar processes.
The process of thinking involves symbols, signs and signals that stand for objects and events.
Whenever symbols are used, they call for interpretations.
To think profitably, the learner must be able to identify, recognize and clarify the problems to be studied in various units of instruction.
Materials for thinking include perceptions based on memory and observation, images and concepts.
Units of instruction on the thinking processes will focus on problem solving, examination of ideas, issues, points of view and statements in reading materials.
According to Aina, (1982), critical and creative thinking are very crucial to Social Studies curriculum.
As instruction is planned and learning experiences developed, ways that critical and creative thinking may be used should be kept in mind.
3.
The Skill Strand The Skill Strand refers to the development of relevant skills necessary for an understanding of Social Studies.
These include reading skills, interpretation skills, time and chronology skills and writing skills needed to gather and organize data from different sources.
Social Studies cannot be taught successfully without teaching basic skills of reading and writing.
The teaching of basic skills will not only improve learners’ achievement levels but will also enhance their performance in the mastery of content materials in Social Studies.
4.
The Values Strand The Value Strand focuses on values and valuing processes needed to deal with value-laden topics and issues.
It seeks to promote the development of democratic values, behaviour patterns, and to develop in the learners positive attitudes to the society.
There is a sharp difference between ideal and reality.
Any unit based on values must seek to reduce the gap between these two concepts to the barest minimum.
There are three possible ways of doing this: 1.
To focus on the bright side of the society-emphasizing societal achievements, the promise and ideals of democracy, and the progress made over the years.
This method may lead to 36 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS disillusion for learners, when they grow to realize that reality of life is far from the ideal or the classroom theory.
2.
To focus on the dark side, talking about problems, misdeeds and failures.
This approach may generate negative attitude to the society.
3.
To take a reflective stance, to consider issues based on values of justice, equality, dignity of the individual, respect for majority rule and minority rights.
This method will help learners to develop thinking and valuing processes, concepts and skills that are necessary for effective participation in a democratic society.
It gives opportunity for consideration of both negative and positive action and behaviour of why both success and failure are found in human activities and of different ways of bridging the gap between ideals and realities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List the four stands of curriculum organization 2.
What does cumulative and spiral learning mean?
3.
Both Cumulative and Spiral learning refer to the building of on the old in a logical way to provide with previous experiences.
4.
Concepts are made up of different parts referred to as concept components including: (a) (b) (c) 4.0 CONCLUSION The Social Studies curriculum has been carefully structured through either one of or a combination of the pattern or approaches namely, unidisciplinary, multi-disciplinary or integrated approach.
Consequently, the choice of pattern or approach of the social studies curriculum constitutes an important factor in the selection of instructional materials for Social Studies.
In addition, to ensure maximum learning, there are four strands that must be adequately represented in the selection and organization of learning experiences.
The arrangement of such strands must provide for cumulative and spiral learning.
5.0 SUMMARY This study has taught you different ways of organizing materials to be taught in Social Studies.
You have learned the four components or strands that make up the contents of the Social Studies curriculum.
You have also learned that these strands must be adequately represented in 37 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS the selection and organization of the curriculum content in order to maximize learning.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Patterns of curriculum organization refer to specific models of curriculum organization.
Three patterns of curriculum organization are (a) unidisciplinary (b) Multidisciplinary (c ) integrated 2.
(a) Unidisciplinary or single subject view social studies as either History or Geography or Economics or Sociology or Political Science or Government or Civics etc.
(b) Multidisciplinary approach view social studies as a combination of forms of knowledge, where each unit is clearly identifiable.
(c) Integrated approach is views social studies as an integrated subject but they are treated without reference to their principal discipline.
3.
The choice of a pattern is an important factor in the selection of instructional materials for social studies.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
The four strands of curriculum organization are: a) The conceptual strand b) The thinking strand c) The skill strand d) The values stand 2(a) Cumulative learning provides for a constant and systematic revisit to particular topics in the course of instruction to ensure in-depth study of the issues and make sure that adequate learning impressions have been registered in the minds of learners.
(b) Spiral learning refers to revisiting topics, but at each repetition, a wider area is covered.
3.
Both Cumulative and Spiral learning refers to the building of new knowledge on the old in a logical way to provide linkages and continuity with previous experiences.
4.
Concepts are made up of different parts referred to as concept components.
Including: (a) Concept clusters (b) Themes and (c).
Generalizations 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 38 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.
Define and explain the three patterns of curriculum organization 2.
Discuss the four strands of curriculum organization and its relevance to the contents of the social studies curriculum 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful.
Aina, N. F. et al.
(1982).
Social Studies: A Book on Methodology.
Evans Brothers Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Mehlinger, H. D. (1981).
UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies.
Paris: UNESCO.
Obiadi, G. O.
A.
(1985).
Essentials of Social Studies for Schools and Colleges in Nigeria.
Enugu: Lenja Printers.
Oderinde, B.
& Ekpo, O.
(2005).
Values Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
Walton, Jack.
(1973).
Curriculum Organization and Design.
London: Ward lock Educational Ltd. 39 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 2 FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Curriculum Development 3.2 Factors that Influence the Teaching of Social Studies in School 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Now that you know what the Primary School Social Studies is about and how the materials were organized, the next important thing you need to know are the factors that influence its implementation.
This Study Unit will give you an insight to issues you need to address before, during and after implementing the curriculum.
As you can see you, your knowledge on curriculum issues is being broadened to enhance your further learning about the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum, and you must be prepared to learn these stimulating principles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the development of the contents of Social Studies curriculum  discuss factors that influence the development of the Social Studies curriculum  enumerate and discuss factors that influence the teaching of Social Studies in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Curriculum Development In planning the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum, the major task involves the selection of the appropriate contents that will help 40 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS teachers achieve the overall aims and objectives of the curriculum.
While it is desirable to want every learner to have a sound education in a subject, it is impossible to cover every detail.
This leaves experts with no choice than to prioritize what is considered most important information and skills that the learner need to learn and what can be ‘comfortably’ left out.
In other words, curriculum decision making is a complex task and is determined usually by a coordinating body and other relevant agencies such as Ministry officials from relevant agencies and departments such as the Federal Ministry of Education, NERDC, curriculum planners, teachers, school officials, inspectors, examination bodies, PTA, experts from higher institutions etc.
Since this is such an important task, careful planning should precede the curriculum development process.
Below are issue and factors to consider when planning for or developing the Social Studies curriculum.
(a) Learner and Societal Needs: Although child-centred theorists believe that the curriculum should be developed based on the needs of the learner, such needs should not be in isolation of the societal needs.
This is because children grow and develop within a socio-cultural context that has direct and indirect effects on their needs.
For instance, children are encouraged to study the sciences, but the type of knowledge that the child from an advanced society would require will be different from the one from a poorer society, who may need to learn more about agricultural science for example.
By implication, children need to get information or knowledge about their physical and social environment that will help then understand how the society operates.
The contents of the Social Studies Curriculum would therefore be different in various counties because of the differences in the needs of the child and the society where he/she lives.
Since the needs of the child are complimentary to that of the society, these needs can best be translated into what makes up the curriculum content when a cultural analysis of the society has be conducted.
(b) Cultural Analysis: The “systematic process of examining a particular society within its social and historical context is what is referred to as cultural analysis” (Denis Lawson: 1981).
It is important for curriculum developers to study relevant aspects of a society’s culture including language, religion, values, beliefs, cultural practices, technology, level of knowledge and so on, before making decisions about what should be included in the curriculum.
This is because whatever information is passed will be transmitted from generation to generation.
There has to be a decision about how to organize this knowledge either under single subjects (unidiscilinary approach), or through organizing 41 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS the curriculum based on problems or issues derived from various relevant disciplines to assist learners to understand the problems or issues selected (ie integrated approach).
Figure 3 Influence Factors on Curriculum Decision Making In Social Studies Areas of formally organized Society: bodies of knowledge Needs and priorities People who make decisions about Social Studies Curriculum Learners’ Curriculum planners Ministry officials needs and Teachers School officials priorities Inspectors Publishers Examination bodies Parents Curricular goals and educational programmes _________direct influence --------------indirect influence Adapted from Mehlinger, H. D. (1981).
UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies.
Paris, UNESCO.
Pg.
37 (c) Contributions of other academic disciplines: Social Studies regard all subjects as a unit or entity.
It deals almost every area including the social, physical, economic, religious, political, scientific, technological and other aspects of a the society.
To this end, curriculum planners or developers must have a mastery of the subject matter and methodology of the subject areas that have a bearing on the understanding of the society in order to be able to come up with a comprehensive Social Studies programme.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the major task involved in planning the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum?
2.
List examples of relevant agencies and individuals that make up the curriculum development team.
3.
List three key factors that influence the planning/development of the Social Studies curriculum.
42 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.2 Factors That Influence the Teaching of Social Studies in Schools The following factors influence the effective teaching of Social Studies in schools: 1.
Clarity and Understanding of the Goals of the Social Studies Curriculum If teachers have a proper understanding of the goals and expected outcomes, implementation of the subject becomes more effective 2.
Availability and Quality of Resource Materials Teachers require textbooks, visual and audiovisual aids, and other relevant materials that would facilitate teaching and learning.
These materials must be available, affordable and of high quality.
3.
Administrative Support The more support teachers get from school authorities, the more successful the implementation of the programme.
For instance teachers need to obtain the approval of the school principle to take learners on excursions and use the school bus.
If the school does not support such teachers, learners will be restricted to constant classroom experiences.
4.
Staff Development Training and re-training of teachers is essential in improving the quality of education generally.
If teachers are exposed to periodic training experiences, the quality of teaching especially in relation to the use of various teaching methodology will improve.
5.
Methods and Techniques of Teaching Closely related to staff development, Social Studies teachers must be willing to drop old methods of teaching and embrace new interactive style of teaching.
This is particularly important for teachers of Social Studies in order to achieve the objectives, which include the acquisition of skills and not just increasing knowledge.
43 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 6.
Support of Government Government should motivate teachers by prompt payment of salaries, sponsorship of training programmes, presentation of awards to deserving teachers and other incentive that would encourage teachers to put in their best.
This will go a long way in influencing what they do with learners in the classroom.
7.
Support of Parents Parents play an important role in the academic development of their child.
Parents can assist learners by supervising their children’s assignment.
They can also visit the teachers to find out how their child is performing and what they can do to help him/her.
8.
Public Assistance The general public also has a role to play in the effective implementation of the Social Studies programme.
For instance they can serve as resource persons, they can provide vehicles to take learners on filed trips and excursions, they can equip the school libraries with good social studies books, maps, encyclopedia and other relevant materials.
They can also donate audio-visual aids to the school.
9.
Time Allocation on School Time Table Adequate time need to be devoted to the teaching of Social Studies for effective teaching and learning to take place.
For example a period of 30 minutes is too short to conduct certain learning activities such as group discussions, which is recommendation in the curriculum.
10.
Quality Teacher Training The effectiveness of social studies teaching in the primary school is also a function of the pre service and in service training and development of social studies teachers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 44 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.
What role can the Government play in influencing the effective teaching of Social Studies in schools?
2.
Why is teaching methodology crucial to the teaching of Social Studies?
3.
What effect does time allotment have on the teaching of Social Studies?
4.
What contributions can the public make in providing support to the teaching of Social Studies?
4.0 CONCLUSION You can now see that the task of curriculum planning, development and implementation is not an easy one.
It involves important decisions that have to be made by experts.
It also entails knowledge about the needs of a child and the society, in which he/she lives, cultural analysis and a mastery of other disciples that contribute to the comprehensive body of knowledge called Social Studies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this study unit, you have learnt about the fundamental requirements for developing a curriculum.
You have also learnt about the role that individuals and relevant agencies play in the development and implementation of the curriculum.
Finally, you have learnt about factors that can strengthen or hinder the effective teaching of Social Studies in schools.
You have learnt about the importance of understanding individual learners’ needs; the societal/cultural dictates; the political/ideological influences; language as well as the influence of other ancillary bodies of knowledge, in the design and development of primary social studies curriculum.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
The major task involved in planning the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum is the selection of appropriate contents that will enable teachers achieve the overall aims and objectives of the curriculum.
2.
The curriculum development team is made up of Ministry officials from relevant agencies and departments such as the Federal Ministry of Education, NERDC, curriculum planners, teachers, school officials, inspectors, examination bodies, PTA, experts from higher institutions etc 45 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.
Three factors that influence the planning/development of the social studies curriculum are: (a) learner and societal needs, (b) cultural analysis, (c), contributions from other disciples ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Government can motivate teachers by prompt payment of salaries, sponsorship of training programmes, presentation of awards to deserving teachers and other incentive that would encourage teachers to put in their best.
2.
Teaching methodology is crucial to the teaching of Social Studies because teachers of Social Studies need to adopt appropriate teaching methods and learning activities in order to achieve the curriculum objectives, which include the acquisition of skills and not just knowledge.
3.
Time allotment have an effect on the teaching of Social Studies because teachers need to have adequate time for effective teaching and learning to take place.
4.
The public can make a lot of contributions in providing support to the teaching of Social Studies through serving as resource persons, providing vehicles to take learners on filed trips and excursions, equipping school libraries with relevant materials, and donation of audio-visual aids to schools.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What does curriculum development entail?
2.
List and discuss the factors that influence the development of the contents of the Social Studies curriculum 3.
Mention five factors that influence the teaching of Social Studies in schools 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Bishop, G. (1985).
Curriculum Development: A Textbook for Students.
Macmillian: Accra.
pp.
6-15.
46 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Dorothy McClure Fraser (1969).
Social Studies Curriculum Development: Prospects and Problems.
Washington: National Council for The Social Studies.
Dufty, David.
(1979).
Planning for Social Studies Instruction.
In UNESCO Source Book on the Teaching of Social Studies.
Chapter 3.
New York International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1972).
(Vol.1- 10) Crowell Collier and Macmillan Inc. Lewy, A.
(1977).
Planning The School Curriculum.
International Institute for Educational Planning (I.I.E.P.)
UNESCO/PARIS.
Mehlinger, H. D. (1981).
UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies.
Paris: UNESCO.
Obiadi, G. O.
A.
(1985).
Essentials of Social Studies for Schools and Colleges in Nigeria.
Enugu: Lenja Printers.
Onwuka, U (1981) (ed).
Curriculum Development for Africa.
Africana- Fep: Ibadan.
Pp.
44-50.
Walton, Jack.
(1973).
Curriculum Organization and Design.
London: Ward lock Educational Ltd. 47 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 3 PLANNING THE SOCIAL STUDIES LESSON CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is a Lesson Plan?
3.2 Why is the Lesson Plan Important?
3.3 What are the Principles of Lesson Panning?
3.4 Framework for Structuring Sequence of Lessons 3.5 The Lesson Plan Outline 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every teacher who wants to be effective needs to have a plan for accomplishing lesson objectives.
This study unit will focus on skills that will help you as teachers to become more organized and conduct effective lessons through adequate planning.
You will also learn how to develop your own lesson plan.
This will give you a unique opportunity of demonstrating what you have learnt in this unit.
Therefore, you must ensure that you pay attention to every detail of the interesting information contained in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning of a lesson plan  explain the importance of a lesson plan  discuss the principles of planning for a lesson  discuss the framework for structuring a lesson  discuss the content of a lesson plan.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is a Lesson Plan?
A lesson plan is a framework, or what we can call an outline or agenda for a lesson.
It gives you an idea about what the teacher hopes to achieve during the lesson and how he/she hopes to achieve it.
It is 48 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS important that all teachers take time to think through their lessons before they enter the classroom.
According to McKeachie (1994), lesson preparation should begin long before a teacher meets the class.
In his view, the first step in preparing for a lesson is determining the objectives for the lesson.
This is very important because all the decisions involved in planning for a lesson should derive from the objectives.
In order words, the content, choice of textbooks, selection and order of assignments, choice of teaching techniques and assessment all depend to a large extent on the objectives for the lesson.
In the case of the primary social studies curriculum, the teacher’s work has been made easy because the lesson objective is predetermined.
All the teacher needs to do is to prepare how to go about the activities that will enable him/her realize the objectives.
3.2 Why Is The Lesson Plan Important?
It is important to plan for a lesson for the following reasons: a.
Planning for a lesson is important because the teacher needs to be clear about what he/she wants to achieve from the lesson.
In other words, he/she needs to identify the aims for the lesson.
(ie what learners should know or do at the end of the lesson that they did not know or could not do before the lesson).
b.
It is also important for teachers to plan a lesson, because it gives them the opportunity to predict possible problems and how to resolve the problems ahead of the class.
c. It gives the teacher confidence, because he/she feels adequately prepared.
d. It is good practice and a sign of professionalism.
e. The planning of a lesson also provides the opportunity to deal with time constraint.
Teachers are always confronted with the challenge of carrying out recommended activities in the curriculum module within the limited time frame allotted for the subject, and at the same time cover all aspects of the day’s lesson.
3.3 What Are The Principles of Lesson Planning?
1.
Aims: Teachers must consider realistic and achievable goals for the lesson.
They need to have an idea of what the learners already know, what they need to know, how to motivate the learners etc.
2.
Variety: This is an important way of getting the students engaged and interested in the lesson.
3.
Flexibility: Precise preparation must allow for flexible delivery.
Sometimes, things do not go as planned, therefore teachers should have the ability to cope when things go wrong.
It is useful 49 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS when planning to build in some extra or alternative tasks and exercises.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is a lesson plan?
2.
According to McKeachie (1994), lesson preparation should begin.
2.
Mention five reasons why it is important for a teacher to plan for a lesson.
3.
List and explain three principles of lesson planning 3.4 Framework for Structuring Sequence of Lessons A teacher can adopt the five-E model for structuring the sequence of a lesson in line with the constructive approach.
1.
Engage: This is the first phase, which helps the teacher identify learners’ existing knowledge about the topic by raising open- ended questions and eliciting response from learners.
It creates interest and stimulates curiosity and helps to reveal learners’ ideas, beliefs and level of understanding.
2.
Explore: The next phase involves investigation work in which learners gain first-hand knowledge or experience of the phenomenon of interest.
This helps learners’ to investigate, observe, explore questions, test their ideas and try to answer questions and solve problems.
3.
Explain: This phase builds on learners’ beliefs and ideas from the engage and exploratory phases, from the concepts introduced by the teacher or from text reading.
Learners can work in pairs or small groups and compare their ideas, introduce definitions and terms to describe concepts and ideas, provide explanations and write or draw to clarify and record explanations.
4.
Elaborate: The elaborate phase involves learners applying concepts, developed in the explain phases, to new contexts.
(ie learners extend and integrate their learning).
This means learners using or applying concepts and practical activities or investigations they conducted to offer explanations in new contexts and answer questions that help them to apply their understanding.
5.
Evaluate: The last phase provides an opportunity to assess and evaluate new knowledge and skills of learners and the teacher.
50 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS L SAMPLE DAILY LESSON PLAN e DATE: 5th May CLASS: Primary 4 A SUBJECT: Social Studies ar n er s’ ar e able to compare what they have learnt with their ideas at the engage phase.
They and their teachers look for evidence of changes in the learners’ ideas, beliefs, skills and the kinds of questions they ask.
They also review and evaluate their explanations, and they reflect on their own learning.
3.5 The Lesson Plan Outline Although there are different styles and formulas for presenting a lesson plan, the basic elements of the lesson plan are generally the same.
Usually, the formula is modified to suit the individual teacher's lesson preparation or the school’s style of presentation.
There are three phases or stages of lesson planning.
These include: Phase 1: Pre-Lesson Preparation a.
Goals b.
Content c. Student entry level Phase 2: Lesson Planning and Implementation 1.
Unit title 2.
Instructional goals 3.
Objectives 4.
Rationale 5.
Content 6.
Instructional procedures 7.
Evaluation procedures 8.
Materials Phase 3: Post-Lesson Activities 1.
Lesson evaluation and revision 51 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2006 Sourc e:Les TOPIC: Culture And Elements Of Culture NUMBER OF PERIODS: One son plan NAME OF TEACHER: Mr. A.. A. Adesanya of a teach INSTRUCTIONAL AIDS, MATERIALS, OR TOOLS NEEDED: er in 1.
Pictures depicting various cultures in Nigeria.
(2) Social Studies Textbook for a Primary four prima ry schoo LESSON OUTLINE: l in Lagos Step 1.
What is culture?
Let learners brainstorm the meaning of culture.
Use learners’ explanations to provide additional information.
Tell learners that culture is the total way of life of a people.
Write the definition of culture on the black board and allow learners to copy.
Ask them to explain the definition to make sure that they understand the concept.
Step 2.What are the elements of culture?
Divide class into six groups and let each group list five elements of culture.
Let a representative of each group present the list of the group to the class.
Paste the list of each group on the black board and ask for the views of others learners.
Clarify misconceptions or wrong information.
Provide additional information and paste illustration on the board.
Tell the class that some of the elements of culture are family system, food, style of dressing, form of greetings, language, religion, music, festivals etc.
Step 3.
Revise the lesson and ask if the learners have questions.
Allow them enough time to ask the questions and let other learners provide answers.
Answer the questions and evaluate the lesson.
Ask the learners to define culture and to mention the elements of culture.
Step 4.
Write notes on the black board and allow pupils to copy notes on the blackboard.
Give learners homework.
Ask them to bring a picture from their family album or from an old magazine or newspaper that depicts their culture.
Tell them to submit it in the next class.
Mark learners note book.
OBJECTIVES At the end of the class, pupils should be able to: (1) Explain the meaning of culture.
(2) Mention the elements of culture SPECIFIC BEHAVIOURAL OBJECTIVES 1.
Each pupil should understand that there are different cultures across the country and in the world and that people need to respect one another’s culture ENTRY BEHAVIOUR 1.
Let pupils brainstorm the meaning and elements of culture and clarify concerns and misconceptions 2.
Let class list examples of elements in their own culture and discuss why they need to respect one another’s culture SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What can a teacher use the five-E model for?
52 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
List the five- E model.
3.
List the items in the three stages of a lesson plan outline.
4.0 CONCLUSION A teacher can only feel confident that he/she has prepared for a lesson when he/she has prepared for the topic and activities for the lesson, is equipped with materials and a list of activities that will help to make the subject interesting and easy to understand, and allows sufficient time for learners’ questions.
If a teacher does not have enough time to cover all the activities for the lesson (as is sometimes the case) he/she can concentrate on the more important points and find other opportunities for addressing the information and/or activities that were left out.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has equipped you with the knowledge and skills for planning a Social Studies lesson.
You have learnt that teaching involves much more than making arbitrary decisions about what is to be taught in a class.
Rather, it involves many activities including designing and implementing a lesson plan, preparing or making materials to be used and assessing both the learner's attainment of the anticipated outcomes and the effectiveness of the lesson in guiding learners to achieve the outcomes.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
A lesson plan is a framework, outline or agenda for a lesson.
2.
According to McKeachie (1994), lesson preparation should begin long before a teacher meets the class.
3.
Five reasons why it is important for a teacher to plan for a lesson are: a.
It helps the teacher to know what he/she wants to achieve from the lesson.
b.
It gives the opportunity to predict possible problems and how to resolve the problems ahead of the class.
c. It gives the teacher confidence, because he/she feels adequately prepared.
d. It is good practice and a sign of professionalism.
e. It helps the teacher deal with the issue of time constraint.
4.
Three principles of lesson planning are: 53 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS a.
Aims: Teachers must consider realistic and achievable goals for the lesson.
b.
Variety: This is an important way of getting the students engaged and interested in the lesson.
c. Flexibility: Precise preparation must allow for flexible delivery.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
A teacher can use the five-E model for structuring the sequence of a lesson.
2.
The five-E model for structuring the sequence of a lesson are: (1) Engage (2) Explore (3) Explain (4) Elaborate and Evaluate 3.
The items in the three phases of lesson plan outline are: Phase 1: Pre-Lesson Preparation 1.
Goals 2.
Content 3.
Student entry level Phase 2: Lesson Planning and Implementation 1.
Unit title 2.
Instructional goals 3.
Objectives 4.
Rationale 5.
Content 6.
Instructional procedures 7.
Evaluation procedures 8.
Materials Phase 3: Post-Lesson Activities 1.
Lesson evaluation and revision 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the meaning of lesson plan and its importance 2.
What are the principles of lesson planning 3.
Discuss the framework for structuring the sequence of a lesson 4.
Develop a sample lesson plan 54 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Akinlaye F. A, et al (1996).
Fundamentals of Social Studies Teaching Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited (Educational Publishers).
Akinlaye F. A, et al (1997).
Essentials of Social Studies Education Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited (Educational Publishers).
Clarkm, Leonard 11.
(1973).
Teaching Social Studies in Secondary Schools.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Coy.
Dufty, David.
(1979).
Planning For Social Studies Instruction.
In UNESCO Source Book on the Teaching of Social Studies.
Chapter 3.
New York.
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1972).
(Vol.1- 10) Crowell Collier and Macmillan Inc. Lawson, D. & Dufour, B.
(1974).
The New Social Studies.
A Handbook for Teachers in Primary, Secondary and Further Education.
London: Heinemann.
Taba, Hilda: M. C. Fraenkel, Jack R., and MCNaughton, Anthony, H. (1971).
A Teachers’ Handbook to Elementary Social Studies: An Inductive Approach.
(2nd ed.).
Reading.
Massachusetts Addison- Wesley Publishing Co. Osakwe, E. (1996).
Introduction to Social Studies.
Warri, Nigeria: JAAP Alero Publishers.
55 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 3 TEACHING AND LEARNING SOCIAL STUDIES IN PRIMARY SCHOOL Unit 1 The Teacher’s Role in Facilitating Learning Unit 2 The Expository and Activity Teaching Methods Unit 3 The Inquiry and the Discussion Teaching Methods UNIT 1 THE TEACHER’S ROLE IN FACILITATING LEARNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Understanding the Learner 3.2 Establishing a Relationship with Learners 3.3 Learning Styles 3.4 Promoting Active Learner 3.5 Basic Facts About Learning 3.6 Dale’s Cone of Learning Experience 3.7 Learning Domains 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Bravo!
You are progressing steadily on your course and have reached the mid-point.
Modules One and Two focused on key theoretical issues about the course and now, you will be learning some practical details.
In this study unit, you will get insights into trends in teaching and learning.
Every teacher ought to know some basic facts about the learner before the commencement of teaching.
This helps to make teaching and learning easier to manage.
On the other hand, teachers also have to be adequately equipped with the necessary teaching skills.
They need to know what teaching methods to use and the appropriate time to use them.
These are the facts that are presented to you in this unit and I know that you will enjoy every detail of the study, as you aspire to learn more about the teaching of Social Studies in primary school.
56 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain why the teacher should understand the learner before teaching  list and discuss four developmental characteristics of the learner  discuss ways that a teacher can establish relationship with learners  distinguish the difference between passive and active learning  explain the learning domains.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Understanding the Learner The learner is a central factor in any educational system and if the Social Studies teacher is to achieve the education goal of helping learners to appreciate his/her environment and develop responsible citizenship skills, then it is important for him/her to have a fair knowledge of the developmental characteristics of the learner.
The average age of a primary school pupil in Nigeria is between 6 and 11 years, and knowing what behaviour or attitude to expect before meeting the learner goes a long way in the processes of planning lessons and creating conducive environment for learning.
Since each learner is unique, school programme should be developed in a way that caters for individual differences.
This will be reflected in the methods of teaching and materials of instruction, realizing that the interest of the learner is triggered and retained through careful selection and planning of activities, amidst periods of rest and play.
Therefore, a teacher should understand learners in terms of their developmental characteristics in order to be able to meet their learning needs and be an effective teacher.
Learners possess certain characteristics that the Social Studies teachers can use.
Some of these are discussed below: (1) Curiosity: Learners in the middle childhood age (6-11 years) are generally very inquisitive.
They display a great desire to know everything around them.
They ask endless questions including embarrassing questions.
They believe that they must understand everything they see, hear and do.
They ask a lot of questions because they want to expand their experiences and horizon, and the teacher should encourage them by answering all their questions as honestly as possible.
The Social Studies teacher can utilize this quality by giving learners tasks and take home assignments that would require asking questions about their 57 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS environment, family, religion, culture etc.
The teacher should not shout down or abuse the learner for being too curious.
(2) Mastery of Skills: The urge to know drives learners at this age to master skills such as talking, an essential skill for communication.
Once a learner realize that talking serves as a channel for conveying thoughts, feelings and desires, they become encouraged to make maximum use of the skill.
An inexperienced or unskilled teacher can easily suppress this skill in a learner.
On the other hand, the teacher should encourage them to express feelings, ideas and thoughts.
This helps them to develop physical and mental capabilities.
The Social Studies teacher can encourage further development of the talking skill by engaging learners in debates, class discussions, brainstorming etc.
(3) Adventurous: Young learners love to explore in order to discover.
They are restless and sometimes take risks before counting the cost.
The Social Studies teacher can take advantage of this quality by involving them in well planned and meaningful activities, such as reading, filed trips or excursions, games and exercises.
This helps them develop physically, mentally and emotionally.
(4) Active: At this age, learners are active and love to be engaged in activities.
The Social Studies teacher can encourage learners to participate in play activities, drawing, competitions, games, imitation of events etc.
The whole idea is to get them to learn by doing.
This is an effective way of learning and it assists learners to develop physical, social and mental capabilities.
An informed Social Studies teacher who is aware of the developmental characteristics of learners will be a better teacher, because he/she can use this knowledge to assist learners to develop interest in the subject by making use of their natural qualities and skills.
He/she can also make informed decisions when selecting teaching methods and instructional materials.
3.2 Establishing a Relationship with Learners A learner’s first day at school can go a long way in determining his/her success or failure in school.
A learner may determine not to like school because he/she feels isolated and unwanted, probably as a result of lack of attention or an unfriendly attitude by the teacher.
This feeling is understandable.
The child (learner) will be one out of a crowd of other learners meeting an unknown adult for the first time.
The learners themselves are new to one another and it is a totally new experience for each of them.
Therefore, the teacher has the responsibility of making a good impression on the child on this important day and probably first week to help the learner like school, other learners and the teacher.
The teacher also has the challenge of paying attention to the individual needs of the learner, providing them with a sense of security and making them feel welcomed at school, until the learner develops enough trust and confidence in the teacher and school mates.
A teacher should also make an effort to know the names of learners and use them.
This would encourage the learner to feel loved and appreciated.
It is essential however for teachers to remember that their relationship with learners must always be professional and not personal.
58 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.3 Learning Styles Learning styles refer to the different approaches or ways of learning.
Some pupils learn better from seeing things, while others enjoy drawing, yet others like writing or reading.
Some learn faster when they are hearing and listening, while others prefer action such as making things with their hands.
Majority of learners prefer a mixture of all these.
Since, all learners are under pressure to achieve similar levels of competence, despite the varied levels of acquisition of knowledge and understanding in a large class, teachers need to be aware of these preferences in order to facilitate effective learning.
This also means that teachers who adopt a monotonous style of teaching do this to the disadvantage of some learners.
Therefore, teachers need to give a variety of tasks that will help pupils learn in different ways.
Below is a list of the learning styles: (1) Visual Learners: Visual learners acquire knowledge and skills by seeing.
In order to fully understand the content of a lesson, visual learners need to see the teacher’s facial expression and general body language.
Such learners prefer to sit in front of the class so that they can see the teacher clearly.
They learn best from visual materials such as charts, pictures, illustrations, diagrams, and other visual aids.
Visual learners often prefer to take detailed notes during a lesson in order to properly absorb the lesson.
(2) Auditory Learners: This type of learners learns through listening.
They learn best when they are listening to lectures, discussions, debates, radio recording, and just generally listening to what people around them say.
Auditory learners interpret the essential meanings of speech through listening to tone of voice, pitch, speed and other nuances.
To such learners, written information may have little meaning until it is heard.
These learners often benefit from reading text aloud and using a tape recorder.
(3) Tactile/Kinesthetic Learners: The tactile of kinetics learner learns best through doing, moving, and touching.
They enjoy actively exploring the physical world around them.
They may find it hard to sit still for long periods and may become distracted by their need for activity and exploration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Why should a teacher understand the learner?
2.
What is the average age of pupils in primary one – six?
59 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.
Mention four developmental characteristics of a primary school pupil 4.
List four examples of learning approaches 5.
Why is it important for a teacher to know about learning approaches?
6.
Mention ways that a teacher can establish a relationship with learners.
3.4 Promoting Active Learning "When learning is active, students do most of the work.
They use their brains... studying ideas, solving problems, and applying what they learn."
(Mel Silberman: 1993).
According to Meyers and Jones (1993), active learning derives from two basic assumptions: (1) That learning is by nature an active endeavour and (2) That different people learn in different ways.
In another definition, Bonwell and Eison define active learning as instructional activities involving students in doing things and thinking about what they are doing."
A teacher who wants to encourage active learning among learners will engage learners in activities involving application of what they have learnt in class.
This is one of the most effective ways of helping them develop critical thinking skills.
It also helps learners remember what they have learnt, much more than when they are just passive listeners.
As stated above however, learners develop their own knowledge structures (or learning style) through discussion (talking and listening), reading and writing, drawing, reflecting etc.
Passive and Active Learning Passive Active Puts more emphasis on giving out Puts more emphasis on active information participation in activity Places more emphasis on Places more emphasis on critical memorization thinking Lay emphasis on knowledge alone Lay emphasis on what learners can do with the knowledge they have received (and/or acquired) Stresses passive acceptance of a Stresses discovering and prescribed value system developing learners own values 60 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Some active learning strategies include discussion, brainstorming, demonstrations, case studies, role-playing, debates, discussion panel, videos, games etc.
Most of these teaching techniques will be discussed in the next two units.
3.5 Basic Facts about Learning The following tips present facts about learning that the Social Studies teachers should know:  Learners learn best when they want to learn  Learners are interested in learning when they know why it is important for them to learn  Learning becomes easy when learners are in a conductive environment that is free from threat  Pupils enjoy learning when learners feel good about themselves  Learning is interesting when teaching is conducted in several different ways  Learning is effective when learners have a chance to practice what they have learned  Effective learning takes place when learners are given feedback on their performance  Learning becomes fun when learners are praised when they do things well.
3.6 Dale’s Cone of Learning Experience After several years of teaching, Edgar Dale (1969) developed the concept called “cone of learning experience”, based on his studies and observation.
The cone is used to show the relationship of educational experiences to the realities of a person's life, such that the teacher selects materials, resources, and activities that are appropriate to use in the classroom.
The theory of the cone states that people learn best when they are actively involved in the learning process and they learn better when their experiences are concrete rather than abstract.
The theory also states that people generally remember:  10% of what they read  20% of what they hear  30% of what they see  50% of what they hear and see 61 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS  70% of what they say or write  90% of what they say as they do a thing.
This is further illustrated in the diagram below.
3.7 Learning Domains 1.
Cognitive Domain: The cognitive domain focuses on knowledge and involves three practical instructional levels including fact, understanding, and application.
The fact level refers to a single concept and uses verbs like define, identify, and list.
The understanding level adds two or more concepts together and uses verbs such as describe, compare and contrast.
The application level puts two or more concepts together to form something new.
Examples of verbs used at this level include explain, apply, and analyze.
Delivery in this domain is usually a lecture or presentation and the evaluation will be subjective and objective test items.
2.
Psychomotor Domain: The psychomotor domain focuses on skills development.
It also has three practical instructional levels including imitation, practice, and habit.
The delivery mode is largely demonstration and proficiency building in nature and the first level, which is imitation, refers to replication of the demonstration of the skill under the supervision of the teacher.
The practice level is the display of proficiency based on 62 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS experience and may be conducted without direct supervision of the teacher.
The habit level is reached when the student can perform the skill in twice the time that it takes the teacher or an expert to perform.
The evaluation is conducted through a performance or skill test.
The content that is needed to be known to do the skill is however cognitive.
3.
Affective Domain: The affective domain addresses beliefs, attitudes and behavioral aspects of learning.
The three levels in the domain are awareness, distinction, and integration.
The verbs for this domain include words like display, exhibit, and accept.
The first two levels are cognitive; integration is behavioral and requires the learner to evaluate and synthesize.
The content in this domain usually involve discussions.
The testing in the first two levels will be cognitive, whereas the third level will require an affective checklist.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
How do Bonwell and Eison define active learning?
2.
According to Meyers and Jones (1993), active learning derives from two basic assumptions.
What are these assumptions?
3.
List four examples of passive learning 4.
Mention five examples of active learning strategies 5.
List five basic facts about learning 4.0 CONCLUSION It is important for a Social Studies teacher to equip him/herself with relevant knowledge about the learner.
This is so essential for an achievement of the Social Studies curriculum goals.
This is because it prepares the teacher for what to expect and can deal proactively with issues relating to learning rather than reacting to challenges of pupils who are struggling to learn the subject.
It also helps in knowing when and what methods to use for specific lessons.
5.0 SUMMARY This has been a very rich study.
In this study unit, you have learnt about the need to understand the learner and the developmental characteristics that influence the learning process.
You have also learnt about the important of establishing relationships with learners.
The study unit also emphasized the need to engage learners in active and not passive learning.
Some of the strategies for active learning were stated and the Dale Edgar’s cone of learning experience was discussed.
63 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
A teacher should understand the learner and their developmental characteristics in order to be able to meet their learning needs and be an effective teacher.
2.
The average age of pupils in primary one – six is 6 – 11 years.
3.
Four developmental characteristics of a primary school pupil are (a) Curiosity (b) Adventure (c) Active (d) Mastery of skills 4.
Four examples of learning approaches are (a) seeing (a) drawing (c) doing (d) hearing and listening 5.
Why is it important for a teacher to know about learning approaches?
6.
A teacher can establish a relationship with learners by knowing their names and using it, by making them feel welcome at school, by giving them a sense of security and by paying attention to their individual needs.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Bonwell and Eison define active learning as “instructional activities involving students in doing things and thinking about what they are doing."
2.
According to Meyers and Jones (1993), active learning derives from two basic assumptions: (1) that learning is by nature an active endeavour and (2) that different people learn in different ways.
3.
Four examples of passive learning include: (1) learning that lay more emphasis on giving out of information (2) learning that places more emphasis on memorization (3) learning that lay emphasis on knowledge alone (4) learning that stresses on passive acceptance of a prescribed value system 4.
Five examples of active learning strategies are (1) discussion, (2) brainstorming, (3) demonstrations, (4) case studies, (5) role playing 5.
Five basic facts about learning are: (1) Learning becomes easy when learners are in a conductive environment that is free from threat (2) Pupils enjoy leaning when learners feel good about themselves (3) Learning is interesting when teaching is conducted in several different ways (4) Learning is effective when learners have a chance to practice what they have learned (5) Effective learning takes place when learners are given feedback on their performance.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 64 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.
In your own opinion, why should a teacher know about the learner before teaching 2.
Discuss four developmental characteristics of learners 3.
List and cite examples of the three learning styles 4.
What does Dale Edgar’s cone of learning experience emphasize?
Give examples to back up your answer 5.
Discuss the three learning domains 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Adaralegbe, A.
(1980).
The Nigeria Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect NERDC, Social Studies Teaching: Issues and Problems.
Benin: City Ethiope.
Aina, N. F. et al.
(1982).
Social Studies: A Book on Methodology.
Evans Brothers Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Akinlaye F. A.
(2003).
Social Studies (A Sociological Approach).
Lagos: Ziklag Educational Publishers.
Akinlaye, F. A.
& Adekoya, S. O.
A.
(eds.).
Readings in Social Studies Education.
Lagos: OACE Publishing Co. 65 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 2 THE EXPOSITORY AND ACTIVITY METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods and Techniques 3.2 Definition of the Expository Method 3.3 Primary Goals of the Expository Method 3.4 Characteristics of the Expository Method 3.5 Examples of Expository Techniques 3.6 The Activity Method 3.7 Purpose of the Activity Method 3.9 Examples of the Activity Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Welcome to Study Unit 8!
In the last unit, you learnt some basic facts about learning and how a teacher can encourage active learning.
In this study unit, you will learn about two methods for teaching Social Studies.
These are the Expository and Activity teaching methods.
Teachers need to know what teaching methods to use for specific topics or concepts.
Therefore, you will learn these methods and the appropriate times to use them.
As you study this unit, think back to your primary school experience.
Did your teacher use any of these methods?
What effect did it have on you as a learner?
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the difference between a teaching method and a technique  define and explain the meaning of the expository and activity methods  discuss the purposes of the expository and activity methods  list and explain techniques under the two methods.
66 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods and Techniques A teaching method is a particular style of instruction.
It can also be described as an approach which a teacher uses to stimulate, motivate, propel, spur and encourage the learners in a typical classroom situation.
(Akinlaye 2003).
On the other hand, a teaching technique is a set of unique activities that a teacher uses to implement a particular method.
(Gage 1976).
For instance a teacher using the expository method may employ one or a combination of three – four techniques of exposition.
A good teacher should be able to use appropriate methods and techniques that will help him/her achieve lesson objectives/learning outcomes.
3.2 Definition of the Expository Method The expository method is sometimes referred to as the ‘lecture method’.
It is a method of teaching that involves the teacher delivering a pre- planned lesson to learners with little or no instructional aid.
It is the oldest style of teaching for imparting knowledge about events and trends and is generally considered not to be a very effective teaching method.
However, the use of the method has been justified for its effectiveness 67 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS by some schools of thought who believe it is effective in teaching certain abstract topics and for very large classes.
It is also believed to help learners develop listening skills and the ability to write notes rapidly.
Finally it is believed that the method saves time.
Despite these claims, experts believe that the exclusive use of this method in teaching social studies is ineffective in achieving the goals of the subject.
This is because social studies is a subject that aims at exposing learners to knowledge and experiences that increase their understanding of trends and events, and as well as enable them develop the ability for critical thinking.
The subject also intends to help them to develop practical skills and explore multiple interests.
Therefore the goal of social studies requires participation of learners and the expository method will not be adequate for this.
Teachers are expected to use this method only occasionally, when lecturing cannot be avoided, such as when introducing a topic that is technical, complicated and completely new to learners.
Even in doing so, the teacher should make sure that it is participatory by asking learners questions and allowing them to answer before providing clarification or additional information.
3.4 Primary goals of the Expository Method The expository method can be used for the following purposes: 1.
To motivate learners 2.
To clarify issues that are unclear or confusing 3.
To review the lesson by summarizing the main points 4.
To expand the content of the lesson by presenting additional information.
3.5 Characteristics of Expository Method 1.
It involves the act of telling, informing and instructing the learners.
2.
It is teacher centered (except when modified) 3.6 Examples of Expository Techniques 1.
Lectures: A lecture is simply talking to the learners, who remain passive throughout the lesson, giving them information about the topic.
Most of the time, it is teacher-centered.
However, this method can be modified to make it more effective by allowing learners to participate through question and answers.
2.
Guest speaker 3.
Recitation 68 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define teaching method 2.
What is the meaning of teaching technique?
3.
Define and explain the expository method 4.
Is the expository method an effective method for teaching Social Studies?
Why?
5.
List the major goals of the expository method 6.
List three examples of expository techniques Table 2: List of Methods and Techniques in the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum S/N Method Techniques 1 Expository 1.
Lecture (or modified lecture i.e.
participatory) 2 Inquiry 1.
Questioning 2.
Field trips, field work or field study 3.
Take home assignment 3 Activity 1.
Role Play 2.
Dramatization 3.
Drawing, painting and labeling 4.
Poetry recitation 5.
Demonstration 6.
Songs 4 Discussion 1.
Story telling 2.
Class discussion/ Group Discussion/group work 3.
Debate 4.
Brainstorming 5.
Question & Answer 3.7 The Activity Method The activity method refers to the use of physical and mental actions aimed at stimulating creative expression and application of principles and knowledge to solve problems.
It involves the participation of learners in their own learning process.
3.8 Purpose of the Activity Method The activity method can be used for the following purposes: 1.
To stimulate a learner’s interest 2.
To encourage initiative and exploration 69 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.
To provide an enabling environment for practicing socialization skills 4.
To aid the understanding of concepts 3.9 Examples of Activity Techniques 1.
Role-play: In role-plays, learners act out a real-life situation, so they can practice newly learnt skills.
Role plays are conducted when a real life situation is presented by the teacher or one of the learners, then a volunteer in the class is asked to act /play specific roles, and the other learners can provide constructive feedback.
The feedback session is important because it helps the learner to know how well he /she followed the behavioural steps; while the teacher ensures that the key points relevant to the topic being addressed is reflected in the feedback.
Role-play can be done in pairs, or as a group, with the rest of the class observing.
Role- plays give learners the opportunity to experiment in a situation they can be confronted with.
2.
Field trip/work: A field trip or study or work, involves site visits to gain practical experience and knowledge through first hand observation and interviewing of subjects in the field.
The purpose of field trips/work is to gather information.
When given a field trip assignment, learners are expected to provide an oral or written report and a brochure or other evidence of the visit.
They should also be able to answer several questions on the topic based on their observations and knowledge acquired during the field trip.
3.
Simulation: This technique imitates conditions of real life, providing experiences in which learners practice interpersonal and intra-personal skills; observe and analyze their own and other’s feelings and behaviours.
During simulations, learners practice with a variety of skills, including listening, problem solving, decision-making, negotiation and expression of feelings.
Learners become involve in the process as they imagine themselves in real-life situations.
After the simulation is concluded, an analysis should be conducted giving learners the opportunity to share feelings, interpretations, and perceptions of their experiences, as well as to analyze feelings and to project applications to real life.
4.
Dramatization: This is different from role-play in the sense that the parts to be played are decided upon in advance.
The acting out of situations helps the learners work out the inter-personal relations among the characters involved.
70 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 5.
Games: Games are usually thought of as forms of play, amusement, competition, diversion or entertainment, but they can be used as a technique for teaching.
They can be used as warm-up exercises and for opening up discussions on sensitive topics.
They can also be used for practicing skills and evaluation.
6.
Real Life Home Work: With real life homework, learners practice skills in real situations.
For instance they talk with their parents about issues like sanitation or governance.
This also provides learners the opportunity to practice social skills, and increase their belief that they will be able to carry out skills and use community resources when needed.
7.
Demonstration: In some cases, learning can be best achieved by doing.
A demonstration technique is a teaching technique by doing.
This is done when the teacher performs the skill being taught and the learners observe and are provided with an opportunity to practice the skill demonstrated.
When using this technique, break the task into a sequence or steps and make sure that the learners can see the demonstration.
The following questions should assist a teacher in determining the appropriateness of a demonstration: Does the learner need to see the process?
Will the demonstration last more than 20 minutes?, Will there be practice time for the learners?
Can the learners easily identify the steps?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Define activity method 2.
Enumerate the uses of activity method 3.
Define the following: (a) Role-Play, (b) Field Trip (c) Dramatization 4.
What questions should guide the appropriateness of demonstration technique?
4.0 CONCLUSION Both the expository and activity methods have instances when they can be used to the advantage of the learners in a Social Studies class.
What is important is for the teacher to be aware of the strengths and weaknesses of both methods, as well as the various techniques that go with them, in order to derive maximum benefit from their use.
What ever the chosen method may be, it should be ideal for achieving the lesson objectives.
It should also be appropriate for the age, interest, needs and abilities of the learners, as well as the resources available for teaching the subject.
71 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY In this study unit, you have learnt the difference between teaching method and technique.
You have also learnt the meaning of expository and activity teaching methods, along side their different uses and the various techniques used in the two methods.
The unit also highlighted the strength and weaknesses of the methods.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
A teaching method is a particular style of instruction.
2.
A teaching technique is a set of unique activities that a teacher uses to implement a particular method.
3.
The expository method is sometimes referred to as the lecture method.
It is a method of teaching that involves the teacher delivering a pre-planned lesson to learners with little or no instructional aid.
It is the oldest style of teaching for imparting knowledge about events and trends and is generally considered not to be a very effective teaching method.
4.
No, the expository method is not an effective method for teaching social studies.
This is because social studies is a subject that aims at exposing learners to knowledge and experiences that increase their understanding of trends and events, and as well as enable them develop the ability for critical thinking.
The subject also intends to help them practical skills and explore interests.
Therefore the goal of social studies requires participation of learners and the expository method will not be adequate for this.
5.
The goals of the expository method are: a.
To motivate learners b.
To clarify issues that are unclear or confusing c. To review the lesson by summarizing the main points d. To expand the content of the lesson by presenting additional information.
6.
Three examples of the expository techniques are: a. Lectures b.
Guest speaker c. Recitation 72 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
The activity method refers to the use of physical and mental actions aimed at stimulating creative expression and application of principles and knowledge to solve problems.
2.
The activity method can be used for the following purposes: a.
To stimulate a learner’s interest b.
To encourage initiative and exploration c. To provide an enabling environment for practicing socialization skills d. To aid the understanding of concepts 3(a) Role-play: Role-play is the acting out of a real-life situation, so they can practice newly learnt skills.
(b) Field trip/work: A field trip is the visiting of sites to gain practical experience and knowledge through first hand observation and interviewing of subjects in the field.
(c) Dramatization: Dramatization is the acting out of situations helps the learners work out the inter-personal relations among the characters involved.
4.
The following questions should guide the appropriateness of demonstration technique: (a) Does the learner need to see the process?
(b) Will the demonstration last more than 20 minutes?
(c) Will there be practice time for the learners?
(d) Can the learners easily identify the steps?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Select one method between the expository and activity methods to teach any of the following topics and justify your choice of the method with two reasons.
(a) Types of government (b) Types of a family.
2.
Mention three techniques used in expository teaching method and four techniques used in activity teaching method 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 73 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Adaralegbe, A.
(1980).
The Nigeria Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect NERDC, Social Studies Teaching: Issues and Problems.
Benin: City Ethiope.
Aina, N. F. et al.
(1982).
Social Studies: A Book on Methodology.
Evans Brothers Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Akinlaye F. A.
(2003).
Social Studies (A Sociological Approach) Lagos: Ziklag Educational Publishers.
Akinlaye, F. A.
& Adekoya, S. O.
A.
(eds.).
Readings in Social Studies Education, Lagos: OACE Publishing Co. Bank, J.
A.
(1997).
The Teaching Strategies for The Social Studies.
(2nd ed.).
Reading.
Massachusetts Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. Clarkm, Leonard 11.
(1973).
Teaching Social Studies in Secondary Schools.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Coy.
Dufty, David.
(1979).
Planning For Social Studies Instruction.
In UNESCO Source Book on the Teaching of Social Studies.
Chapter 3.
New York.
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1972).
(Vol.1- 10) Crowell Collier and Macmillan Inc. Jones, B., et al (1994).
Designing Learning and Technology for Educational Reform.
Oak Brook, IL: North Central Regional Educational Laboratory.
Lawson, D. & Dufour, B.
(1974).
The New Social Studies.
A Handbook for Teachers in Primary, Secondary and Further Education.
London: Heinemann.
Mehlinger, H. D. (1981).
UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies.
Paris: UNESCO.
Ogunsanya, M. O.
(1984).
Introduction to Methodologies of Social Studies.
Ibadan: University Press.
74 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Silberman, Mel.
(1996).
Active Learning: 101 Strategies to Teach Any Subject.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Taba, Hilda: M. C. Fraenkel, Jack R., and MCNaughton, Anthony, H. (1971).
A Teachers’ Handbook to Elementary Social Studies: An Inductive Approach.
(2nd ed.).
Reading.
Massachusetts Addison- Wesley Publishing Co. 75 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 3 THE INQUIRY AND THE DISCUSSION METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of the Inquiry Methods 3.2 Primary Aims of the Inquiry Method 3.3 Characteristics Inquiry Methods 3.4 Examples of Inquiry Methods 3.5 Definition of the Discussion Methods 3.6 Types of Discussion Methods 3.7 Uses of Discussion Methods 3.8 Characteristics of Discussion Methods 3.9 Example of Discussion Methods 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous study unit, you learnt about the Expository and Activity methods of teaching.
In this unit, you will learn about the Inquiry and Discussion teaching methods.
You would learn about when and how to use the methods, the characteristics of each method and examples of the techniques under each method.
At the end of this study in this unit, you should endeavour to visit a primary school in your community and observe a Social Studies lesson.
Did the teacher use any of these methods?
You can also interview the learners and find out whether the learning outcomes were achieved.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the Inquiry and Discussion teaching methods  state the purposes of the two methods  list at least three characteristics of each method  list and explain the examples of techniques under each of the two methods.
76 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of the Inquiry Method The inquiry method is a teaching style where learners seek to discover and create an answer to a recognized issue or problem, as a direct result of their research, with minimum guidance from the teacher.
This implies that the learner must search for answers to the phenomena, the learner must go over several sources of relevant information, facts and figures, analyze them, organize the facts and data, then decide on the alternative solutions.
It is characterized by learner’s active involvement in systematic and scientific steps, to find out about something.
3.2 Primary aims of the Inquiry Method The inquiry method aims at assisting learners to develop skills, values and attitudes that will enable them to: 1.
Think critically 2.
Recognize problems in their environment 3.
Become independent problem solvers 4.
Help learners live a better life through direct involvement in the problem-solving process 5.
Enable them make better and intelligent decisions.
It is expected that if learners are trained to recognize problems in their environment, formulate and test ideas for solution, they will grow into adults that will become critical thinkers and good problem solvers.
Therefore learners must be given adequate training in skills that constitute inquiry process, in order for them to become adept decision makers.
The basic goal of social studies in adopting the social inquiry approach to learning is to assist learners develop the ability to make sound decisions, so that they can resolve personal problems and influence public policy by participating effectively in intelligent social action.
3.3 Characteristics of Inquiry Method The general characteristics of this method include: 1.
Encouraging learners to think, probe, search, discover, gather information, sifting information, analyzing and drawing conclusions from them.
77 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
Participation of learners who are encouraged to provide answers to open-ended questions, or contribute to discussions on issues raised.
3.4 Examples of Inquiry Techniques 1.
Questioning Technique: The questions asked by the teacher who uses this technique will allow learners to explore ideas.
Time must be given from responses and fellow learners could comment constructively on responses.
The posing of questions by a teacher is a very efficient way to initiate creative classroom participation.
The following suggestions are provided to help you improve your own questioning skills: (1) Formulate your questions to generate discussion, not just part answers or recitation of facts; (2) Phrase the question at a level of abstraction or complexity appropriate to the experience of the class; (3) Allow enough time for the student to respond; (4) Rephrase the question rather than answer it yourself if no student response is forthcoming within a reasonable time; and (5) Never ridicule a student's answer.
In Teaching Tips (1994), McKeachie outlines several techniques for using questioning skills to generate discussions and include suggestions for handling the discussion monopolizers and/or non-participants.
You will find evidence in educational research indicating that after asking a question a teacher should allow from three to five seconds for a student response before making any comment.
Allowing less time may preclude responses from students who are formulating an answer in their minds, and allowing more time may lose the students' attention or create class tension as continuing silence hangs heavily over the classroom.
Five seconds may seem like a very long time when you are standing before a silent group of students.
You may need to develop some discreet means of timing yourself for a few discussion sessions to be sure you allow enough time for creative student responses to your questions.
You should note that questioning skills also extend to the handling of student questions.
Lack of response to teacher-generated questions may indicate that student attention is still focused on some prior problem.
In such cases, asking the learners if they have any questions may more easily generate discussion.
It is very important to treat questions in this 78 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS context with respect.
A student may understandably be embarrassed if his question is made to appear ridiculous or irrelevant.
Of course, it would be unfair to the rest of the class to spend a lot of time answering an irrelevant question; but such situations should be handled courteously, perhaps by offering to discuss the matter after class.
Discussion sessions are generally very productive learning environments when all students feel that their questions will be appreciated as evidence of their interest in learning and not as indications of ignorance.
2.
Project Technique: This technique involves a co-operative study of real life situations by either a class or the whole school, usually under the guidance of their teacher.
It is a well planned and carefully executed project, which will enable learners come into actual contact with the lives and activities of their neighbourhood.
It presents real life problems, which they should try to solve by thinking and working together in co-operation.
At the end of it, they would have acquired new skills and gained more knowledge about the issue.
Example of a Project Conducted in a Primary School in Ibadan The pupils in Primary 5 in a school in Ile-Ogbo town, Ibadan, Oyo State, were confronted with a problem of what to do about the increasing accumulation of garbage near their school.
They discussed the problem in class with their teacher and decided to solve it by building a mud incinerator in which they could burn the garbage and other debris.
They wanted their school environment to be both healthy and beautiful.
With the guidance and active help of the teacher, the incinerator was built.
Not only did it beautify the school environment, but the ashes from the incinerator were used to fertilize the school garden.
Source: Mehlinger, H. D. (1981).
UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies.
Paris, UNESCO.
Pg.
17 3.
Homework: It has been found out that the assignment and completion of homework yields positive effects on academic achievement.
The effects are almost tripled when teachers take time to grade the work, make corrections and specific comments on improvements that can be made, and discuss problems and solutions with individual learner or the whole class.
Like a three- legged stool, homework requires a teacher to assign it and provide feedback, a parent to monitor it, and a student to do it.
If one leg is weak, the stool may fall down.
The role of the teacher 79 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS in providing feedback—in reinforcing what has been done correctly and in re-teaching what has not—is key to maximizing the positive impact of homework.
4.
Case Studies: This technique focuses on a human dilemma, presenting the learners with conflicting points of view or interpretations of an event, decision or situation.
The learners are challenged to examine the case, consider alternative ways of resolving the conflict and justify their conclusions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define Inquiry method of teaching.
2.
In what situation is the inquiry method of teaching most effective?
3.
In what ways does the inquiry method of teaching contribute to learners development?
4.
Mention two characteristics of the Inquiry Method 5.
Mention four techniques of the Inquiry method of teaching 3.5 Definition of the Discussion Method The Discussion method is a learning process, which requires teamwork among the learners.
A discussion method is an open forum in which learners express their opinions as well as review factual material.
It is a natural opportunity for learners to build skills in communication, inference, application, synthesis, and drawing conclusions.
In most learning situations, we strive to have learners talk as much or more than the leader.
3.6 Types of Discussion Methods 1.
Open discussion -- learners determine the topic and the role of the leader is to ask those questions that will lead the learners to consider various ideas.
The leader may need to define terms and encourage differing points of view.
2.
Planned discussion -- the leader determines the content of the discussion, plans the questions in advance, and guides the learners toward some predetermined goal or conclusion.
3.
Formal debate -- learners present opposing viewpoints usually in a structured format.
80 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.7 Uses of the Discussion Methods The Discussion method can be used for the following purposes: 1.
To introduce a topic 2.
To bring to a topic a wide variety of information, attitudes, opinions, insights, and talents 3.
To help learners make inferences, draw conclusions, communicate, and express values and attitudes 4.
To involve learners cognitively 5.
To create greater motivation, interest, and involvement in learning and decision making 6.
To address controversial issues and help learners clarify values and positions 7.
To encourage research 3.8 Characteristics of Discussion Method 1.
It is learner centered, not teacher centered 2.
It requires more of presentations by learners than formal sessions 3.
It promotes learner, teacher interaction 4.
It promotes learner participation 3.9 Examples of Discussion Techniques 1.
Debate: A debate is a formal discussion of differing sides of an issue.
This technique is used for exploring viewpoints, analyzing issues and expressing different points of view.
Learners need to be aware of the rules of debating and to co-operate in establishing a respectful environment.
2.
Brainstorming: Brainstorming is the process of spontaneously generating ideas or information about a topic.
When teachers use brainstorming, they acknowledge that learners bring with them considerable content for the lesson.
This involves the participation of class members in suggesting a range of possible solutions to a problem or question posed by the teacher or one of the learners.
It is a process for spontaneously generating ideas or information about a topic.
The ideas of the learners are usually written on the board, paper or poster.
It is used to assess learner’s needs, interests, knowledge and misinformation and to generate expression of feelings, values, attitudes and beliefs.
Brainstorming can be used at any time in a class session, to begin 81 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS a session or as part of a sequence of activities.
The teacher should first of all introduce the topic for brainstorming, be clear in phrasing the question they should respond to, and wait for several responses before clarifying or adding to the idea.
3.
Class discussions: In this technique, the teacher allows the class to ask questions, and controls the way in which learners discuss them, or when a teacher guides a discussion by asking carefully chosen questions.
Such discussions can be used as a follow-up to a lecture session, after viewing a video or film, as a class revision session etc.
The key advantage of this technique is that it involves learners in their own learning process and this helps them to learn faster and they are not likely to forget easily.
However, there are the challenges of time management, difficulty with handling a learner who talks too much, how to get shy learners to participate, class control when the discussions get heated etc.
Creating opportunities for learners to discuss in pairs, in small groups or as a whole class is essential to help clarify their understanding.
However, certain rules need to be established by the class to ensure discussions do not get out of hand.
4.
Group Work: Group work plays a vital role in the all-round education of learners.
It helps them to develop the skills of listening, presenting ideas, persuading and working as part of a team.
It also gives the learners the chance to monitor their own learning and thus gain a degree of self-direction and independence in their studies.
However, there are many problems associated with group work.
Therefore, the teacher needs to ensure that group members have an agreed set of rules for example not talking at the same time as another group member.
The teacher should also ensure that the learners are clear about the tasks to be carried out.
The learners should be arranged in circles or as the class situation allows.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What is the meaning of the Discussion teaching method?
2.
List three types of the Discussion method 3.
Mention five uses of the Discussion method 4.
What are the four characteristics of the Discussion method 5 List four examples of Discussion techniques 4.0 CONCLUSION An effective teaching of Social Studies can be attained when appropriate methods of teaching have been employed.
The Inquiry and Discussion 82 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS methods are useful especially when teachers wish to affect the affective and behavioural domains of learning.
This is in addition to learning in other domains including cognitive and psychomotor.
This is because learners have the opportunity to discuss, inquire, research, reflect on findings and draw their own conclusions.
5.0 SUMMARY You will agree that learners will find the Inquiry and Discussion methods of teaching very interesting when put into effective use in the Social Studies class.
You have learnt about what the methods are meant to achieve and the characteristics.
You have also learnt the techniques for teaching the methods.
You must however remember that these methods require careful planning and time management in other to be able to achieve the learning objectives.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
The inquiry method is a teaching style where learners seek to discover and create an answer to a recognized issue or problem, as a direct result of their research, with minimum guidance from the teacher.
2.
The Inquiry method is very effective in teaching about controversial social issues in the social studies curriculum 3.
Inquiry method of teaching contributes to learners’ development by enabling them to: (a) Think critically (b) Recognize problems in their environment (c) Become independent problem solvers (d) Live a better life through direct involvement in the problem- solving process (e) make better and intelligent decisions 4.
Inquiry methods of teaching have the following characteristics: (a).
It encourages learners to think, probe, search, discover, gather information, sifting information, analyzing and drawing conclusions from them.
(b).
It allows for participation of learners who are encouraged to provide answers to open-ended questions, or contribute to discussions on issues raised.
5.
Techniques of Inquiry Method of teaching includes: (a) Questioning Technique, (b).
Project Technique(c).
Home work (d).
Case Studies ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 83 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.
The Discussion method is a learning process, which requires teamwork among the learners.
2.
Three types of the Discussion methods are (a) Open (b) Planned discussion (c) Formal debate 3.
Five uses of the Discussion method include: a.
To introduce a topic b.
To help learners make inferences, draw conclusions, communicate, and express values and attitudes c. To create greater motivation, interest, and involvement in learning and decision making d. To address controversial issues and help learners clarify values and positions e. To encourage research 4.
The four characteristics of the Discussion method are: a.
It is learner centered, not teacher centered b.
It requires more of presentations by learners than formal sessions c. It promotes learner, teacher interaction d. It promotes learner participation 5.
Four examples of the Discussion method are: (a) Debate, (b) Brain storming (c) Class Discussion (d) Group work 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List four ways through which learner-teacher interaction can be promoted?
2.
Discuss the methods and techniques of the Inquiry and Discussion methods?
3.
Provide an example of a project conducted by a Primary school in Ibadan.
What lessons can be learnt from the experience?
4.
Write a paragraph on the importance of learner participation in a Social Studies class.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Adaralegbe, A.
(1980).
The Nigeria Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect NERDC, Social Studies Teaching: Issues and Problems.
Benin: City Ethiope.
84 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Aina, N. F. et al.
(1982).
Social Studies: A Book on Methodology.
Evans Brothers Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Akinlaye F. A. et al (1996).
Fundamentals of Social Studies Teaching.
Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited (Educational Publishers).
Akinlaye F. A, et al (1997).
The Essentials of Social Studies Education Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited (Educational Publishers).
Bank, J.
A.
(1997).
The Teaching Strategies for the Social Studies.
(2nd ed.).
Reading.
Massachusetts Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1972).
(Vol.1- 10) Crowell Collier and Macmillan Inc. Lawson, D. & Dufour, B.
(1974).
The New Social Studies.
A Handbook for Teachers in Primary, Secondary and Further Education.
London: Heinemann.
Mehlinger, H. D. (1981).
UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies.
Paris: UNESCO.
Ogunsanya, M. O.
(1984).
Introduction to Methodologies of Social Studies.
Ibadan: University Press.
85 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 4 RESOURCES FOR TEACHING PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES Unit 1 Selection and Functions of Instructional Materials Unit 2 Instructional Materials for Schools Unit 3 Sourcing For Instructional Materials UNIT 1 SELECTION AND FUNCTIONS OF INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What are Instructional Materials?
3.2 Types of Instructional Materials 3.3 Why should Teachers Use Instructional Materials?
3.4 Criteria for Selecting Resource Materials 3.5 Guidelines for Using Instructional Material 3.6 Maintenance and Control of Instruction Materials 3.7 Checklist for Evaluating Instructional Materials 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this study unit, you will learn about the processes of selecting instructional materials, as well as their functions in the teaching/learning of Social Studies Primary Schools.
The Unit also gives some definitions of instructional materials by scholars.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define instructional materials  list types of instructional materials  describe teaching and learning materials  state reasons why teachers should use instructional materials  list criteria for selecting resources materials  state and discuss guidelines for using instructional materials 86 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS  evaluate the relevance of instructional materials.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What are Instructional Materials?
One of the ways of ensuring effective learning is by making the experience real for learners.
This requires using true examples that they can relate with.
Real life situations that they see happening around them.
When these real life experiences cannot be presented, teachers need to use other materials, devices, techniques or items that closely represent them.
At the end of the day, what the teacher hopes to achieve is to put across the intended message as effectively and meaningfully as possible to the learners.
Instructional materials have been defined by Schramn (1977) as “information-carrying technologies that are used for instructional purposes with the hope of delivering educational information very quickly and widely.” Instructional materials or media is the modern term used for teaching materials.
The media are the channels for communication used in the classroom for effective teaching and learning.
Since Social Studies focuses on human beings within the environment, teachers need to allow learners understand things that exist in their environment, which are usually not abstract in order for their to fully appreciate and understand the realities of their experiences.
Therefore, resources for teaching are always usually very necessary for teaching Social Studies.
3.2 Types of Instructional Materials There are two types of instructional materials, teaching materials and learning materials.
These are discussed below: (a) Teaching Materials: Teaching materials are aids teachers use to help pupils learn.
They help teachers to explain ideas in a concrete way.
Examples include a picture charts or posters, flash cards, real objects, and other materials that help learners learn.
(b) Learning Materials: Learning materials are resources that learners use to help themselves learn.
They help pupils learn actively, either independently or with others.
Examples of learning aids include stones, seeds, and shells for counting, games to learn proper spelling, and worksheets that require learners to answer questions in writing.
87 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.3 Why Should Teachers Use Instructional Materials?
You may be wondering why so much emphasis is being placed on the use of instructional materials.
Indeed a lazy teacher may find them burdensome and time wasting.
The facts below will help you find out more about the importance of instructional materials and why teachers should regard them as essential the tools for their profession: 1.
Helps to Support Teaching Strategy and Learning Instructional materials usually contribute to the efficiency, depth and variety of learning.
This is because these materials simplify learning by using the senses of hearing (through audio tapes or radio, CDs etc) and sight (through visual aids such as posters, charts, maps, videotapes, overhead PowerPoint and projectors etc), as well as sense of touch (through models, real objects etc).
Research indicates that people learn and retain information, (about 50%), when they see and hear, while their learning and retention increases drastically to 90% when they say and do (through drama, discussions, demonstration, simulating real experiences etc).
With this at the back of a teacher’s mind, he/she should select appropriate teaching strategies and support the teaching process with the use of relevant teaching materials in order to carter for the needs of visual, auditory and kinetic oriented learners to achieve the desired learning outcomes.
2.
Motivates and Arouses Learners’ Interest More often than not, pupils dislike the idea of going to school.
They would rather stay at home to watch their favorite TV programme or play games with a friend in the neighbourhood.
Teachers can make learning fun by being creative and innovative.
They can motivate learners and re- kindle their interest in school activities when they use instructional materials.
Children love pictures; therefore teachers can make use of colourful picture charts or posters to support their teaching of certain concepts.
Since they also enjoy play activities, teachers can use games and drama to teach other topics.
Learners will love attending such lessons.
3.
Allows Effective Use of Teaching Time Contrary to the view that the use of instructional materials is time wasting, it actually helps the teacher to manage teaching time efficiently.
For example, instead of using many words to describe a sound, object, or function, the teacher can play a recording of the sound, show a picture of the object, or presents a diagram of the function.
As a 88 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS result, the learner understands faster and the teacher is able to save time, which would have been spent in long explanations.
4.
Helps to Emphasize Areas that Need Reinforcement Instructional materials build on previous learning and provides additional information that adds value to teaching and answering of learner’s questions, while avoiding needless repetition.
It helps to keep the goals and objectives of the subject in proper perspective and supply a concrete basis for conceptual thinking.
It helps to prevent gaps in learning and provides necessary support for achieving curriculum goals by laying emphasis on key points that need to be retained.
5.
Contributes to Vocabulary Development Good instructional aids also can help resolve some language barrier problems and increase learners’ vocabulary.
Many times, words or sentences used in an instructional aid are carefully selected to convey the same meaning for the learner as the teacher intends.
Some of these words may be new to learners who easily pick the new words, which are often self-explanatory.
6.
Helps to Concretize Learning Outcomes The use of learning/teaching aids assists the recall rate of learners, since they would find it easier to retrieve materials that they saw and read rather than those they simply read.
It is also helpful if these materials contain operations which would involve the learner’s participation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
How did Schram (1977) define instructional materials?
2.
List types of instructional materials 3.
What are teaching materials?
4.
Define learning materials 5.
State five reasons why teachers should use instructional materials 3.4 Criteria for Selecting Resource Materials Certain considerations should be made when selecting resources for instructional materials for teaching.
Some of these factors are highlighted below: 1.
Learner Characteristics: Individual differences of learners should be put into consideration.
Therefore materials selected should cater to the different learning styles and competence 89 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
Types of Learning Activities: The tasks and activities for learning would help to determine the type of instructional materials to be selected.
3.
Quality of Production: Materials to be selected should be of high quality production in terms of clarity of messages, boldness in size of printed letters/numbers/pictures etc 4.
Social-Cultural Relevance of Material to Curriculum Content: An instructional material may be the best in all regards but if it is not relevant to the content of the curriculum for which it is intended, it becomes useless.
For example a material intended for the pupils in the U.S.A. may not be appropriate for Nigerian pupils because of the differences in the content of the curriculum, except if the material is adapted in line with the local curriculum used.
5.
Medium: A particular medium must be matched with a type of learning.
For instance a learning that requires acquisition of skills will be good for real objects etc.
6.
Relationship of Content to Pupils' Experiences: Materials should reflect learner’s interest, levels of comprehension, age, and maturation level.
7.
Suitability of vocabulary: The use of language is important.
A material with very complex vocabulary will be of no use to a primary one-school pupil.
8.
Accessibility: The material should be available, affordable and within the reach of its users.
9.
Durability of Equipment and Materials: Since materials are supposed to be used from time to time, it is essential that they are durable.
For example, a laminated chart will be more appropriate than a paper chart.
10.
Ease of Operation: In cases where schools can afford equipments such as video, projector, computer, multi-media etc, preference of equipment to be selected should be based on its user-friendliness.
That is, it should be easy to operate.
11.
Cultural Sensitivity: The materials should be not be culturally offensive.
Rather, it should reflect culturally acceptable pictures and illustrations.
90 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 12.
Gender Sensitivity: In line with current trends, materials used should reflect issues that promote respect and dignity of both male and females.
3.5 Guidelines for Using Instructional Materials It is not enough to have instructional materials at one’s disposal.
The effective use of such materials is what matters.
Following are some tips to help teachers learn how to make effective use of instructional materials: (1) Use Multiple Resources Instructional materials should include sufficient variety to represent a range of perspectives around issues.
The more materials available to a teacher, the more chances learners have to fully understand the subject.
As discussed above, learners have their differences and unique learning styles and it is the responsibility of the teacher to meet the individual needs of learners.
One of the effective ways of doing this is by using a variety of resources that addresses the five senses including seeing, touching, hearing, feeling and smelling.
The teacher should endeavour to use as many resources as possible to enrich the learning experience of the pupils.
For example, in a Social Studies Class, a teacher can treat a topic such as the family by using pictures (seeing), chalkboard (writing) and games or cardboards for drawing (doing).
All of these activities can be managed in one class, depending on the time for the lesson and the ability of the teacher to manage the class within the time frame.
(2) Use Resources That Are Relevant To Subject Matter Materials for instruction should be appropriate to the stated objectives, contents of the subject, and learner’s stage of development.
For instance a film on Shakespeare will not appeal to a primary one pupil, because of its irrelevance to their experiences at that age, and the complex language and concepts.
A recorded children’s programme on television will be more appropriate.
(3) Check That Learners Can See/hear The teacher should ensure that he/she does not block students' view of instrcutional materials, especially visual aids.
He/she should stand to one side of the chalk board or the overhead projector, or ask learners to re- 91 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS organize the seating arrangements so that they can see.
This is very important otherwise only the learners in front will benefit from the use of the materials.
Also learners should be given the chance to read the image on the screen before you talking about it.
If the material used is an audio tape, the teacher should ensure that it is loud enough for the whole class to hear.
(4) Speak to Learners Not to the Aids Some teachers are fond of speaking to the poster, or map or projection screen when showing information on them.
Rather the teacher should use a pointer or ruler to highlight points on the material.
Again caution must be taken to ensure that; learners see what is being highlighted or emphasized.
You could ask those seating at the back whether they can see what you are showing them.
3.6 Maintenance and Control of Instructional Materials As a result of the challenges of limited funds and resources, school authorities and teachers need to take responsibilities for the maintenance and control of teaching/learning materials, otherwise, they would get worn-out and spoilt easily and it may become difficult to replace them.
This is the reason why guidelines and procedures need to be established.
Some examples of are stated below: (a) Stock Taking: An inventory of all resources in the school including library resources should be maintained and updated regularly.
Teachers can take advantage of PTA meetings to make requests of additional equipment (if this allowed by the authorities) and such supply or donations must be acknowledged and proper records kept.
This would make it easy to what is on ground and what is lacking.
It is also useful for reporting and accountability.
(b) Storage: Some materials such as charts, pictures and diagrams may be permanently on the walls of the classroom.
However, other specialized ones such as technological resources (television, video, radio, projector etc) should be kept securely under the supervision of an assigned member of staff.
The use of use equipment should be duly signed for when being requested for, in order to be able keep track of where it is being used and by who.
(c) Maintenance: Teachers should alert appropriate authorities when the equipment needs servicing or repairs.
Skilled personnel should be invited to service or repair them when necessary.
Care should be taken when shifting materials or equipment from building to building of class to class, to avoid damages.
92 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (d) Insurance Policy: It is important to insure such materials and equipment against fir and robbery incidents.
3.7 Checklist for Evaluating Instructional Materials It is not ideal to just pick a material to use during a lesson, for the sake of satisfying supervisor or inspector’s expectation.
Therefore, it is better to ensure that whatever resources are selected will serve the purpose of enhancing the teaching/learning situation.
The list below provides a guide that a teacher can use in the selection of appropriate materials for teaching and learning.
Learning Materials Selection Guide 1.
Title of material: …………………………………………………………………………………………………… 93 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
Class for which it is intended: ………………………………………….……………………………….
3.
Publisher: ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 4.
Reading level- appropriateness for class being considered: (a).
satisfactory : ………….
(b).
unsatisfactory : ………… (c ).
N/A: …………… Comments: ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
5.
Does the content fit subject and curriculum objectives?
(a).
Yes : ………………………….
(b).
No : …………………….. 6.Is the content appropriate for the age, maturity and interests of the learner?
: (a).
Yes : …………………... (b).
No : …………………… 7.
General format and organization: (a).
good : ………………………… (b).
fair: ………………..… (c).
poor: ………..……………… Comments: ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
8.
Size of print (where applicable): (a).
satisfactory : ………….
(b).
unsatisfactory : ………… (c).
N/A: …………… 9.
Physical features (binding, sound quality, photography quality etc as applicable): (a).
satisfactory : ………….
(b).
unsatisfactory : ………… (c).
N/A: …………… Comments: ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
10.
Positive and adequate treatment of cultural features: (a).
satisfactory : ………….
(b).
unsatisfactory : ………… (c).
N/A: …………… Comments: ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
11.
Positive and adequate treatment of both genders: (a).
satisfactory : ………….
(b).
unsatisfactory : ………… (c).
N/A: …………… Comments: ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
12.
Outstanding features of the material: ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
13.
Negative features of the material: ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
14.
General comments: …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List 12 criteria for selecting resource materials for PSSS 2.
Why is it necessary to consider the relevance of materials to curriculum content during resources selection?
94 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.
List four guidelines for using instructional materials 4.
Why is it necessary to use a checklist for evaluating instructional materials during selection?
4.0 CONCLUSION This has been a very comprehensive study unit for introducing discussions about instructional materials.
An important point to note is that some materials are meant for teaching, while some are meant for learners, yet they are all regarded as instructional materials.
It is equally essential for teachers to understand why they have no option as far as the use of teaching materials is concerned.
This was well explained in this unit.
Finally, certain factors must be put into consideration before the selection of instructional materials.
Such materials should be relevant and appropriate for curriculum content and the context of its usage.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has focused on some basic facts about instructional materials.
It has addressed the definitions of instructional materials by scholars, the types, criteria for selection of materials and guidelines for using them.
Finally, it looked at the maintenance and control of the se of instructional materials and the evaluation of the materials.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Schram (1977) defined instructional materials as “information- carrying technologies that are used for instructional purposes with the hope of delivering educational information very quickly and widely.” 2.
The two types of instructional materials are: (a) Teaching materials and (b) Learning materials 3.
Teaching materials are aids teachers use to help pupils learn.
They help teachers to explain ideas in a concrete way.
4.
Learning materials are resources that learners use to help themselves learn.
They help pupils learn actively, either independently or with others.
5.
Teachers should use instructional materials for the following five reasons: (a) It helps to support teaching strategy and learning (b) It motivates and arouses learners’ interest 95 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (c) It makes effective use of teaching time (d) It helps to emphasize areas that need reinforcement (e) It contributes to vocabulary development ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
The following are criteria for selecting resource materials for PSSS: (a) Learner characteristics (b) Types of learning activities (c) Quality of production (d) Relevance of material to curriculum content (e) Medium (f) Relationship of content to pupils' experiences (g) Suitability of vocabulary (h) Accessibility (i) Durability of equipment and materials (j) Ease of operation (k) Cultural sensitivity (l) Gender sensitivity 2.
It is necessary to consider the relevance of materials to curriculum content during resources selection because a material intended for the pupils in the U.S.A. make not be appropriate for Nigerian pupils as a result of differences in the content of the curriculum, except if the material is adapted in line with the local curriculum used.
3.
The following are guidelines for teachers using instructional materials: (a) Use multiple resources (b) Use resources that are relevant to subject matter (c) Check that learners can see/hear (d) Speak to learners not to the aids 4.
Is it necessary to use a checklist for evaluating instructional materials during selection to ensure that the selected materials are appropriate to the teaching/learning situation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define and explain the two types of instructional materials 2.
State reasons why teachers should use instructional materials 3.
Discuss the criteria for selecting resources materials 96 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 4.
What should teachers take note of when using instructional materials 5.
Discuss briefly the following: (a) Control and maintenance of the us of instructional materials in schools and (b) evaluation of the relevance of instructional materials that are being used in schools 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful.
Abimbade, A.
(1996).
Principles and Practice of Educational Technology.
Ibadan: International Publishers Ltd. Agun, I.
(1976).
The Use of Instructional Media for Teacher Education in Developing Countries.
Kenya Educational Review, 25-34.
Erinosho, Stella Y. et al.
(2000).
Teaching Effectiveness in Nigerian Schools.
Ibadan: Sam Bookman Publishers.
Hoban, Charles F. et al.
(1949).
Research on Audio-Visual Materials.
Audio-Visual Materials for Instruction Forty-Eight Year Book of National Society for the Study of Education.
University of Chicago Press.
Kemp, Jerrold (1975).
Planning and Producing Audio-Visual Materials.
(3rd ed.).
New York: Thomas Crowell.
UNIT 2 INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS FOR SCHOOLS CONTENTS 97 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classification and Definitions of the Instructional Materials 3.2 Visual Aids 3.3 Reading Materials 3.4 Audio Aids 3.5 Audio -Visual Aids 3.6 Artifacts 3.7 Computer Resources 3.8 Project Materials 3.9 Resources Packs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last Unit, you learnt about the importance and uses of teaching and learning materials.
In this study unit, you will learn about the various instructional materials that you can use in schools.
Since the contents of the PSSS curriculum provides the learner with foundations of knowledge about man and society, the type of resource materials to be used should have a powerful influence on teaching and learning.
This study unit examines some of these resources and how they can be used.
You can find out how to get some of these resources within your community.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  list the various classifications of instructional materials  discuss examples and uses of the instructional materials  list some instructional materials in the PSSS curriculum modules.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classification and Definitions of Instructional Materials 98 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS As stated before, instructional materials are tools used by teachers to help learners improve reading, critical thinking, communication, observation and other skills, as well as illustrate or reinforce a skill, fact, or idea, and to make learning interesting.
There are various ways of classifying instructional materials, so you will find people use certain words or classifications interchangeably such as visual aids or visual symbols.
Whatever classifications are used is not so important.
What matters is for one to be able to know each resource or material and how and when to use them.
We shall endeavour to explain this below.
3.2 Visual Aids Visual aids are symbols and images, which the learners can see, that help the teacher pass the message across effectively.
They help to prevent boredom, providing a visual stimulant to emphasize what the learners are hearing.
Visual aids are usually simple, related to the lesson, interesting and colourful.
When using a visual aid, the teacher should make sure that it can be seen by all learners and that it helps to get the points across to learners.
Examples: (a) Wall Charts: Are large pieces of paper or cardboard which contain information which may be in form of diagram, pictures, table, graphs etc.
(b) Posters: A large printed picture that convey messages.
Posters can be used alone to explain a lesson or used to tell a story.
(c) Chalk or Marker Board: The chalk or marker board is a board for writing during lessons or instruction.
It can be erased, allowing the surface to be used again and again.
It should be kept clean when not in use.
Teachers should write legibly and large enough for all to see, organize materials on the board in an orderly way, use underlining, colour and boxes to emphasize key ideas, avoid standing in front of the board, preventing the learners from viewing what he/she has written.
(d) Graphs: A graph is a symbolic drawing that illustrates relationships or makes comparisons.
The most common types are the line graph and the bar graph.
The use of a graph for teaching will depend on the type of information the teacher wants to pass across to learners.
This pie- chart may also be used to show brief comparisons of quantitative data (e) Flashcards: pieces of paper or cardboard with words or pictures on them used for teaching or reinforcing certain concepts and ideas.
(f) Globes/Maps: These are presentations that help to explain issues such as locations, weather and international affairs.
99 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (g) Diagrams: Graphic representation of a situation e.g.
the results of an action (h) Flip Charts: A pad of large paper sheets on a stand for presenting information (i) Pictures/Photographs/Paintings: These aids are like real objects.
They show the actual thing that the teacher is trying to explain or describe.
However, they have to be large enough for every one to see or be produced in large quantity to be used in small groups.
A picture or photograph conveys a perspective of reality that may have a greater impact than hundreds of words on the same topic.
(j) The Human Body: The human body is an important and one of the most frequently used aids for teaching.
This is because the teacher uses body movements; facial expressions and gestures that help learners understand what the teacher is saying.
3.3 Reading Materials These are very useful sources of knowledge, which are easy to obtain.
Some parents buy books for their children and others can loan books and other reading materials form the school library.
These are the most common and easily accessible class a instructional materials that a teacher uses in the school.
Examples: (a) Textbooks: Textbooks are subject specific materials containing comprehensive information about a subject matter.
They can be used in many ways.
Relevant chapters of a book can be read and discussed in class, or learners may be given reading assignments to prepare them for what will be discussed in class.
The teacher also uses textbooks to enrich the lesson plan.
Reading Materials 100 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (b) Reference books: They are specialized reading materials that may not be easily available except in some homes, libraries and schools.
They include encyclopedia, dictionaries, manuals etc.
(c) Literature/story books: These are reading materials, which contain stories that teach morals and values and help in vocabulary development.
(d) Newspapers, magazines, journals etc: These are print media documents, which focus on news, current affairs, international relations etc.
They also contain pictures and illustrations, which learners can use in learning about their environment.
Junior learners could be taught to read and interpret pictures, such as pictures on cover and inside pages, pictures in adverts etc, while older learners could be taught to read simple articles, feature stories opinion pieces etc in relation to the curriculum content.
This also means that the teacher must be an adept reader.
3.4 Audio Aids These are learning resources that appeal to the sense of hearing.
Such materials can be easily purchased from commercial sources or recorded if it will be used for classroom purposes.
Learners can record interviews with experts during field trips etc.
Examples: (a) Tape Recorders/Audiotape/CDs: A teacher can record a lecture or one of the children’s programme and allow learners listen and learn from it.
It can be used as a trigger for discussions in class.
(b) Radio: The radio is a very useful media for teaching and learning.
Radio programmes provide updates, news, educational issues, music and children’s programmes.
3.5 Audio-Visual Aids These are materials that are both audible and visible.
They can be useful ways of emphasizing, introducing or filling in details on the subject matter.
It is important to give some time for discussion before and or after the presentation.
Also, teachers should encourage learners to note the important messages being passed across and ask them to summarize the main point after the presentation.
The teacher should also give room for question and answers.
101 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (a) Television: The television can be used to present programmes that depict real conflicts and issues that allow learners to suggest possible solutions.
This helps them to develop skills in problem solving.
(b) Videocassettes, VCDs/DVDs: Videocassettes, video compact disks and digital compact disks are devices, which provide motion, color and sound.
It is a popular teaching aid because children love to watch television.
It’s captivating effect also has a strong impact on the reception of its messages to learners.
Video Cassette SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What are visual aids?
2.
Mention three contributions of visual aids to teaching and learning.
3.
List five examples of visual aids that can be used in a Social Studies class 4.
Mention two examples of audio aids 5.
Mention one important thing a teacher should do when using the audio-visual aid 3.5 Artifacts Artifacts (sometimes called realia materials or real objects) are objects, work of art, relics etc that are used for teaching/learning because it makes the learning experience real to learners.
They can see what is being discussed and it makes a lot of sense to them, as opposed to if teachers were describing them, because it would seem like something abstract to the learners.
It is usually useful for introducing new concepts.
For example, a teacher who wants to talk about the media can bring a TV, radio, CD player, newspaper etc to class or objects that look exactly like them such as toy cars etc to illustrate the meaning and functions of the media.
102 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Examples: (a) Models: A model is a reproduction of a real object.
It comes in different sizes so it may be smaller or bigger than the original object.
However, some models may not have all the details of the real object.
Artifacts on mode of transportation (b) Real Objects: Real objects are the actual things themselves.
Objects and models can make learning situation real and interesting.
The teacher can bring such from his/her home or ask the learners to bring them.
Some may also be available within the school.
(c) Mock-ups: A mock-up is a three-dimensional or specialized type of model made from real or synthetic materials.
It is used for study, training, or testing in place of the real object, which is too costly or too dangerous, or which is impossible to obtain.
Cut- aways: cut-aways are models that are built in sections and can be taken apart to reveal the internal structure of an object.
3.6 Computer Resources Technological development has contributed immensely to the use of modern technologies for teaching and learning.
In fact, learners can 103 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS learn on their own at home through computer-assisted programmes.
These equipments are interactive so the teacher (computer) and the learner can interact and communicate.
Examples: (a) Computers/Computer games etc: Computerized games have been developed to teach children about alphabets, vocabulary and other specialized subjects.
These are simple operated devices, which they can use even as toddlers.
Some private schools have introduced the use of such computer programmes and computer games to facilitate teaching and learning.
These can also be obtained in supermarkets and some bookstores.
Computer (b) Internet Resources: The internet is a bank of data and information on virtually everything one can think of.
Children who have been taught how to use a computer and the internet can learn so much from the internet.
They can log on to educational sites, research and learn so much from people in other countries.
However, young learners should be informed that the internet also contains bad information that they can be harmful to them.
Therefore, the use of the internet should be under an adult’s supervision, or teachers and parents can use special programmes that will restrict them from viewing what may be harmful to them.
3.7 Projected Materials These are usually electronic equipment used during a classroom session.
One has to learn how to use it, and it requires preparation of transparencies that will project the information and practice, so the 104 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS teacher should set it up and make sure it is functioning well before using it in the class.
Examples: (a) Over Head Projector: Overheads otherwise called OHPs, is operated when information is written or drawn on a sheet of transparency and placed on the bed of an overhead projector.
The projector switch is then turned on and the information is projected on a white wall or screen, through light and magnification technology.
Over Head Projector (b) Multi media projector: multimedia means a combination of more than one instructional media, such as audio, text, graphics, and video (or film) etc.
It is a computer-based media that is shown on personal computers (PCs) with already stored information.
3.8 Resource Packs A resource pack is a collection of documents that supports the teaching or subject matter.
They are usually kept in a folder.
Examples: (a) Handouts: A handout is a collection of supporting document(s) on a lesson.
It may also contain information on other aspects of the subject matter not covered during the classroom sessions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 105 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 1.
Mention three types of artifacts.
Why are they important in learning?
2.
Mention some of the areas of learning that the computer contributes to 3.
Why should learners be supervised when using the internet?
4.
What are OHPs?
How are thy operated?
5.
What is a resource pack?
6.
List five classifications of instructional materials in the PSSS curriculum module.
Table 3: List of Instructional Materials in the Primary School Social Studies Curriculum S/N Classification Instructional Materials 1 Visual Aids 1.
Pictures 2.
Maps 3.
Diagrams 4.
Posters 5.
Album/ photographs 6.
Placards 7.
Atlas 8.
Charts 2 Audio-Visual Aids 9.
Film, film strip, video 10.
Television 3 Audio Aids 11.
Radio 12.
Audio Tapes 4.
Realia 13.
Real Objects (eg International Passport, Materials/Artifacts Traveler’s cheque, Inoculation certificate, Conversion table for foreign exchange rates, Bible, Koran, rosary etc) 14.
Models (e.g.
Flag, Telephone) 5.
Reading Materials 15.
Textbooks, 16.
Magazines 17.
Reference books 18.
Literature books 19.
Newspapers/articles 4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of instructional materials cannot be over-emphasized.
Teachers cannot afford to do without them for several reasons.
It helps learners to enjoy the lesson, it makes them understand and remember what they have learnt, it carters for the needs of individuals who learn in different ways.
It also important to the various uses of the aids and the do and don’ts when using the aids should be taken to account and adhered to.
106 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 5.0 SUMMARY I hope you enjoyed this study unit.
You have learnt about the various classifications of instructional materials and their examples and definitions were presented to you.
You also learnt about the uses of these aids and some of their advantages.
You should remember that it is always good to use a combination of two or three instructional aids for maximum effectiveness.
However, caution be taken not to overuse them of use them to replace actual instruction.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Visual aids are symbols and images, which the learners can see, that help the teacher pass the message across effectively.
2.
Three contributions of visual aids to teaching/learning are: (a).
It breaks the monotony in a lesson (i.e.
prevents boredom), (b).
It serves as a visual stimulant to emphasize what the learners are hearing.
(c).
It helps learners to understand the lesson (ie it helps to get the points across to learners).
3.
Five examples of visual aids that can be used in a Social Studies class are (a) wall charts (b) picture and photographs, (c) the human body (d) flip chart (e) flash cards 4.
Two examples of audio aids are (a) radio and (b) tape recorder 5.
The teacher should encourage learners to listen to the important messages in the vide and ask questions at the end of the video presentation ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Three types of artifacts are: (a) Models (b) Real Objects (c) Mock-ups They are important in learning because it makes the learning experience real to learners.
They can see what is being discussed and it makes a lot of sense to them, as opposed to if teachers were describing them.
2.
The computer helps learners in the following ways: (a) To learn on their own at home through computer-assisted programmes (b) To about alphabets, vocabulary and other specialized subjects 107 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.
Learners should be supervised when using the internet because the internet also contains bad information that they will be harmful to them.
4.
OHP means Over Head Projector.
It can be operated when information is written or drawn on a sheet of transparency and placed on the bed of an overhead projector.
The projector switch is then turned on and the information is projected on a white wall or screen, through light and magnification technology.
5.
A resource pack is a collection of documents that supports the teaching or subject matter and is usually kept in a folder.
6.
Five classifications of instructional materials listed in the PSSS curriculum modules are: (a) Visual aids (b) Audio-visual aids (c) Artifacts (d) Audio aids (e) Reading materials 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the various classifications of instructional materials 2.
List some instructional materials 3.
List 10 examples of instructional materials in the PSSS curriculum modules 4.
Mention and draw any two instructional materials you are familiar with 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Adaralegbe, A.
(1980).
The Nigeria Social Studies Programme: Retrospect and Prospect NERDC, Social Studies Teaching: Issues and Problems.
Benin: City Ethiope.
108 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Akinlaye, F. A.
& Adekoya, S. O.
A.
(eds.).
Readings in Social Studies Education.
Lagos: OACE Publishing Co. Clarkm, Leonard 11.
(1973).
Teaching Social Studies in Secondary Schools.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Coy.
Doyle, C. and Robson, K. (2002).
Accessible Curricula: Good Practice for All.
UWIC Press: Cardiff.
Dufty, David.
(1979).
Planning for Social Studies Instruction.
In UNESCO Source Book on the Teaching of Social Studies.
Chapter 3.
New York.
Heinich, R.; Molenda, M.; Russell, J.D., & Smaldino, S.E.
(2002).
Instructional Media and Technologies for Learning.
(7th ed.).
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
(5th ed.
Reserved) International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1972).
(Vol.1- 10) Crowell Collier and Macmillan Inc. Lawson, D. & Dufour, B.
(1974).
The New Social Studies.
A Handbook for Teachers in Primary, Secondary and Further Education.
London: Heinemann.
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
Primary School Curriculum Modules (Primary 1-5).
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
NERC (1973).
Guidelines on Primary School Curriculum.
Nigeria Educational Research Council.
Oderinde, B.
& Ekpo, O.
(2005).
Values Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education Principles and Methods of Effective Education.
Hedgepeth pg.
215-216.
UNIT 3 SOURCING FOR INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sources of Obtaining Instructional Materials 3.2 Tips on Designing Visual Aids 109 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.3 Making Instructional Materials for PSSS Classes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 10, we discussed extensively about the various types of instructional materials and what they are used for.
In this unit, you learn how to source for the materials.
In addition, you will learn how to improvise or creatively make resources for teaching or learning, especially since some of the resources are expensive, because they are imported from other countries.
Many schools have a short supply of books and stationery; many lack technological equipment as well as electricity to operate them.
Therefore, this study unit provides suggestions on you can be creative and resourceful as a teacher, rather than being limited by inadequate funds and short supply of teaching materials.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  list three major sources of obtaining instructional materials  mention some examples of PSSS textbooks and where they can be obtained  discuss some principles for designing visual aids  describe the process for making three teaching materials.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sources of Obtaining Instructional Materials (a) Resources in the School The school provides standard instructional materials for teaching Social Studies including textbooks, maps, real objects, wall charts etc.
These types of materials should be treated as basic resources to be used for the social studies classes, rather than as supplementary materials to be used 110 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS at rare intervals, as is too often the case in many classrooms today.
A piece of children’s literature or story book dealing with a social studies topic can help to bring the subject alive in class, if reference is made to the story or if the story is read as part of the lesson.
Relevant Federal and State agencies such as the NERDC (Federal) and the Curriculum Services Department (State) usually provide a list of recommended textbooks for the subject at the vary levels.
Some common textbooks being used by teachers for teaching the primary school social studies include Macmillan Primary Social Studies (Book 1 – 6); Ilesanmi Social Studies For Nigerian Primary Schools (Book 1-6); Longman Primary Social Studies (Book 1- 6); Lantern Comprehensive Social Studies For Primary Schools (Book 1-6), Primary Social Studies Pupils’ Book 1-6 (Petroleum, Special Trust Fund Low Price Edition); etc.
Most of these books also come with separate pupil’s workbook.
Each teacher should have a copy of the list of recommended books for social studies and encourage learners to obtain a copy for themselves.
(b) Resources in the Home The home also provides several resources for teaching/learning social studies.
The radio, television, newspapers, magazines, encyclopedia, dictionary etc all serve as useful resources that can be used to teach the subject.
For instance, in teaching the first module of primary 1 curriculum, which has the topic “Learning to Read Pictures of a Family”, the suggested teaching aid includes pictures of various families.
The teacher can encourage the pupils to bring a picture of their family (with permission from their parents,) or they may be asked to cut pictures of families from old calendars, newspapers, and magazines.
These are resources that can be best obtained from the home.
Photographs and pictures can be useful resource materials for depicting social customs and community life.
(c) Resources in the Community The community presents a store or resources for teaching.
The abundant human and non-human resources, which reside in the community, can enhance the teaching/learning process.
Such resources could be classified in the following ways: 1.
Specialists/experts in various fields and professions 2.
Places of interest or historic –cultural influence and importance.
These provide enormous facilities for visits, such as banks, 111 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS manufacturing companies, museums, libraries, markets, police stations, hospitals, NGOs, international agencies, the media etc.
3.
Important events in the community such as festivals, workshops, coronations, meetings etc.
These resources are usually easily obtained or acquired, with little or no financial involvement and they are always available.
3.2 Tips on Designing Visual Aids Some of the most successful teaching materials are those developed by the teacher and learners.
When learners participate in creating their own learning materials, they acquire additional skills, interests, and enthusiasm in the learning process.
We shall discuss some topics for making or designing instructional materials below.
First, we shall look at the principles for designing visual aids.
(a) Define Your Audience You need to be able to answer some basic questions before you start designing your teaching aid.
This is because it serves as the foundation for other things you will do.
You need to determine age of your learners and what holds their interest.
You also need to know about their language and culture as well as gender differences that may need to be addressed.
All of these information should help you define your target audience.
(b) Outline Key Messages A next step to take should be to list the objectives of the instructional materials and the key points or messages that it intends to pass across.
At this stage, you do not need to worry about the details.
It is just a draft to help you know what exactly you want your learners to gain from the material.
If you want to use it for your Social Studies lesson, you need to look at the curriculum and find out the key messages and objectives that should be achieved from your instruction.
Remember that your teaching aid is supposed to supplement your teaching and help you achieve stipulated objectives.
(c) List Relevant Options of Materials that can be Made Brainstorm on options of teaching aids that can be made for the subject matter at hand.
For instance, if your topic is “Respect for Parents and Elders”, your option may probably not be a model, because it is not likely to help you achieve what you want.
Rather, pictures, paintings, pictorial collages and diagrams may be useful options to consider.
112 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (d) Consider Available Resources The next question you should ask yourself is, what you might need to make each of the listed options.
What are their costs?
Are they available in the market?
How much time will it take to make them.
Do you have the necessary skills to make them or do you need to ask for assistance from others?
How many are you going to make?
These are important questions that should help you arrive at a realistic material that you can produce.
(e) Organize Your Information Now that you know what you want to produce, you should organize your information if it is a poster, or chart, or picture, whatever it is, you need to organize the way you want is.
What will the title of the material be?
What type of picture, or illustration will best depict the intended messages?
How will the various components of the materials be organized?
There should be some logical sequencing or structure in the organization of the materials.
These should be arranged in a way that it will be easy for learners to understand.
You may use arrow, underline, bullets etc to guide learners in processing the information.
(f) Simplify the Language You should use very simple words and short sentences to express the thoughts and ideas promoted.
Use local pictures and examples that learners can relate with.
The messages should be brief, concise and catchy.
(g) Use of Colour and Harmony The background and colours used should not be too loud.
It must not compete with the information otherwise; the essence of the material is lost.
The colours should be complementary and relevant.
There should also be harmony between the colours, type style, layout symbols etc.
Complimentary colours, pictures or illustrations and type style should help to draw attention to the material.
(h) Spacing and Legibility The graphics should not be too crowded.
They should be spacious and easy to follow.
Also, letters, and symbols should be bold enough to be seen from the back of the class.
You can improve on legibility by effectively mixing upper and lower case letters.
Information should flow from left to right and top to bottom.
113 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (i) Evaluation You would conduct a field test to obtain feedback on the clarity of your material and on other aspects discussed above.
This can be done through a questionnaire and focus group discussion.
You must ask specific questions that will give you the answers you need.
You should also get a sample population of your target audience and let them tell you what they can learn from the material.
This feedback should be obtained early enough to enable you have enough time to adjust the material.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention four standard instructional materials for teaching Social Studies, which schools provide.
2.
Name five common textbooks being used by teachers for teaching PSSS in Nigeria 3.
List six resources for teaching/learning PSSSS that are available in homes.
4.
What are the principles to consider when designing visual aids?
3.3 Making Instructional Materials for PSSS Classes As stated earlier, teachers are sometimes constraints in the learning process when they do not have materials to teach.
This is because the school may not have the funds to purchase the materials, or the materials may not be available because they are not produced locally.
Since a teacher needs to use teaching materials for instruction, he/she has to be creative and resourceful by making use of whatever is available at his/her disposal.
There are several advantages of making personal teaching aids.
This is because it promotes active learning especially when learners participate in the making of the materials.
It helps them to understand and remember more effectively.
As Dale Edgar’s research confirms, they are likely to retain 90% of what they say and do.
It also reduces monotony and boredom.
A teacher who does not use instructional materials will bore the learners.
It reduces cost.
Money that should have been spent on the purchase of expensive imported materials can be saved to make more local materials.
It also makes learning experience more real because the teacher can use examples and cultural images that the learners can relate with.
Furthermore, it provides support for teaching and learning in order to achieve desired outcomes.
(a) Making a Chalk Board You and your pupils should discuss why you need to make a blackboard and discuss how you can do it.
You can all look around your school or 114 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS home environment for a piece of large wood.
Be sure that it does not belong to anyone by asking for the owner.
If someone has an ideal wood, ask him/her to donate it to your class, and tell him/her what you want to use it for.
It the shape of the wood is not neat enough, ask the local carpenter around to help you put it in shape.
This should not cost you much.
Buy a small gallon of black paint or chalkboard paint (green) and use it on the board.
Attach it to the wall of your classroom with nails and then you can begin to use your chalkboard.
(b) Making Flash Cards If you want to make flash cards to reinforce the lesson on the “Various Means Of Transportation Used In The Locality”, for example, you can get cards boards or use the back of old calendars or just ordinary paper.
Cut the cardboard or calendar into squares or rectangles.
Let the size be about half a piece of A4 paper.
Use a marker to draw a picture of each means of transportation discussed.
(Assuming you had used models or pictures while teaching the lesson).
Write the letters of the type of transportation under the picture.
Some of the pupils can assist with the drawing, while others do the lettering.
You can make one for them to see and allow them to work in groups to make their own flashcards.
(c) Making a Picture/Photo Collage You can engage your learners in making a picture collage to teach, for example, about “Members of a Family”.
Both teacher and pupils should bring old calendars, newspapers and magazines to class.
Divide learners into groups and let each group identify pictures of members of a family.
Let them cut it with a scissors of ruler and use a gum to paste it on the cardboard or the back of the old calendar.
They should paste as many pictures as the cardboard can take.
However, it should be neatly done.
Let each group label the picture collage and hang it up in the class.
This can be use for further discussions about the subject matter.
(d) Making of Models Learners and teachers can make models using paper of plasticine.
Plasticine is synthetic clay, which is made up of different colours.
It is elastic and can be easily manipulated by children.
They can make paper or plasticine models such as boats, aeroplanes, animals, ball etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention some of the advantages of making local teaching aids?
115 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
What are the materials required for producing a chalkboard?
3.
How can learners contribute to the making of flash cards?
4.
Mention four examples of models that can be made from paper and plastacine.
4.0 CONCLUSION Lack of supply of teaching materials is not an excuse for teachers not to use them.
It takes dedication, resourcefulness and creativity.
Teachers also need to have support from other teachers, school authorities and community members in obtaining materials that will help them to teach and help learners to learn.
5.0 SUMMARY In this study unit, you have learnt about where to obtain resources for teaching.
Some of them can be provided by the school, while others can be from homes or the community.
You have also learnt how to make some teaching aids and the principles for making standard visual aids.
The unit also provided a list of resource materials in the PSSS curriculum modules.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Four standard instructional materials for teaching PSSS which the school provide are: (a) Textbooks (b) Maps (c) Real objects (d) Wall charts 2.
Five common textbooks being used by teachers for teaching PSSS in Nigeria are: (a) Macmillan Primary Social Studies (Book 1 – 6) (b) Ilesanmi Social Studies for Nigerian Primary Schools (Book 1-6) (c) Longman Primary Social Studies (Book 1- 6) (d) Primary Social Studies Pupils’ Book 1-6 (Petroleum, Special Trust Fund Low Price Edition) (e) Lantern Comprehensive Social Studies for Primary Schools (Book 1-6), 3.
List six resources for teaching/learning PSSSS that are available in homes include: 116 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (a) Radio (b) Television (c) Newspaper (d) Magazine (e) Encyclopedia (f) Dictionary 4.
The principles to consider when designing visual aids are: (a) Define the audience (b) Outline key messages (c) Consider available resources (d) Organize your information (e) Simplify the message (f) Use of colour and harmony (g) Spacing and legibility (h) Evaluation ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Some of the advantages of making local teaching aids include: (a) It promotes active learning especially when learners participate in the making of the materials.
(b) It reduces monotony and boredom.
(c) It reduces cost of purchase of materials.
(d) It makes learning experience more real because of the use of local examples and cultural images (e) It provides support for teaching and learning in order to achieve desired outcomes.
2.
The materials for producing a chalkboard are: (a) Wood (b) Nails (c) Black paint or chalkboard paint (d) Filing materials to smoothen the edges 3.
Learners can contribute to the making of flash cards by writing and drawing on cardboard or old calendar 4.
Four examples of models that can be made from paper and plastacine are: (a) Boats (b) aeroplane (c) Animals (d) Balls 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the major sources of obtaining instructional materials?
List examples of the kinds of resources that can be obtained from each source.
117 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
Mention some examples of PSSS textbooks and where they can be obtained 3.
What standard principles are required for designing visual aids 4.
Describe the process for making three teaching materials 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Aina, N. F. et al.
(1982).
Social Studies: A Book on Methodology.
Evans Brothers Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Akinlaye F. A, et al (1997).
Essentials of Social Studies Education Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Limited (Educational Publishers).
Dufty, David.
(1979).
Planning For Social Studies Instruction.
In UNESCO Source Book on the Teaching of Social Studies.
Chapter 3.
New York Erinosho, Stella Y. et al.
(2000).
Teaching Effectiveness in Nigerian Schools.
Ibadan: Sam Bookman Publishers.
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1972).
(Vol.1- 10) Crowell Collier and Macmillan Inc. Mehlinger, H. D. (1981).
UNESCO Handbook for the Teaching of Social Studies.
Paris: UNESCO.
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
Primary School Curriculum Modules (Primary 1-5).
National Implementation Committee on National Policy on Education.
Oderinde, B.
& Ekpo, O.
(2005).
Values Education.
The Nigerian Academy of Education.
118 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 5 EVALUATION OF SOCIAL STUDIES PROGRAMME Unit 1 The Nature of Evaluation Unit 2 Models of Evaluation Unit 3 Techniques of Evaluation Social Studies Programme UNIT 1 THE NATURE OF EVALUATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Evaluation 3.2 Purpose of Evaluation 3.3 Types of Evaluation 3.4 Guiding Principle of Learner Evaluation 3.5 The Evaluation Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0.
INTRODUCTION In the past, (ie traditionally), evaluation was used to measure learners’ achievement at the end of their exposure to a course of instruction.
Present day evaluation is used to assess every component of a learning situation including details about the learners, teacher and the resources for teaching.
In this study unit, you will learn about the meaning and types of evaluation, justification for evaluation and the process of evaluation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define evaluation  state and explain the importance/purposes of Evaluation  discuss three major types of Evaluation  mention five guiding principles for learner evaluation  describe the evaluation process.
119 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Evaluation Several experts have provided definitions of evaluation.
According to Gay (1979), evaluation is a “systematic process of collecting and analyzing data for the purpose of determining whether and to what extent objectives are being achieved or to make decisions”.
A similar definition is provided by Cronbach (1963) who defined evaluation as “the collection and use of information to make decisions about an educational programme.” He identified three types of decisions for which evaluation can be used.
These are: 1.
For course improvement (i.e.
deciding what instructional material and methods are satisfactory and where change is needed) 2.
For making decisions about individuals (i.e.
identifying the needs of the pupil for sake of planning instruction judging pupil merit for the purpose of selection and grouping, acquainting the pupil with his own progress and deficiencies) 3.
For administrative regulations (i.e.
judging how goods the school system is, how good individual teachers are etc).
Straton (1985) defines evaluation as “the process of delineating, obtaining and providing information about an educational programme which is to be used in describing, understanding and making decisions.” In the views of Obe (1988), evaluation is a continuous process which underlines all good activities, including teaching and learning”.
He explains further, “the teacher has set the instructional objectives and taught accordingly, will like to know the extent to which these objectives have been attained or how much the students have learnt.
The teacher, therefore, has to evaluate preferably through measurement based on testing”.
From the various definitions, we can conclude that evaluation is an assessment of one or more phases of the curriculum process.
It involves a process of collecting and using information to make decisions and can be conducted before, during and after instruction.
3.2 Purposes of Evaluation Teaching or learning without a purpose is useless.
The goal of every Social Studies teacher should include imparting knowledge and skills, as well as influencing attitudes and behaviour.
There must be a purpose or objective(s) for teaching or learning.
How then do we know whether the objectives have been achieved?
This can only be determined when the processes and outcomes of instruction have been objectively evaluated.
Evaluation therefore is important for the following reasons: 1.
To assess the effectiveness of instruction and measure the extent to which instructional objectives were achieved.
120 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.
To provide relevant information/feedback to the teacher about the instruction.
3.
To provide information about what would guide decisions regarding learner’s progress, how to improve teaching/learning, curriculum changes and instructional objectives.
3.3 Types of Evaluation We shall examine three major types of evaluation.
These are diagnostic, formative and summative evaluations.
1.
Diagnostic Evaluation: This takes place prior to beginning a unit of instruction, usually at the beginning of a school year.
This pre-instructional evaluation is used to obtain information about learners’ entry behaviour such as the kinds of attitude, knowledge, understanding, or skills that they already have and how it can influence efforts by teachers and learners to achieve the desired objectives.
For example, if learners already have a lot of information about a lesson, it would amount to a waste of time for the teacher to begin to teach it all over again, when what he/she should be doing is reinforcing what they know and adding on to that information.
However, learners often know far less than teachers assume they know.
Therefore, diagnostic evaluation results may recommend modifying original objectives, or expanding the content of lesson etc.
2.
Formative evaluation: This type of evaluation is an ongoing classroom process that informs teachers and learners about learners' progress in achieving learning objectives.
The purposes of formative evaluation include enabling teachers assess learners’ progress towards attainment of objectives, and providing feedback to teachers and learners about learners’ successes and specific challenges in understanding the lesson.
3.
Summative evaluation: This usually occurs at the end of a unit of study in order to determine how much and how well learners have learned and to what extent desired objectives have been attained.
Its primary purpose is to establish what has been learned over a period of time, to review learners’ progress, and to report on progress in relation to curriculum objectives.
121 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.4 Guiding Principles of Learner Evaluation In the book, Student Evaluation: A Teacher Handbook by Regina, SK.
(1991), five general guiding principles are stated to assist teachers in planning for learner/student evaluation.
These principles are: a.
Evaluation should be regarded as an essential part of the teaching-learning process; therefore it should be a planned, continuous activity, which is closely linked to both curriculum and instruction.
b.
Evaluation should be guided by the intended learning outcomes of the curriculum and a variety of assessment strategies c. Evaluation plans should be communicated in advance.
Learners should have opportunities for input to the evaluation process.
d. Evaluation should be fair and equitable.
It should be sensitive to family, classroom, school, and community situations; it should be free of bias.
Learners should be given opportunities to demonstrate the extent of their knowledge, understandings, skills, and attitudes.
e. Evaluation should help learners.
It should provide positive feedback and encourage learners to participate actively in their own learning.
3.5 The Evaluation Process Evaluation is a technical aspect of instruction that consists of a process, which occurs in a cyclic manner.
The beginning point is the formulation of objectives.
It is almost impossible to determine whether an instruction was successful, if there were no objectives that were set before the commencement of the instruction.
These are specific statements of accomplishments as a result of the teaching/learning experience.
Also, at this phase, certain decisions have to be made regarding what is to be evaluated, the type of evaluation to be used, the criteria against which learning outcomes will be judged and the most appropriate assessment techniques to collect data.
This explains why some experts call this stage the preparation phase.
The second phase is the observation of evidence to show that these accomplishments (or objectives) were achieved.
For example, the objectives may include changes in knowledge, attitude, behaviour and skills acquisition.
The evaluator needs to see evidence that the changes did occur after the instruction.
This stage involves information gathering.
The third phase is the recording stage.
This is a collation and reporting of the observations and notable changes that occurred.
The fourth phase involves an analysis of the evaluation report to finally judge whether learning had taken place satisfactorily or otherwise.
At this stage, the teacher/evaluator interprets the assessment information and makes judgement about learner information progress.
122 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS The last phase requires taking action based on the analysis of the evaluation report.
For instance, the teacher may need to change his/her teaching methods in order to improve learners’ comprehensiveness and subsequent performance.
The figure below illustrates further the evaluation process.
Figure 3.0 The Cyclic Process Of Evaluation 1 Formulation of objectives/preparation for evaluation 5 2 Taking action based on Data collection/observation analysis of evaluation of evidence of achievement report of objectives 4 3 Analysis/interpretation of Collation and reporting of evaluation to make observation/evidence judgement about learner progress and instruction SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
State at least three definitions of evaluation?
2.
Mention and discuss three major types of evaluation 3.
State four purposes of evaluation 4.
State five guiding principles that assist teachers to plan for learner evaluation 5.
List five phases of the evaluation process 4.0 CONCLUSION Evaluation is an integral part of instruction.
Therefore, it is important to plan for and incorporate evaluation as part of the teaching/learning process.
You should remember that certain decisions need to be made at 123 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS the on-set of evaluation, including what is to be evaluated, how, when and where evaluation should take place.
An objectively conducted evaluation should guide decisions regarding instruction, learner progress and learning objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit provides an introduction to the basic concepts of evaluation.
You have learnt the meaning and purposes of evaluation, the types of evaluation and when it is appropriate to use them.
You have also learnt the principles guiding learner evaluation as well as the cyclic process of evaluation.
In the next unit, these concepts would be further expanded to aid your comprehension of learner evaluation.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE (1).
Three definitions of evaluation are: (a) Evaluation is a “systematic process of collecting and analyzing data for the purpose of determining whether and to what extent objectives are being achieved or to make decisions” Gay (1979), (b).
Evaluation is a continuous process which underlines all good activities, including teaching and learning” Obe (1988),” (c) Evaluation is “the process of delineating, obtaining and providing information about an educational programme which is to used in describing, understanding and making decisions.” Straton (1985).
(2).
The three types of evaluation are diagnostic, formative and summative.
1.
Diagnostic Evaluation takes place prior to beginning a unit of instruction, usually at the beginning of a school year.
It is used to obtain information about learners’ entry behaviour such as the kinds of attitude, knowledge, understanding, or skills that they already have and how it can influence efforts by teachers and learners to achieve the desired objectives.
2.
Formative evaluation is an ongoing classroom process that informs teachers and learners about learners' progress in achieving learning objectives.
The purpose of formative evaluation is to enable teachers assess learners’ progress towards attaining the desired objectives.
3.
Summative evaluation occurs at the end of a unit of study.
It is used to determine how much and how well learners have learned and to what extent desired objectives have been attained.
Its primary purpose is to establish what has been learned over a 124 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS period of time, to review learners’ progress, and to report on progress in relation to curriculum objectives.
(3) Four purposes of evaluation include: a.
To assess the effectiveness of instruction b.
To measure the extent to which instructional objectives were achieved c. To provide relevant information/feedback to the teacher about the instruction d. To provide information about what would guide decisions regarding learner’s progress, curriculum changes and instructional objectives.
(4) The five guiding principles in planning for learner evaluation are: a.
It should be a planned, continuous activity, which is closely linked to both curriculum and instruction.
b.
Evaluation should be guided by the intended learning outcomes of the curriculum and a variety of assessment strategies should be used.
c. Evaluation plans should be communicated in advance and learners should have opportunities for input to the evaluation process.
d. Evaluation should be fair and equitable.
e. Evaluation should help students.
(5) The five phases of evaluation are: (a) Formulation of objectives (b) Observation of evidence of achievement of objectives (c) Collation and reporting of observations/evidence (d) Analysis/interpretation of evaluation report (e) Taking action based on analysis of evaluation report 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write one paragraph justification for the relevance of evaluation in learning.
2.
List and explain three types of evaluation 3.
Mention five principles that should guide learner evaluation 4.
With the aid of a diagram, explain the cyclic process of evaluation.
125 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful in this regard.
Cronbach, L. J.
(1974).
The Presence of Evaluation.
JRST 3.
Gronlund, N. E. (1981).
Measurement and Evaluation in Teaching.
London: Collier Macmillan (4th ed).
Leinhardt, G. (1976).
Observation as a Tool for Evaluation of Implementation, Instructional Science Volume 5.
Levine, H. M. (1983).
Cost Effectiveness: A Primer.
Beverly Hills: C.A.
Sage Publications.
Regina, S.K.
(1988).
Understanding the Common Essential Leanings: A Handbook for Teachers.
Saskatchewan Education.
Regina, S.K.
(1991).
Student Evaluation: A Teacher Handbook.
Saskatchewan Education.
126 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 2 MODELS OF EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Models of Evaluation 3.2 Quantitative Oriented Evaluation Models 3.3 Qualitative-Oriented Models 3.4 Adversary Evaluation Model 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Study Unit 13, you learnt about the nature of evaluation, focusing on the meaning and types of evaluation as well as justification for evaluation and process of evaluation.
In this study unit, you will learn about the models of evaluation and their characteristics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  state the importance of evaluation model  state the classifications of evaluation models  describe qualitative and quantitative evaluation models  list examples of qualitative and quantitative evaluation models  describe some of the identified models.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Models of Evaluation In order to evaluate a program systematically, a model of evaluation needs to be selected.
The choice of the appropriate model will therefore depend on the one that best suits the purpose of the study.
There are two classifications of evaluation models.
These are qualitative and quantitative oriented evaluation.
The quantitative model lays emphasis on methods of inquiry, focuses on objective measurement representative sampling, experimental control and the use of statistical 127 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS technique to analyze data.
Qualitative evaluation models lay emphasis on qualitative methods such as participant observation, case studies, interviewing and they address aspects of evaluation ignored or given little emphasis in quantitative oriented models.
Qualitative oriented models assume that the worth of an educational programme or product depends heavily on the values and perspectives of those doing the judging.
As a result, the selection of persons or groups to be involved in the evaluation is critical.
3.2 Quantitative Oriented Evaluation Models There are several quantitative evaluation models that have been postulated.
Some of these will be discussed below.
(a) Tyler’s Objective Based Curriculum Evaluation Model Tyler’s model emphasis that curriculum should be organized around specific objectives and that the success of the curriculum should be judged on the basis of how well learners achieve objectives.
This model implied that learners might perform poorly in a test or examination because of weaknesses in the curriculum such as lack of clarity in the language of the curriculum ambiguity in the stated objectives, lack of resource materials and poor implementation of the planned curriculum and not necessarily because of he/she lacked innate ability.
According to Tyler, evaluation should be viewed as an integral part of the curriculum development process.
He believes that: (a) Educators must clarify and validate their objectives (b) Educators must develop learning experiences to help students attain these objectives (c) Educators must continually evaluate learners’ progress in their attaining the objectives.
Figure 2.1: Tyler’s Objective Based Curriculum Evaluation Model Objectives Learning Experiences Evaluation Procedures Source: Arich Lewy (1977) (Ed.
), Handbook of Curriculum Evaluation.
New York: Longman Inc. 128 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Tyler further stipulated that there are three key sources of educational objectives including: 1.
Studies of the learners themselves; 2.
Studies of the contemporary life outside the school; and 3.
Suggestions about objectives from subject—matter specialists.
Although Tyler’s model is considered to be good, it had certain limitations.
One of such limitations is the nature of an aim or objective and whether it serves as the terminal point for activity in the sense that Tyler’s rationale implies.
According to Dewey (1902) the starting point for a model of curriculum and instruction is not the statement of objectives but the activities and whatever objectives do appear, will arise within that activity as a way of adding new dimension to it.
Therefore, the process of evaluation would not be seen as one matching anticipated consequences with actual outcomes, but as one of describing and of applying criteria of excellence to the activity itself.
In his own argument, Cronbach (1963) states when evaluation is carried out in the service of course improvement; the chief aim is to ascertain what effects the course has.
This is not to inquire merely whether the course is effective or ineffective.
Outcomes of instruction are multidimensional, and a satisfactory investigation will map out the effects of the course along these dimensions separately”.
Other flaws identified in Tyler’s model were that it does not lead to explicit judgement of work merit or on how evaluation data might be manipulated and interpreted.
In addition, the model failed to provide ways to evaluate objectives themselves.
(b) Malcolm Provus Discrepancy Curriculum Evaluation Model Malcolm Provus (1971) developed the discrepancy evaluation model.
The model lays emphasis on the search for discrepancies between the objectives of a programme and students’ actual achievement of the objectives.
This implies looking at the intended objectives and actual objectives achieved by the students.
The information gathered about the discrepancies can be used to guide programme management decisions.
129 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Figure 2.2: Malcolm Provus Discrepancy Curriculum Evaluation Model Intended Actual outcomes outcomes Measured Unmeasured outcomes outcomes (c) Henry Levin Cost Benefit Curriculum Evaluation Model The cost benefit evaluation model of Levin (1983) seeks to determine the relationship between the cost of a programme and the objectives that it has achieved.
This is an attempt to marry the costs of a programme and the objectives that it has achieved.
Different programmes can be compared to determine which is most cost—effective, that is, which programme promotes the greatest benefits for each unit of resource expenditure.
Figure 2.3: Henry Levin Cost Benefit Curriculum Evaluation Model CURRICULUM CURRICULUM CURRICULUM A B C Cost Cost Cost benefit/effective benefit/effective benefit/effective A, B, C COMPARED Determine which is most cost effective All the models identified above, deal with measurement of the objectives.
In order to ensure measurement, it is important to state objectives in behavioural terms, meaning that the programme outcomes are stated as behaviours, that anyone, including evaluators can observe in a programme participant.
However, behavioural objectives have been 130 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS criticized on the grounds that they reduce education to a matter of only teaching that which can be stated and measured in the language of behavioural objectives.
Another issue in evaluating programme objectives concerns which objectives to measure.
Evaluators, most of the time, rely on the programme developers or experts to make this decision.
(d) Scriven Goal—Free Curriculum Evaluation Model Michael Scriven (1974) suggested that evaluators should not know the programme goals in advance.
Rather, the evaluator should conduct a research to discover the actual effects of the programme in operations, since the actual effect may differ from the programme stated goals.
However, knowledge of the goals in advance may lead to some biases and one may tend to overlook other effects.
Scriven’ s strategy for evaluation is regarded as goal-free evaluation model.
There are many situations in which an evaluator is employed to collect evaluative data about specific programme goals.
In these situations the evaluator is required to attend to certain goals.
Yet it is advisable to remain alert to the possibility that the programme may have actual effects, both beneficial and adverse, that is quite different from those intended by the programme designers.
131 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Figure 2.4: Scriven Goal—Free Curriculum Evaluation Model Intended outcomes by curriculum Actual outcomes both beneficial developers (not known to and adverse identified by evaluator) evaluator (research) Both beneficial and adverse Feedback outcomes of the curriculum Context evaluation Recycling decisions Planning decisions Product evaluation Input evaluation Implementing decision Structuring decisions Process evaluation Source: Stephen I, and William B.M.
(1971) Handbook in Research and Evaluation.
San Diego, California.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Why is a model important in evaluation?
2.
Mention the two classifications of evaluation model 3.
What is the emphasis of qualitative evaluation models?
4.
What are the major flaws of Tyler’s model 5.
What is the emphasis of the Discrepancy Curriculum evaluation model?
6.
State the process of the cost benefit curriculum evaluation model 3.3 Qualitative - Oriented Models The qualitative oriented models focus on qualitative methods such as participant observation, case studies, interviewing, and they address aspects of evaluation ignored or given little emphasis in quantitative oriented models.
Qualitative oriented models assume that the worth of an educational programme or product depends heavily on the values and perspectives of those doing the judging.
As a result, the selection of 132 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS persons or groups to be involved in the evaluation is critical.
Some of these models are described below.
Responsive evaluation model according to Stake (1967) focuses on the concerns and issues affecting the stakeholders.
The stakeholders are persons who are involved in or affected by the programme being evaluated.
A concern is any matter about which a stakeholder feels threatened or any claim that they want to substantiate.
An issue is any point of contention among the stakeholders.
Guba and Lincoln (as quoted by Borg & Gall, 1989) identified four major phases in responsive evaluation model.
(a) Initiating and organizing the evaluation: At this stage the evaluation and client negotiate an evaluation contract that specifies such matters as identification of the entity to be evaluated, the purpose of the evaluation, rights of access to records, and guarantees of- confidentiality and anonymity.
The importance of identifying the stakeholders in the evaluation is also emphasized.
Such stakeholders have the right to have their concerns reflected in the evaluation process.
(b) Identifying the concerns, issues, and values of the stakeholders: At this stage the evaluator identifies the concerns, issues and values of the stakeholders.
These factors are usually identified by series of interviews and questionnaires administered to all or a sample of stakeholders.
(c) Gathering Information: This is the stage to gather information that pertains to the concerns, issues, and values identified by the stakeholders.
The evaluator should also collect descriptive information about the entity being evaluated and about standards that will be used in making judgements concerning the entity.
Information in this model can be gathered by a variety of methods, naturalistic observation, interview, questionnaire, standardized test.
(d) Preparation of reports: The final phase is to prepare reports of results and recommendation.
This report will contain extensive descriptions of the concerns and issues identified by the stake— holders.
The evaluator in negotiation with the stakeholders should make judgements and recommendations based on the gathered information.
In responsive evaluation model, evaluators do not specify a research design at the outset of their work.
Instead evaluators use emergent designs, meaning that the design of the research changes as the evaluator 133 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS gains insights into the concerns and issues of the stakeholders.
It is also important to stress the fact that sampling is almost never representative or random but purposive, intended to exploit competing views and fresh, perspectives as fully as possible.
Sampling stops when information becomes redundant.
3.3 Adversary Evaluation Model Another qualitative oriented model is Adversary evaluation model.
This model of evaluation presents the best case for each of competing alternative interpretations of the programme’s value with both sides having access to the same information about programme.
This model was derived from procedures used in jury trials and administrative hearings in the field of law.
The following features can be identified in adversary evaluation model (a) Use of wide array of data, (b) Reliance on human testimony, (c) It is adversarial - meaning that both positive and negative judgements about the programme are encouraged.
Adversary evaluation has four major stages 1.
The first stage is to generate a broad range of issues.
To succeed in doing this, the evaluation team surveys various groups involved in the programme (users, managers, funding agencies etc.)
to determine what they believe are relevant issues.
2.
The second stage is reducing the list of issues to a manageable number.
One way of doing this is to list the issues in order of importance and priority.
3.
The third stage is to form two opposing evaluation teams and provide them an opportunity to prepare arguments in favour of or in opposition to the programme on each issue.
In this process, the teams can interview potential witnesses, study existing evaluation reports and collect new data.
4.
The final stage is to conduct pre-hearing sessions and a formal hearing.
In this formal hearing the adversarial teams present their arguments and evidence before the programmes decision-makers.
Also to be identified with the qualitative oriented model is the expertise based evaluation model.
This in essence is the ability to use experts to make judgement about the worth of an educational programme.
For 134 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS example, most institutional programmes are reviewed periodically by accreditation boards composed of experts.
Commissions that include experts and lay persons are often used to appraise the status of some aspect of the educational enterprise.
Examples are the National Curriculum Conference of 1969, the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) instituted in 1992 and the National Universities Commission (NUC).
In the opinion of Owen & Rogers (1999) the task of evaluating an educational programme might be said to be impossible if it were necessary to express verbally its purposes or accomplishments.
Fortunately, it is not necessary to be explicit about aim, scope, or probable cause in order to indicate worth.
Explication will usually make the evaluation more useful, but it also increases the danger of misstatement of aim, scope and probable cause”.
Shaw (1999) asserts further “to layman and professional alike, evaluation means that someone will report on the program’s merits and shortcomings.
The evaluator reports that a program is “coherent” “stimulating, “parochial” and “costly”.
These descriptive terms are also value-judgement terms.
An evaluation has occurred.
The validity of these judgements may be strong or weak, their utility may be great or little.
But the evaluation was not at all dependent on a careful specification of the programs goals, activities or accomplishments.
In planning and carrying out an evaluation study, the evaluator must decide how far to go beyond the bare bones ingredients: values and standards.
Many times he will want to examine goals.
Many times he will want to provide a portrayal from which audiences may form their own value judgements”.
Robson (2000) says, the purpose of the audiences is all important.
What would they like to be able to do with the evaluation of the program?
Chances are they do not have any plans for using it.
They may doubt that the evaluation study will be of use to them.
But charts and products and narratives and portrayals do affect people.
With these devices persons become better aware of the program, develop a feeling for its vital forces, a sense of its disappointments and potential troubles.
They may be better prepared to act on issue such as change of enrollment or a reallocation of resources.
They may be better able to protect the programme”.
Different styles of evaluation will serve different purposes.
A highly subjective evaluation may be useful but not be seen as legitimate.
Highly specific language, behavioural tasks and performance scores are considered by some to be more legitimate.
In America, however, there is seldom a greater legitimacy, than the endorsement of large numbers of 135 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS audience-significant people.
The evaluator may need to discover what legitimacies his audiences (and their audiences) honour.
Responsive evaluation includes such inquiry.
Responsive evaluation will be particularly useful during formative evaluation when the staff needs help in monitoring the programme, when no one is sure what problems will arise.
It will be particularly useful in summative evaluation when audiences want an understanding of a program’s activities, its strengths and shortcomings and when the evaluator feels that it is his responsibility to provide a vicarious experience.
Preordinate evaluation should be preferred to responsive evaluation when it is important to know if certain goals have been reached.
If certain promises have been kept, and when predetermined hypotheses or issues are to be investigated.
With greater focus and opportunity for preparation, preordinate measurements made can be expected to be more objective and reliable.
It is wrong to suppose that either a strict preordinate design or responsive design can be fixed upon an educational programme to evaluate it.
As the programme moves in unique and unexpected ways, the evaluation efforts should be adapted to them, drawing from stability and prior experience where possible, stretching to new issues and challenges as needed.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Identify the major focus of the responsive evaluation model 2.
Identify four phases of the responsive evaluation model 3.
What are the features of the adversary evaluation model 4.
What are the stages involved in adversary evaluation model 5.
Name any two accreditation boards used for programme review in the Nigerian educational system 4.0 CONCLUSION The essence of the review is not the identification of all models of evaluation, but the isolation of that model which best suit a particular study to be carried out at any particular time.
All models have both strong points and weaknesses.
The value of all evaluation programmes is determined by the evaluators’ knowledge of the model used.
5.0 SUMMARY 136 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS In this study unit, you have learnt the importance of model in evaluation.
The unit provided two classifications of models of evaluation, gave examples for each classification and discussed steps, as well as, features of some models.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
A model is important in evaluation because it provides a systematic way of doing the evaluation 2.
The two classifications of evaluation model are: (a) qualitative oriented evaluation and (b) quantitative oriented evaluation 3.
Qualitative evaluation models lay emphasis on qualitative methods such as participant observation, case studies and interviewing.
4.
The major flaws of Tyler’s model are: (a) It does not lead to explicit judgement of work merit (b) it failed to provide ways to evaluate objectives themselves (c) the nature of an aim or objective and whether it serves as the terminal point for activity 5.
The Discrepancy curriculum evaluation model lays emphasis on the search for discrepancies between the objectives of a programme and students’ actual achievements of the objectives 6.
The cost benefit curriculum evaluation model seeks to determine the relationship between the cost of a programme and the objectives that it has achieved.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Responsive evaluation focuses on the concerns and issues affecting the stakeholders 2.
The four major phases in responsive evaluation model are: (a) initiating and organizing the evaluation (b) identifying the concerns and values of the stakeholder (c) gathering information (d) preparation of report 3.
The features of adversary evaluation model are: (a) use of wide array of data (b) reliance in human testimony (c) it is adversarial 4.
The steps involved in adversary evaluation model are: (a) generate a broad range of issues (b) reduce the list of issues to manageable number (c) form two opposing evaluation teams and provide them an opportunity to prepare arguments in favour of or in opposition to the programme on each issue (d) conduct pre- hearing sessions and a formal hearing 137 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 5.
Two accreditation boards used in the Nigerian education system are (a) National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) and (b) the National Universities Commission (NUC) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the sources of educational objectives according to Tyler 2.
Describe the goal-free curriculum evaluation model 3.
At what point in a programme is responsive evaluation useful 4.
When should preodinate evaluation be used?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful.
Arich Lewy (1977) (ed.).
Handbook of Curriculum Evaluation.
New York: Longman Inc. Cronbach, L. J.
(1974).
The Presence of Evaluation.
JRST 3.
Gronlund, N. E. (1981).
Measurement and Evaluation in Teaching (4th ed).
London: Collier Macmillan.
Leinhardt, G. (1976).
Observation as a Tool for Evaluation of Implementation, Instructional Science Volume 5 Levine, H. M. (1983).
Cost Effectiveness: A Primer.
Berver Hills: C.A.
Sage Publications.
Regina, SK.
(1988).
Understanding the Common Essential Learnings: A Handbook for Teachers.
Saskatchewan Education Regina, SK.
(1991).
Student Evaluation: A Teacher Handbook.
Saskatchewan Education.
Stephen I, and William B.M.
(1971).
Handbook in Research and Evaluation.
San Diego, California.
138 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 3 TECHNIQUES OF EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Techniques of Evaluation 3.2 Guidelines for Writing Questions 3.3 Types of Evaluation 3.4 Evaluation of Learner’s Attitudes 3.5 Evaluation of Social Studies Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you were taken through the models of evaluation.
In this study unit, you will learn about various techniques of evaluation, types of evaluation instrument and guidelines for their development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  mention the major approaches to evaluating learner achievements in social studies  describe both Norm referenced evaluation and criteria referenced evaluation  state some guidelines for writing questions  mention and describe some instrument for measuring learners progress, learning outcomes and instruction.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Techniques of Evaluation There are two major approaches that can be used for evaluating learners’ achievement in Social Studies.
These include norm-referenced evaluation and criterion-referenced evaluation.
139 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS (a) Norm Referenced Evaluation This is a way of determining or interpreting test scores of a learner by comparing one learner’s scores to the scores of other learners.
The interpretations of the score can be based on comparison of scores of a large group of learners for a standardized test or on scores of a smaller, local group of learners for a teacher made test.
What is important to note here is the fact that each learner’s performance is compared with that of other learners.
For instance if all learners of in a Social Studies class score highly on a test, for example more than 70, out of a possible 100, then a score of 55 may be considered a failing score.
On the other hand, if the highest score in the class in 30 out of a possible score of 100, this would be an excellent score.
In the norm-referenced test, some kind of average score in the group is the basis, or standard, for comparison.
(b) Criterion-Referenced Evaluation This approach uses a different comparison.
The teacher prepares test items for measuring learners’ understanding of a particular objective.
Therefore, a criterion (or standard), which indicates to the teacher that the learner has mastered the objectives, is chosen.
Learners’ scores are then compared to the expected score in order to judge individual achievement.
It is possible to measure several objectives in one single test.
However, it is desirable to prepare between 3-10 items for each objective.
The essential point is to have enough items to give a true assessment of each objective and to compare each learner result to the predetermined standard for each objective, without reference to how other learners are performing.
The more common way is to say that the student has “passed” or “failed” the test or examination by comparing the learner’s score with a predetermined criterion.
For instance you can say 50 is the pass mark, when the maximum possible score is 100.
This is called criterion-referenced interpretation of test scores.
Any score can be identified as the minimum passing standard and any score below that is a failing grade.
If this standard is to be used, it should be established as the test is being constructed and before any answer is scored.
Diagnostic tests are usually interpreted with criterion-referenced standards.
Although these two approaches are different, teachers usually use both approaches from time to time, depending on the kind of comparison that is most appropriate for each situation.
140 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention two major approaches that can be used for evaluating learners’ achievement in Social Studies 2.
The approach whereby learners’ scores are compared to the predetermined score in order to judge individual achievement is called ____________________ referenced evaluation.
3.
Interpreting test scores of a learner by comparing one learner’s scores to the scores of other learners is called ________________ referenced evaluation.
3.2 Guidelines for Writing Questions Learners sometimes find it difficult to respond to questions during class test or examination, not because they do not know the answer, but because they get confused or have problems with interpreting the question.
This explains why every teacher should devote ample time to the composition and review of test or examination questions.
It is advisable for teachers to draft questions at the end of each lesson in order to enable the examination reflect the teaching at a later date.
It is also beneficial to give examination questions to fellow colleagues to review.
The analysis of tests or examination results also presents an opportunity to sharpen testing techniques and refine questions.
3.3 Types of Evaluation Instruments There are several types of instrument that can be used for measuring learner progress, learning outcomes and instruction.
Some of such instrument would be discussed below.
1 Multiple-Choice Questions The multiple-choice test item is one of the effective ways of measuring different intellectual processes of teaching Social Studies.
It can be used to measure knowledge of facts and high-level mental processes such as understanding and judgement.
It is the test item most commonly used in standardized tests.
A multiple-choice item is made up of two parts: a stem and several choices.
The stem may be a complete or incomplete statement or a question.
The choices usually include one correct answer and three or four incorrect answers, referred to as distractors.
Although the multiple tests are a very effective instrument, many teachers find it difficult to develop good items or question statements and distractors.
Many times, teachers write questions that require only 141 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS recognition or recall of information, rather than application of knowledge.
This is one of the major disadvantages of the multiple- choice question.
In writing the “stem” of the item you should note the following statement: (a) The statement or question should be simple and easy to understand.
Learners should be able to understand.
Learners should be able to understand the question without reading it several times (b) State brief questions and avoid undue complexities (c) State the question in positive form.
For example avoid saying, “which of these is not an objective of social studies”.
This can be confusing to learners.
Rather, you may say, “which of these is an objective of Social Studies” (d) Do not use similar or related words in both the stem and the correct answer (e) All questions in a multiple-choice test must stand on their own Furthermore, when writing multiple-choice items, the following should be observed: (a) Do not place the correct answer too frequently in a particular position.
For example some teachers use C as the correct option 80% of the time and it becomes easy for learners to recognize the pattern (b) Do not write items that are obviously wrong or totally unrelated to the subject (c) The option “none of the above” should be avoided.
It can only be used when there are absolutely correct answers.
For instance the main colours of the Nigerian flag are green and white.
Therefore, other options without these colours will be definitely wrong (d) Do not provide clues to the answers in other question items (e) Avoid using words or terminology that is completely unfamiliar to the learner 2.
Completion Questions These are incomplete statements whose correct answers have to be provided by the learners.
In writing completion questions, learners must be presented with adequate information that will enable them answer the question.
In doing this however, one must be careful not to give the answer away.
There should be a blank space at the end of each item and the required answers should be short.
142 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.
Short-Answer Questions There are several ways of writing the short-answer questions.
They can take the form of definitions, short essays, descriptions or a mixture of the three.
The most important element of this test type is the provision of clear and specific instructions that would guide learners to provide the required answers.
4.
Essay Questions Essay questions are ideal forms of testing of learners’ ability to express their thoughts and ideas in writing.
Therefore, essay questions can be used for testing critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
The challenge for teachers is how to mark and grade the test objectively.
It is also important to provide enough time for learners to answer the questions.
They should be given the limit to the length of the answer to be given for each question.
Also, all learners must be made to answer the same questions rather than asking them to select 3 questions out of 6.
This is because it will be difficult to come up with a common basis for comparison.
When all learners are subject to the same number of question items, it will be easy to determine the comparative performance of learners, all things being equal.
3.3 Evaluation of Learners’ Attitudes Social studies teachers often include attitudinal goals as part of their instructional programmmes.
For example they may wish that learners would develop more positive attitudes towards conservation of natural resources.
It is not easy for teachers to evaluate accurately whether or not they have accomplished attitudinal or affective goals.
Two general approaches to this problem will be described here briefly: self-reports and observations.
1.
Self Reports of Learners’ Attitudes While a verbal interview is one way of gathering self-reports about attitudes, the length of time required for interviews makes this approach inappropriate for many classroom situations.
The more commonly used method is the paper and pencil questionnaire.
Two different types of questionnaire will be described: Likert scales and the semantic differential scale.
a) The Likert scale is probably one of the most familiar techniques for assessing attitudes.
Under this procedure, statements are listed which reflect both positive and negative attitudes related to 143 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS an object.
Learners then mark their level of agreement with the statement using five categories: strongly agree, agree, undecided, disagree, and strongly disagree.
For scoring purposes, a weight of five (5) is generally given to the most positive response and a weight of one (1) is given to the most negative response.
b) The Semantic Differential Scale is a second questionnaire technique that can be used for measuring attitudes.
With this approach, attitudes towards a concept can be evaluated by making six-point scales anchored by adjective opposites.
For example, if a teacher has taught a series of lessons about Nigeria, and wants to know what attitude learners have developed towards Nigeria, the following scale might serve the purpose: Nigeria Example of Semantic Differential Scale Good_______; ________; ________; ________; _______; ________; bad Valuable _______; ______; ______; ________; _______; _______; worthless Effective _______; ______; _______; _______; _______; ______; ineffective Useful ________; _______; _______; ________; ________; _______; useless Numbers from 1 to 6 are assigned to responses, with six being the most positive rating.
Then scores from each evaluation scale are added to give a total score.
In this example, scores could range from 4 to 24.
Several studies have shown that responses to these evaluative adjectives reveal the predominant attitude people hold toward a variety of concepts and subjects.
1.
Observation of Learners’ Attitudes Classroom teachers frequently observe learners on an informal basis to discover their attitudes.
Systematic observations of learners’ attitude are more informative than the usual random observations, but unfortunately systematic observations are time-consuming and often expensive.
Nevertheless, structured observations are useful techniques for evaluating attitudes.
Three types will be mentioned here include: checklists, rating scales and unobstrucive measures.
A) Checklists are useful in evaluating the presence of or absence of certain attitudes on ‘yes or no’ scales.
144 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Sam ple Che cklist Yes No 1.
Does the learner respect the family group?
_______ ______ 2.
Does the learner have a positive attitude about Nigeria?
_______ ______ b) Rating scales are useful in evaluating the strength of attitudes when wide variation can be expected.
(i) To what eExxteanmtp dleose osf t Rhea tlienagr Sncearl erse spect the family group?
Not at all To a great extent _____________________________ 1 2 3 4 5 (ii) What is the learner’s attitude about studying about Nigeria?
_____________________________ 1 2 3 4 5 Very negative Very positive (c) Unobtrusive measures are non-direct ways of judging attitudes without the physical presence of an observer.
An observer’s presence or even the knowledge that the teacher is recording an observation can influence learners to display attitudes designed to please the observer.
The following examples show how these three techniques apply to similar subjects.
For example: 1.
How often does the learner speak respectfully of family members in conversation?
2.
How many extra books or articles has the learner read about Nigeria?
3.5 Evaluation of Social Studies Programme The evaluation of learners’ progress discussed above is one key element in evaluating the total programme.
However, equally important is the objective –based approach.
This way, the programme is judged on whether the program objectives were reached.
Although this approach 145 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS has its own challenges and limitations, it is recommended as the basic approach in initial attempts to evaluate social studies programme.
The syllabus and lesson plan are useful instruments to evaluate in this approach.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
State two guidelines that teachers should follow when writing questions 2.
Mention four types of instruments used for measuring learner progress, learning outcomes and instruction 3.
Mention and describe two approaches to measuring attitudinal goals in Social Studies 4.0 CONCLUSION Evaluation is a process of finding out how far the learning experiences as developed and organized are actually producing the desired results and the process involves identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the programme.
It can also be seen as a means of ascertaining the success or failure of what has taken place in the classroom by measurement and assessment of desirable change in the behaviour of the learner.
Evalaution has a tool of measurement helps the curriculum planner (the teacher) to know whether the existing curriculum should be re-structured or re-organized or discarded to bring about effective teaching and learning in the classroom.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has focused on techniques of evaluation.
Major approaches to evaluating learners’ achievement in Social studies were discussed.
Some guidelines for writing questions were stated, along side some instruments for measuring learners progress, learning outcomes and instruction.
The Unit also gave some hints about Evaluation of Social Studies programme.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Two major approaches that can be used for evaluating learners’ achievement in Social Studies are norm-referenced evaluation and criterion referenced evaluation.
2.
The approach whereby learners’ scores are compared to the predetermined score in order to judge individual achievement is called criterion-referenced evaluation.
146 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.
Interpreting test scores of a learner by comparing one learner’s scores to the scores of other learners is called norm-referenced evaluation.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Guidelines for writing questions include that: (a) teachers should draft questions at the end of each lesson (b) teachers should give questions to fellow colleagues to review.
2.
The following are instruments used for measuring learner progress, learning outcomes and instruction: (a) multiple choice questions (b) completion questions (c) short-answer questions and (d) essay questions 3.
The two approaches to measuring attitudinal goals in Social Studies are: (a) self reports and (b) observations.
(a) Self reports involve the use of interviews and questionnaires.
Two of such are the Likert Scales and the semantic differential scale.
(b) Observation of learner’s attitude can be done on an informal basis by teachers as well as systematically (structured observation).
Structured observation can be done using checklists, rating scales and unobtrusive measures to discover their attitudes about certain concepts or ideas.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What should teachers pay attention to in writing the “stem” of question items?
2.
Mention five rules that should be observed in writing multiple- choice items 3.
Briefly describe the following: (a) completion questions (b) short answer questions (c) essay questions 4.
With the aid of an example, describe each of the following: (1) The Likert Scale (2) The Semantic Differential Scale (3) Checklist and (4) Rating Scale 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Below are list of references for the information contained in this unit.
We have also included additional texts, which you will find useful.
Cronbach, L. J.
(1974).
The Presence of Evaluation.
JRST 3.
Gronlund, N. E. (1981).
Measurement and Evaluation in Teaching (4th ed.).
London: Collier Macmillan.
Leinhardt, G. (1976).
Observation as a Tool for Evaluation of Implementation, Instructional Science Volume 5.
147 PED 261 PRIMARY SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM AND METHODS Levine, H. M. (1983).
Cost Effectiveness: A Primer.
Beverly Hills: C.A.
Sage Publications.
Regina, S.K.
(1988).
Understanding the Common Essential Learnings: A Handbook for Teachers.
Saskatchewan Education.
Regina, S.K.
(1991).
Student Evaluation: A Teacher Handbook.
Saskatchewan Education.
148
