 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: PED320 COURSE TITLE: Family Education PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Course Code PED320 Course Title Family Education Course Team Dr. Funsho Olatunde (Developer/Writer) - UNILAG Dr. F. I. Okoro (Editor) - UNIBEN Dr. Dorathy Ofoha (Programmer Leader) - NOUN Mrs. H. I. Johnson (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-225-8 All Rights Reserved iii PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Functions and Lifestyle of the Family…………….. 1 Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Family…………………………… 1 Unit 2 Roles of Parents, Teachers and Children in the Family………………………………………………… 14 Unit 3 Marriage and Family Life…………………………….
19 Unit 4 Parenting Styles and Patterns…………….…………… 27 Unit 5 Communication and the Family………….………….. 40 Module 2 Physical and Health Development in the Family…... 47 Unit 1 Important Physical and Health Issues that Affect Family Life……………………………………….….... 47 Unit 2 Some Traditional Practices that Affect People’s Health…………………………………………….…… 55 Unit 3 Healthy Practices that Promote Good Health……….. 62 Unit 4 Healthy Family-Friendly Foods and Recipe………… 67 Unit 5 Family Fun and Entertainment……………………….
75 Module 3 Types of Education Available for the Family……… 82 Unit 1 Traditional Family Education……………….….…….
82 Unit 2 Teaching Children Family Values…………..………... 93 Unit 3 Educational Resources in the Family………….…….. 99 Unit 4 Financial Resources and Management in the Family...106 iv PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION MODULE 1 FUNCTIONS AND LIFESTYLE OF THE FAMILY Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Family Unit 2 Roles of Parents, Teachers and Children in the Family Unit 3 Marriage and Family Life Unit 4 Parenting Styles and Patterns Unit 5 Communication and the Family UNIT 1 BASIC CONCEPTS OF FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of the Family 3.2 Types of Family 3.3 Changing Family Structure 3.3.1 Traditional Family Structures 3.3.2 Modern/Postmodern Family Structures 3.4 Factors Responsible for Family Structure 3.5 Impact of Changes on Family Structures 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The family plays an important role in the life of an individual and the society at large.
It is the first training institution where a child learns about basic issues of life such as values, human and social relations, communication and other basic skills that will be required for relating with the larger society.
Therefore, the experiences that a child has at the family level-whether positive or negative may affect the child’s personal development throughout life.
For example, a child who grows in a family full of strife and violence may find it difficult to show true love and care, except he/she encounters other experiences outside the family that provide learning about love and happy family life.
Family patterns are likely to influence a child’s ability to trust others, express love or anger appropriately, being successful at school and so on and so forth.
Obviously, the family plays a big role in nurturing emotionally healthy (or disturbed) children.
This unit discusses basic concepts of the family and the changes that have occurred in the family structure over time in 1 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION traditional and postmodern societies.
Some of the effects of these changes especially on children’s care and education are also extensively discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define family • mention and explain examples of traditional and modern/postmodern family structures • list the characteristics of traditional and modern/postmodern family structures • describe types of family on the basis of marriage, residence, descent and nature of relation • discuss factors responsible for changes in family structure • examine impact of changes in family structure.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of the Family Many experts have had difficulty defining what a family is; this is because of the complex nature of the concept.
The word ‘family’ means different things to different people.
Therefore, it may not be easy to suggest a standard definition for the concept.
Moreover, the form and structure of the family has changed overtime, making it difficult to come up with a specific definition that covers the range of existing family structures.
To this end, several definitions of the family have been propounded to reflect some of these changes.
While some of these definitions are conservative, others are regarded as too broad and sometimes, almost unacceptable.
Nevertheless, each definition helps to shed more light on the concept of family.
Some of these definitions are cited herewith: • According to Murdock (1949), “a family is a social group characterised by common residence, economic cooperation and reproduction.
It contains adults of both sexes, at least two of whom maintain a socially approved sexual relationship, and one or more children, owned or adopted, of the sexually cohabiting adults.” • Burgess and Lock (2006) define family as “a group of persons united by ties of marriage, blood or adoption constituting a single household interacting with each other in their respective social 2 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION role of husband and wife, mother and father, brother and sister creating a common culture.” • Carrington (1999) defines family as consisting of people who love and care for one another.” • Weston (1991) defines the family from two perspectives: families of affinity or families of choice.
Meaning, people with or without legal or blood ties who feel they belong together and wish to define themselves as a family.” From these definitions, it is clear that the word, ‘family’, cannot be given one single definition.
The family as an institution has different connotations in different places.
Therefore, in simple terms, the family can be regarded as a group of people (two or more) usually related by blood (and sometimes not related, perhaps by adoption) living together wherein the adults care for the young.
3.2 Types of Family Some experts have classified the family on the basis of marriage, residence, descent or ancestry, and on the nature of relations.
This is discussed in details below: 1.
Types of Family on the Basis of Marriage: A family can be classified into three major types on the basis of marriage.
These are: • Monogamous Family Monogamous family is made up one man and a woman.
The Christian religion and court marriages encourage this type of family.
• Polygamous Family This consists of a man with multiple partners.
The Islamic and African traditional religion approve of a man marrying more than one wife.
However, in the Islamic religion, the man can marry only four wives if he is able to meet certain conditions stipulated in the Quran.
• Polyandrous Family In this type of family, a woman is allowed to marry more than one man at a time.
Examples of such families are found in few families in South Asia (usually allowed in poor societies with shortage of women.)
For instance, the Toda people of India practiced this when a man marries a 3 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION woman and she becomes a wife to all his brothers.
It was also used as a strategy to keep the birthrate down in cases of extreme poverty.
2.
Types of Family on the Basis of Residence Based on the nature of residence, a family may be classified into five forms, namely: • Family of Matrilocal Residence This is a situation where in some societies the couple is expected to live with or near the wife’s parents.
• Family of Patrilocal Residence This is a situation whereby the society expects the couple to live with or near the husband’s parents.
• Family of Bilocal Residence A situation whereby newly married couple is allowed to chose whether they will live with or near the husband or wife’s parents.
• Family of Neolocal Residence The newly married couple is free to set up their residence apart from both parents.
3.
Types of Family on the Basis of Ancestry or Descent Another way a family can be described is through descent or ancestry.
In this regard, a family can be classified into two main types: • Matrilineal Family In some societies, kinship (that is, a network of people who are related by marriage, birth, or adoption) is traced through the mother’s family.
In this set-up, property is passed from mother to daughter.
This type of family is common in some Ghanaian communities.
• Patrilineal Family In some societies, kinship is traced through the father’s family.
In this type of family, property is passed from father to son.
4 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Bilateral Descent In this case, kinship is traced through both parents and property can be inherited from both sides of the family.
4.
On the Basis of Nature of Relations: Based on the nature of relations among the family members, a family can be classified into two main types: • The Conjugal Family This type of family consists of adult who share sexual relationship.
• Consanguine Family This type of family consists of members with blood relationship such as brother and sister, father and son, etc.
5.
On the Basis of Size or Structure On the basis of size or structure, a family may be classified into two main types: • Nuclear or Single Unit Family The term ‘nuclear family’ refers to a household consisting of a father, mother and their children.
• The Extended Family The nuclear family is usually embedded in a larger family group.
The extended family is made up of three of more generations of a family sharing the same residence.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List and discuss four examples of family structures that have been formed in the modern and postmodern era.
2.
Discuss briefly each of the following family types: a. Monogamous family b. Polygamous family c. Family of bilocal residence d. Matrilineal family e. Conjugal family f. Nuclear family 5 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.3 Changing Family Structure 3.3.1 Traditional Family Structures In all societies, the family remains the basic social unit.
The form that the family takes however varies from society to society.
The family has changed in formation and structure over several decades.
What used to be defined as a typical family in the Victorian Age may no longer hold in the millennium era.
Many experts have tried to describe types of family formations to reflect past and current trends.
According to some sociologists, “the nuclear family seems to be inadequate to cover the wide diversity of household arrangements we see today.” (Edwards 1991; Stacey 1996).
A new term has thus been introduced, the postmodern family, which is to describe the great variability in family forms, such as single-parent families and child-free couples.” Therefore, some families have been classified under traditional and modern/post modern types of family.
Traditional and Modern/Postmodern Family Structures Characteristics of the Traditional Family The traditional family structure has a father as the sole breadwinner and the mother as the stay-at-home caretaker of the children.
Other characteristics of the traditional family structure are: • Most marriages were arranged by parents, and extended family members.
• Sexual freedom of men and women was restricted.
• Polygamy was allowed.
• Children experienced rites of passage to adulthood.
(That is, children had to undertake certain ceremonies and rituals especially when they become adolescents, before they could qualify to be addressed and regarded as an adult.)
6 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Family norms and social interactions were based on traditions and customs of the community or family clan.
(For instance, in some communities, it was a taboo for the head of the family to eat the head of a fish, because it was not traditionally acceptable).
• There were larger families with more children living under the same roof.
Examples of Traditional Families All over the world, there are certain types of family which existed from the past and are still found in many societies.
These types of family are referred to as traditional types of families.
Some of the examples include: • The Family of Orientation In a lifetime, an individual is likely to belong to at least two different overlapping nuclear families: the family of orientation and the family of procreation.
The family of orientation is the nuclear family into which the person is born.
This type of family is made up of the individual and his/her siblings (brother(s) and or sister(s) and the parents).
• The Family of Procreation When an individual get married, a new nuclear family is formed.
This type of family is called the family of procreation which consists of the individual, his or her spouse, and their children.
• The Extended Family The nuclear family is usually embedded in a larger family group called the extended family.
The extended family is made up of three or more generations of a family sharing the same residence.
This type of family system is common in northern Nigeria and in the Chinese society, where the grandparents, parents and their children, uncles, nephews and other relations live together under the same roof.
Sometimes, the extended family structure has the advantage of supporting one another in performing such roles as parenting tasks and responsibilities.
They may also help provide support for sick family member or help with financial problems.
The child is not likely to lack any form of parental care because there will be someone in the family to stand in the gap.
However, in the face of the new global economic crisis, such large families may be unable to meet the economic and financial demands of the extended family.
The cost of maintaining such families, especially children and the elderly may become a burden on a few members of the family who are within the workforce.
7 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Relationships Describing Extended Family Members Source: Wikipedia On-line encyclopedia The Nuclear family A nuclear family consists of a father, mother and their children who live together.
Nuclear families constituted the basic unit of the family before becoming an extended family.
However, such families were common type traditional types of families in the European countries.
It became popular in Africa and other colonized regions during the colonial era.
Nuclear families can be of any size, as long as there are only children and two parents (father and mother).
Most of the time, nuclear families are able to take proper care of their children and support their educational needs because resources are provided for only a few individuals.
Children in return, enjoy the support of both parents in terms of care and education.
Parents are able to speak in one voice to discipline an erring child and also put resources together to meet basic needs when required.
However, in some cases, both parents get carried away by their jobs and devote little or no time to the emotional needs of their children.
3.3.2 Modern/Post Modern Family Structures As with every other aspect of life, industrialisation and globalisation has also influenced in family formations and structures.
This has led to the formation of different family structures, which hardly exist in the past.
Some of the examples of the family structures within the modern and postmodern context are: 8 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Single-Parent Family One of the common changes that have occurred in family structure over the years is the increase of single-parent families.
In such families, only one parent is responsible for raising the child or children.
Single-parent families arise either from the death of one parent, divorce or separation of couples or when an adult chooses not to marry but decides to have and raise a child.
Women, most times, are the head of most single families.
In most single-parent families, childcare is difficult to achieve because the meager income being earned will have to be shared among house rent, utility bills (power and water), feeding, clothing expenses, etc.
If there is more than one child, the situation becomes more critical, except in a few cases where the single-parent (either man or woman) is a high income earner, or from a wealthy family which provides additional support, or if the single-parent is lucky to have the support of the estranged spouse.
Therefore, one of the disadvantages of this type of family may be the inability of the single parent to cope with the social and economic demands of parenting, and the children are usually the ones who suffer for it.
However, some family tensions present in other forms of family may be reduced in a single family.
This enables the parent to concentrate more on the child’s needs; parent and children also corporate with one another and resolve family issues amiably than other types of families.
Reconstructed, Blended, or Step-Family These terms refer to a family in which at least one of the adults has children from a previous marriage or relationship.
Binuclear or Step-Family Binuclear family means that two households, which are formed after a divorce, still comprise one family system where there are children involved.
Complex Family (Extended/consanguineal/Joint Family): • The complex family is used to describe any family structure involving parents, children and other people.
Examples of complex families are extended, consanguineous or joint families.
All of these terms describe a family structure where many generations live together under the same roof, depending on the circumstances.
Therefore, one can find multiple generations in the family living together in the same house.
Usually, the house 9 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION has a large reception area (or sitting room) and a common kitchen, while each family member has his/her own bedroom.
For example, in India, the sons’ families live together in the same house with their parents.
• Within a complex family situation, catering for children’s needs and education may be done unequally.
Boys are likely to have more advantage than girls.
Available money in such family structure is likely used to send boys to school, while the girls will be asked to stay behind, learn a trade or assist their mothers in the market.
This is because the family shoulders more expenses and responsibilities in meeting the basic needs of the entire family and when such decisions as education has to be made, the culture is always in favour of the male child.
Matrilocal Family A matrilocal family consists of a mother and her children.
This is a type of single-parent family structure.
Couples without Children Voluntary childless families are very common especially in Europe and in other foreign countries.
Although, in some cases, couples wish to have children but are unable to due to medical reasons.
In African countries, a high value is placed on children; hence, couples resolve their problems of childlessness, by adopting children of other family members or from in orphanage homes.
Cohabitation or Unmarried Couples With children This is a situation whereby a couple lives together in a sexual relationship without being married.
Characteristics of the Modern/Postmodern Family a.
Change in maternal roles: Most married women are now engaged in labour force (working class mothers/women).
b. Single-parent families are becoming common and there is an increasing number of households headed by women.
c. There is an increasing rate of marital instability and dissolution and step families are emerging.
d. There is a changing pattern of mate selection and family relations and little or no influence or control of clans and kinship group over the family.
e. Free selection of spouse.
10 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION f. Rights of women are becoming largely recognised.
g. Higher levels of sexual freedom for men and women.
h. Children’s rights are recognised.
i.
Emergence of same sex relationships (homosexuals and lesbians).
j.
Increase of age at marriage- unlike in the past when young girls were encouraged to marry after their primary or secondary school education, most girls now delay marriage till an older age when they have graduated from a higher institution and have started working.
k. Decline in fertility and few children in the family.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Define a family in your own words.
2.
List four characteristics of a traditional family.
3.
List three examples of traditional family.
4.
Mention four characteristics of a modern/postmodern family.
5.
List three examples of modern/postmodern family.
3.4 Factors Responsible for Family Structure As part of the processes of urbanisation and modernisation, patterns of family formation and family life are experiencing significant changes resulting in the altering of the composition and structure of families in all societies.
In Africa, these changes occurred as a result of certain factors which are explained below: • Religious Influence African families have undergone significant transformation caused by the influence of indigenous and modern religions (Christianity and Islam) adopted by the ancestors during the colonial era.
• Modernisation and Urbanisation Another factor responsible for changes in the family structures is modernisation, urbanisation and migration of families across the continent.
(People were taken away as slaves and those who migrated to other cities or countries to trade began to imbibe the family patterns of other people.)
11 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.5 Impact of Changes on Family Structures • Reduced care and attention for children Since both parents now have to work to meet the needs of family members, quality time is not spent with children as it was in the past.
Mothers are compelled to combine their traditional roles - childrearing and household chores with earning money to supplement the household income and the extended family system that bridged this gap in the past has equally collapsed, many children are therefore left in the care of house helps and other care givers.
• Neglect of child welfare Many children are living on the streets today because they ran away from home or their parents have rejected or neglected them.
As such, there are child street beggars, child hawkers, and child bus conductors and so on.
Furthermore, the spread of HIV/AIDS has led to child-headed families.
Children who lost both parents to AIDS become orphans; hence, the oldest child takes on the responsibility of taking care of his/her siblings.
• Hindering of physical growth and development Mothers no longer have the time to stay at home to breastfeed their babies.
Such children depend on baby milk while the mother is away at work.
This has led to the stunted growth, developmental problems, ill health and sometimes death of such children.
4.0 CONCLUSION Various transformations have taken place in the family over several decades.
This has had lot of impact on the definitions of family as definitions keep changing to reflect new changes occurring in family structures.
On the whole, there seems to be no singular typical family type.
Rather, the family types are becoming increasingly diverse.
This knowledge is fundamental in a study of family living.
5.0 SUMMARY The basic unit of any society is the family.
Families play an important role in raising children in a healthy, happy and stable environment in order for them to become responsible adults.
Since the experiences the child has while growing within the family determines what society becomes in future (whether peaceful or aggressive), it is important to pay attention to the different formations and structures of the family that 12 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION are emerging with the view of identifying the impact of these developments in future societies and to address necessary areas where changes are needed to bring about improvements in family living and consequently, the larger society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss factors responsible for changes in family structure.
2.
Examine the impact of the changes that have occurred in the family structure.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING La Verne (1995).
Sociology.
“The Study of Human Relations”.
(5th Edition).
USA: Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., pp.
294-297.
Sociology Guide.
A Student’s Guide to Sociology.
http://www.sociologyguide.com/marriage-family-kinship/Types- of-the-family.php.
Williams, B. S. Sawyer, C. & Wahlstrom, Carl M. (2005).
Marriages, Families & Intimate Relationships.
Boston: MA, Pearson.
13 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 2 ROLES OF PARENTS, TEACHERS AND CHILDREN IN THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of the Family 3.2 Roles and Responsibilities of Parents 3.3 Roles and Responsibilities of Other Members of the Family 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Defining roles of individual brings about in the family peace and orderliness in the home and society at large.
Parents have duty of bringing up their children in love, provide for their physical and spiritual needs; and to teach them be law-abiding citizens wherever they live.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • examine the functions of a family • identify the roles and responsibilities of members of the family.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions of the Family Management of sexual activity, reproduction, socialisation, provision of economic and emotional security are the major functions of the family.
• Reproduction The family ensures that the society’s population is maintained through child bearing and rearing.
This is essential to replace members of the society who have died or moved to another location.
14 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Socialisation The family is the first place a child learns how to socialise.
Family ensures that children learn the societal values, beliefs, attitudes, knowledge and skills.
Families also teach children gender and social roles such socially accepted behaviour and behaviour society frowns at.
• Economic support This is an important role performed by the family.
The family provides shelter, food, protection, health, education and other basic requirements of children.
• Emotional security The family provides the child’s first experience in social interaction, which is intimate, nurturing and enduring, thus, providing emotional security for the child.
They family cares for its members even when they get into trouble and suffer from other people’s rejection.
• Regulation of sexual activity One of the functions that the family performs is regulation of sexual activity.
Every society regulates sexual activity in one way or the other.
One common example is incest taboo.
In most cultures, close relatives in a family are prohibited from engaging in sexual activities with each other.
When this occurs, there are sanctions or punishment meted out on the offenders.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss briefly the functions of the family under the following headings: a. Socialisation b. reproduction c. economic security 3.2 Roles and Responsibilities of Parents Parents have an important duty in bringing up their children in healthy and responsible way; this is important to the children’s life-time development.
Parents, therefore, should have a goal and set a standard for their family.
Roles and Responsibilities of the Father A father is considered as the head of the family and is responsible for providing emotional, social, spiritual protection and support for his 15 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION family.
Other roles performed by the father in a family are listed below.
A doctor: • provides the basic needs for the family (such as food, clothing, and shelter).
• lovingly corrects family members whenever they go wrong.
• acts as the role model in the house.
protects family members.
• teaches his family members the culture of the society.
• teaches the children to respect people.
• has authority over all the family’s affairs and decisions.
• Is also responsible for maintaining discipline in the family.
• guides, counsels and directs family affairs.
• cooperates with the mother in training the children and other family members.
• provides the means for proper education for the children by paying their school fees.
Roles and Responsibilities of the Mother Mothers have the responsibility to nurture children to maximise their potential.
The mother, though under the authority of the father, is the overseer of the home.
Other roles include that she: • takes care of the family members.
• may also work to assist the family income.
• acts as role model to her daughters.
• also helps to teach the culture of the society.
• teaches the children to respect people.
• should spend quality and quantity time with the children.
• is a homemaker; she plans, cooks and serves meals for the family members.
• keeps the house clean and in order.
• is responsible for the bearing and rearing of children.
• ensures that the family is well clothed.
3.3 Roles and Responsibilities of Other Members of the Family b.
Roles and Responsibilities of Children Children also have their roles and responsibilities within the family, therefore they should: • assist their parents in household chores.
16 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • love, respect and obey their parents.
• study and do their homework.
• learn the culture of the society.
• protect the name of the family.
Learn and observe family values, societal norms and religious beliefs.
d. Roles of the Extended Family Members Members of the extended family who live together also have their roles and responsibilities depending on their age, sex, ability, and health conditions.
For example, cousins, nephews, and nieces should join the children in carrying out domestic chores and running errands for the parents.
Grandparents can also assist in raising the children and providing guidance and counsel from their wealth of experience.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss four roles and responsibilities of each of the following members of the family: i.
Father ii.
Mother iii.
Children 4.0 CONCLUSION Each family member (father, mother, children, uncle, aunt, etc) has specific roles and responsibilities in the family.
Clear definitions of these roles and strict adherence to it will bring about peace, harmony and also foster family and societal development.
5.0 SUMMARY Showing genuine interest in your children’s daily experiences, asking questions about what they do each day, attending parent- teacher meetings and school events, spending time with and listening to children, and providing opportunities for children to express themselves are positive roles parents can play in their children’s lives.
Children also have the duty to respect their parents, be obedient to them and to be responsible in the society.
17 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Enumerate and describe three types of families on the basis of marriage.
2.
Mention four specific roles of: a.
The father b.
The mother c. The children 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyakoha, E. & Eluwa, M. (1991).
Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: African-FEP Publishers.
Bamidele, R. (1986).
Home Economics for Junior Secondary Schools (Book1).
Ibadan: Abi print Publishers.
http://www.foreverfamilies.net/xml/articles/SacredResponFathers.aspx 18 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 3 MARRIAGE AND FAMILY LIFE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Marriage 3.2 Types of Marriage 3.3 Reasons for Marriage 3.4 Steps to Be Taken Before Marriage 3.5 Family Challenges and Crisis 3.6 Factors Responsible For Marriage Failure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you learnt about the various definitions of family, the different family structures that existed in the traditional era and those currently existing in the modern and post-modern era, changes that have occurred in the family as well as the factors responsible for the changes.
In this unit, you will learn about marriage and family life.
Marriage is one of the natural experiences of human beings which arise from the need to find a companion to spend the rest of one’s life with.
In most societies, people are expected to get married when they reach a certain adult age, although, not everyone eventually gets married.
This unit will help you understand the important role marriages play in the family and the society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the concept ‘marriage’ • discuss different types of marriage • identify different challenges couples face in marriage and its impact on family life • examine factors that can lead to marriage failure • discuss different forms of violence and its impact on family life.
19 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Marriage Marriage refers to a socially approved sexual union between two or more individuals that is undertaken with some idea of permanence.
Marriage may also be defined as a union between a man and a woman of different family background in which the partners share many things in common and which may lead to procreation.
3.2 Types of Marriage There are different types of marriage observed in different societies of the world.
However, we shall focus on the types of marriage in Nigeria.
Some of these types of marriage also exist in other countries.
Marriage under Native Law and Custom (Traditional Marriage) Marriages conducted under native law and custom allows a man to marry as many wives as he wishes (that is, polygamous marriage).
However, some men who marry this way do not take on other wives even though they are not obligated to marry one wife.
This decision may be because they love the woman or for economic reasons (the man may not be able to afford more than a wife) or the man may have been raised in a polygamous family and learnt from experience that monogamous families have more advantages over polygamous families.
Traditional marriages are usually conducted in elaborate ceremonies that involve the extended families of the bride and groom.
The groom usually pays a bride price (and in some cultures, dowry) and present gifts to the bride and her family.
Civilisation has also contributed to many changes in traditional marriage.
Therefore, there is usually parental consent and family approval.
Non-Traditional Marriage This type of marriage is conducted by a religious group, either Islamic or Christian.
Church Marriage According to the marriage ordinance of 1914, Church or Christian marriage means a marriage that is organised by the law of the place where it is contracted as the voluntary union for life of only one man and one woman except one of them dies.
This means, it is a monogamous marriage.
This type of marriage is contracted in the church 20 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION where the couples are joined together by the priest.
Biblical injunction relating to marriage is read to the couples.
In this type of marriage, the couple is not permitted to re-marry except one of them dies.
Couples exchange marriage vows and obtain certificate of marriage from the church as authorised by the State to conduct such marriage.
The bride and groom also exchange rings (or bible) as a symbol of their vow to remain faithful to each other till death.
Islamic Marriage The Islamic marriage permits the union of one man to as many as four wives provided he is able to meet certain conditions stipulated in the Quran.
He is not allowed to have more than four wives.
The wedding ceremony is usually conducted in the mosque in the presence of family members and friends.
Bridal price is not accepted in Islamic marriage but the groom is expected to give his bride a specified and valuable gift which sometimes consists of the Quran, praying mat and other items.
Marriage under Ordinance (Court Marriage) This type of marriage takes place in the court under the guidance of the registrar.
Before the wedding day, the couple is expected to file a 21-day notice of their marriage for everyone to see, so that anyone that has any objection to the marriage can notify the court before the wedding.
At the expiration of the notice, if there is no objection, a day is fixed by the court for the couple to present themselves for the marriage ceremony.
The ceremony is usually attended by close relatives and friends and wedding rings and vows are exchanged.
Since it is a legal marriage, neither the groom nor bride is expected to re-marry unless a legal consent is sought for a divorce or either of the party dies.
Anyone who violates this law can be arrested for committing bigamy.
3.3 Reasons for Marriage a.
To procreate (have children).
b.
To fulfill societal and religious obligations.
c. For companionship and sexual pleasure.
d. For financial and emotional security.
e. To gain prestige and respect from the society.
21 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.4 Steps to Be Taken Before Marriage All societies have some forms of regulation before marriage can take place.
In many societies, two people are not allowed to just marry each other without fulfilling certain obligation.
In Nigeria, this varies according to culture.
However, there are some basic steps that are generally taken before marriage.
Some of these include: • Mate selection Most families want their son or daughter to marry a good spouse.
In some cases, what may be defined as “good’ may vary.
In the past, families choose a bride for their son after thorough investigation into the family.
However, this is no longer the case as people select their spouses on the basis of love, attraction, wealth, and reproductive ability.
Planning for marriage: Once the couple is sure they want to marry and the families have given their approval, the planning of the wedding ceremony commences.
A date is fixed, usually by the bride’s family, initial formal meetings are conducted between both families and agreements are reached regarding bride price and gifts to be presented to the family.
• New place of residence In the past, a groom was entitled to an apartment in his father’s family compound and that will be his residence, sometimes, permanently.
However, things are changing, nowadays; the man is expected to get a new apartment where he and his bride will live after the wedding.
• Financial plans Again in the past, only the groom was expected to be gainfully employed in order to take care of his new family.
However, in modern times, both couple work and earn a living in order to jointly meet the needs of the family.
This is largely due to the societal economic situation that makes it impossible for the income of only the man to be adequate for the up-keep of the family.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define marriage in your own words.
2.
Describe three common types of marriage in Nigeria.
3.
List four reasons why people marry.
4.
Mention four steps that should be taken before a marriage is contracted.
22 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.5 Family Challenges and Crisis Alcoholism and the family Family is faced with different crisis and challenges.
Some fathers are addicted to alcohol and this has led to serious physical and emotional problems within the family.
The family members of alcoholics, many times, suffer in silence.
Children of alcoholic parents are usually faced with a family life full of disruption and distrust.
Such children avoid bringing their friends home because of the fear of embarrassment.
Worst still, these children themselves, many times, become alcoholics when they grow into an adult.
So, it becomes a vicious cycle that runs in the family.
Family violence Males tend to believe that they are powerful than females.
Therefore, men who believe that females are weaker may abuse their power which can result in violence.
Some examples of forms of violence are listed in the table below: Table1: Forms of Violence Forms of Definition /explanation Examples of each violence Physical Inflicting pain on Beating, punching, kicking, someone’s physical body stabbing, slapping, choking, through direct contact or shooting, burning etc.
through the use of a weapon or instrument.
Emotional Hurting someone Threats, accusations, emotionally.
Usually neglect, humiliation, using constant verbal abuse.
derogatory words, shouting, insults, etc.
Economic Preventing someone from Depriving family of money obtaining what should be or income; making a person their rights such as to work without giving education, health or assets him/her any income; that he/she has the right to refusing to allow a girl to possess.
attend school, etc.
Sexual An unwanted, repeated Inappropriate sexual sexual advance, sexual statements, touching, rape, attention, or demand for sex forced prostitution, forced in return for favours.
sexual intercourse etc.
Harmful Forced cultural or Forced marriages, forced traditional traditional practices.
sexual experience, sexual practices cleansing, forced virginity 23 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION test, female genital mutilation, girls’ denial of education and being forced to work or care for family members instead of going to school Divorce The number of couples who are separating from spouses or suing for a divorce appears to be on the increase.
Unfortunately, divorce affects not only adults but also the children.
Many children who experience their parent’s marriage break-up go through a lot of psychological trauma and pain.
They also have to be forced to stay with one parent and may be exposed to abuse by step-parents if any of the parents re-marries.
Death of a family member The death of a family member especially the breadwinner can cause a lot of challenges for the family, particularly if the mother is not working.
The children will be faced with emotional and financial needs that may be too much for the mother to meet.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Discuss four factors that can lead to marriage failure.
2.
Enumerate three forms of challenges or crisis that marriages may experience.
3.
Mention and explain briefly four forms of violence.
3.6 Factors Responsible For Marriage Failure There are certain factors that can lead to the eventual collapse of a marriage.
Some marriages have lasted a life time, while others broke-up barely a few months after the wedding.
Reflecting on some of these factors may assist intending couples to prevent the pitfalls in order to have longer and lasting union.
This will greatly help in maintaining a stable, peaceful and productive society.
Some of these factors are: Wrong choice of mate sometimes, people rush into marriage without studying each other to know their interests, passion, likes and dislikes and to know whether they are compatible.
It is only when they are a few weeks old in the marriage that they begin to see the true picture of the person they 24 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION married and then, it is almost too late to opt out.
This is likely to lead to a lot of conflicts and quarrels that may eventually end the marriage.
Infertility After marriage, families and the society generally begin to look forward to the arrival of children in the family.
Failure of the bride to conceive within a year of marriage can attract interference from extended families members who are anxious to have grand-children.
If this situation is not properly managed, the marriage may collapse as the man may be under pressure to marry another woman who will be able to bear him a child, preferably, a son.
Sometimes, the problem may not be childlessness but failure to have a male child which is regarded as very important in the African society because of the existing patrilineal descent that ensures inheritance through the linage of the male.
Financial crisis This is one of the strongest reasons for family breakdown in our society.
Lot of wives quarrel with their husbands because they believe their husbands are not giving them enough money to take care of the family.
This is why it is recommended for couples to be an income earner so as to support each other and provide for the needs of the family.
This is however, unacceptable in some families especially in Northern Nigeria, where the man is strictly the head of the house and the breadwinner.
Interference and control from extended family members This is another common cause of conflicts in many marriages.
Many women accuse their husbands of being tied to their mother’s apron and not being able to make decisions about their families.
Some mothers-in- law also take pleasure in visiting their son’s family and make a lot of unreasonable demands on the bride.
This can lead to serious problems if the man is not able to properly manage the situation.
4.0 CONCLUSION The marriage is a very important component of any society.
Whatever experiences are faced at the family level tends to have a larger impact on the society.
Therefore, individuals and family members should ensure that appropriate steps are taken before committing themselves to marriage to forestall marital problems.
This is crucial because of the lives of the other family members that get affected during family crisis.
25 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about marriage, including types of marriage, factors to consider before marriage, challenges that occur in marriage and factors that can cause marriage failures.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss four factors that can lead to marriage failure.
2.
Describe four types of crisis a family can experience.
3.
Examine the impact of violence on the family.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Action Health Incorporated.
(2001).
“Comprehensive Sexuality Education .”Teacher Training Manual on Sexuality Education.
Hamner, T. J., & Turner, P. H. (2001).
Parenting in Contemporary Society.
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Jackman, C. (2009).
“Parenting”.
Written by Research Assistant, edited by Stephen F. Duncan, Professor, School of Family Life, Brigham Young University.
Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parenting 26 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 4 PARENTING STYLES AND PATTERNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Parenting 3.2 Types of Parents 3.3 Parental Duties and Responsibilities 3.4 Parenting Across the Child’s Lifespan 3.5 Characteristics of Negative Parenting Styles 3.6 Family Relationship Patterns 6.1 Parenting Styles That Foster Responsible Behaviour 6.2 Tips for Good Parenting 3.9 Parenting Children with Disabilities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Parents play a critical role in the lives of their children.
This is why the parents must be mature and be ready to deal with the issues and challenges associated with marriage before venturing into it.
In the last unit, you learnt about marriage.
In this unit, you will learn about parenting patterns and skills.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the meaning and types of parenting • explain parenting throughout the life span • identify different patterns of negative parenting • discuss tips for good parenting • enumerate challenges associated with parents and children with disabilities.
27 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Parenting • Parenting is how a father or mother takes care of his/her child/children and others in the household (AHI, 2001).
• Parenting is the process of promoting and supporting the physical, emotional, social and intellectual development of a child from infancy to adulthood (Wikipedia on-line encyclopedia).
• Parenting also refers to the activity of raising a child rather than the biological relationship (that is, parental care from non-parent, blood or non-blood relations, who raise a child which is orphaned or belonging to a relation).
Some children are also raised in foster care or placed in orphanage homes.
Parenting normally involves two people (the father and the mother) or either one of them.
3.2 Types of Parents • Biological parents: Biological parent who has a direct genetic relationship to a child.
• Adoptive parents: One who through legal means takes voluntary responsibility for another person’s child/children as his/her own.
• Foster parents: Person who nurtures or provides parental care to a child who is not related to him/her by blood or legal ties.
• Single parent: Single parent who might be the biological father, biological mother or adoptive) is one who takes the sole responsibility of nurturing a child.
• Step parents: This refers to a father or mother that has remarried.
3.3 Parental Duties and Responsibilities Parental duties and responsibilities include: • Providing the basic necessities of the child including food, shelter, clothing and other basic rights of the child.
• Providing proper nutrition, health care and safe environment to safeguard the child’s physical health.
• Providing love, guidance and acceptance for healthy emotional development.
• Providing supervision, protection and shelter for the child’s safety.
• Impart cultural values and skills.
28 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Promote opportunities for education and recreation for intellectual and social development.
• Setting rules and regulations as a guide for the child to follow.
• Teaching children moral and religious values.
• Motivating children to be imaginative, creative, reliable, hopeful and encourage them when their spirits are low.
• Parents and children must share, communicate and confide in each other.
Table 2: Children’s Needs and Parental Tasks Children’s needs Parental tasks Physical security – • Provide physical safety: shelter, clothes, The safety of a child's nourishment.
body and life.
• To protect a child from danger, physical care.
• To care for a child's health.
Physical development – • To provide a child with the means of appropriate conditions developing physically.
for a healthy growth of a • To train the body of a child, through child.
exercise.
• To develop healthy habits.
Intellectual security – • To provide an atmosphere of peace, justice the conditions necessary and respect to one's dignity.
for the child's mind to • To provide an environment free of fear, develop.
threat, and abuse.
Intellectual • To support and/or provide school related development- providing activities opportunity to a child to • To teach social skills and etiquette learn.
• To provide moral and spiritual development, as well as creating an ethics and value systems with social norms that contribute to the child's beliefs, culture and customs.
Emotional security – to • To provide a safe loving environment.
help protect a child's • To give a child a sense of being loved, being psyche.
needed and accepted.
• To provide emotional support, encouragement (adding caressing, hugging, touching, etc).
Emotional development • Show empathy and compassion to younger – developing the child's and older, weaker and sicker and other.
ability to love, care, help, etc.- Source: Wikipedia on-line Encyclopedia 29 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is parenting?
2.
Distinguish between types of parents.
3.
Mention five roles and responsibilities of a parent.
4.
Discuss three needs of a child and the parents’ tasks.
3.4 Parenting across the Child’s Lifespan Planning and pre-pregnancy Parents should agree on the number of children they want to have.
Family planning is therefore essential in order to ensure that they have only the number of children they can carter for.
Family Planning Methods Method Advantages Disadvantages Male Easy to buy.
Must be put on during sex.
Condoms Easy to use, easy to Some men say it reduces carry.
sexual pleasure.
Latex condoms are best protection against STIs and HIV.
Female Made of polyurethane, More expensive and less Condoms stronger than latex, and available than male condoms.
conducts heat better.
Difficult to insert Some men find it more Some reports of excessive comfortable than male noise associated with use, but condoms, as it does not this can be overcome by constrict penis.
using more lubricant and Can be used with any early insertion.
kind of lubricant, Outer ring highly visible.
Can be inserted up to eight hours before sex.
Female condoms are very effective against STIs/HIV.
Diaphragm, Can be inserted before Must practice insertion to Cervical Cap sex.
learn how to use it correctly.
Some diaphragms need to be fitted by a doctor or nurse.
No protection against STIs/HIV (though some argue that there is less chance of HIV infection if cervix is not exposed).
30 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Method Advantages Disadvantages Injectibles Does not interfere with May cause absence of sex.
periods, irregular bleeding, Lasts two to three weight gain and headaches.
months.
May cause delay in getting pregnant.
Implants It works for three to A trained health care five years.
provider must insert and Does not require before remove it.
sexual intercourse.
Does not protect against Fertility returns soon STIs.
after removal.
May feel some discomfort when the implant is fixed and removed.
Spermicides Easy to buy.
Must be put in shortly before Easy to use, easy to sex, can be messy.
carry.
May irritate vagina and May help protect penis; no protection against against some STIs.
HIV/ STIs.
IUCD Always in place.
May cause more bleeding (Intrauterine Does not interfere with and pain during period or Contraceptive sex.
spotting between periods.
Device) Is effective for long No protection against HIV/ duration.
STIs.
Oral Simple and easy to use.
May cause weight changes, Contraceptive Doesn’t interfere with moodiness, spotting and Pills (OCPs) sex.
many more vaginal Less bleeding and infections.
cramping during Must be taken every day.
period.
No protection against Protects against Pelvic HIV/STIs.
Inflammatory Disease, ovarian and endometrial cancers.
Emergency Easy to buy, use and May cause nausea and Contraceptives carry vomiting.
May cause early or longer period.
No protection against STIs.
Sterilization No other method will Permanent (one cannot ever be needed to change one’s mind later).
protect against No protection against HIV/ pregnancies.
STIs.
No physical effect on sexual desire or ability.
31 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Method Advantages Disadvantages Traditional Fertility awareness Fertility awareness methods methods methods or withdrawal and withdrawal much less Natural may be only options effective than other methods family for some adolescents.
and not recommended for Planning (nfp) no chemicals required, adolescents.
but must use beads, No protection against charts and basal HIV/STIs.
thermometers Cannot be used with irregular Withdrawal is a back- periods or temperature up contraceptive that is patterns as calculating the always available, fertile day is difficult.
though risky.
Pregnancy The health and diet decisions of the mother can have either a positive or negative impact on the child during prenatal parenting.
So, during pregnancy, the mother needs to make healthy decisions about the choice of food and lifestyle that will make her child healthy.
Newborns and Infants Parents have the obligation to provide basic necessities of a baby before its arrival.
Afterwards, the newborn's basic needs such as food and comfort have to be taken care of by the parents.
Each time a baby cries, his/her needs have to be attended to.
Also, the mother has the responsibility of breastfeeding her baby for at least six months.
Toddlers At this stage, parents are concerned with showing the child how to do things rather than doing it for them, and the child will often mimic the parents.
Toddlers need help to build their vocabulary, increase their communications skills, and manage their emotions.
Toddlers will also start learning toilet training; understand social etiquette such as being polite.
Early Childhood and Pre-adolescent Learning in the early years comes from being involved in activities and household duties.
Parents who join their children in play have the opportunity to experience their children’s world, learn to communicate more effectively with them and also have the opportunity to offer guidance.
Parents teach their children healthy, hygienic and eating habits 32 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION through instruction and by example.
Parents are expected to make decisions about their child's education.
Adolescence Although adolescents look up to peers and outsiders for guidance and models.
Adolescence can be a challenging period for children, a time where newly found freedoms can result in decisions that significantly affect their life opportunities.
Parental issues at this stage of parenting include dealing with "rebellious" teenagers.
Adults As children grow into young adults, their personalities show the result of successful or unsuccessful parenting, especially when young adults make their independent life decisions about their education, work and choosing mates for friendship or marriage.
Middle-Age and Old Age Parenting does not end when children grow up and advance in age.
Parents always remain parents to old children.
Their relationship continues as parenting issues may include the relationship with grandchildren and stepchildren.
Traditionally, young mothers receive advice from their own parents, and exchange advice with other young mothers.
3.5 Characteristics of Negative Parenting Styles There are certain characteristics that describe the type of parent an individual is.
Each of this has either a negative or positive impact on the child.
Examples of these characteristics are: • The busy parent Parents do not spend enough time with the children; he/she hardly stay at home even on public holidays when families should be together.
Such parent does not provide an opportunity to discuss the problems or challenges being faced by the child.
• The strict or autocratic parent Some people believe that, the best way to raise a child is to be a strict parent.
Such parents do not allow their children to express their opinion freely, their words are final, they instill fear in a child and they give out order without considering the feelings of the child.
33 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • The frustrated parent This type of parent feels frustrated by the behaviour of the child.
The parent feels that the child is always disobedient, feels upset about differences of opinion and interests between him/her and the child.
Such parent, therefore, indulges in bad habits such as drinking and smoking as a way of coping with the situation.
• Selfish and over protective parent These parents do not always consider the best interest of the child.
Rather, the parent wants to be heard always without listening to the child, likes to win arguments, and displays ignorance of the child’s needs.
The parent does not give the child some degree of freedom to explore.
• The impatient parent Such parents do not give the child the opportunity to prove himself or herself, gets angry, yells, blames and criticises the child when he/she makes a mistake, does not correct the child lovingly, calls the child names.
These lower the child’s self-esteem.
3.6 Family Relationship Patterns The strict family pattern In this type of family, parents do not allow the children to have freedom.
They insist on having things done their own way and the child is expected to always listen to them and obey their instructions.
In this situation, children have no other option than to give in to their parent’s wishes.
Children, sometimes, rebel and this leads to conflicts between parents and children.
The overprotective family pattern In this kind of family, parents show a level of concern and try to give their children all sorts of protection and well-being.
However, overprotection does not allow children to develop healthy emotional and social growth.
Such children are likely to become defenseless, incompetent and insecure.
34 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION The amalgamated family pattern This kind of family does things together and there is no respect for privacy.
This may not be a very ideal situation for the family because children, especially adolescents need some independence and privacy.
The conflict-evading family pattern This family has little tolerance for conflicts therefore, there is little self- criticism and as a result, people tend to avoid conflicts and confrontation.
This type of situation has its disadvantages because children will not be able to learn how to deal with or negotiate difficult situations.
Sometimes, children raised in this type family pattern explode when they are no longer able to bear the repressed feelings, thus leading to a surprising family crisis The family focused on children pattern In this kind of family pattern, parents are incapable of facing conflicts as a couple and divert attention toward their children.
Therefore, the couple’s stability and family satisfaction are also focused on the children.
In this situation, children cannot grow, and therefore, continue to be dependent as the reverse would alter the apparent family balance.
The single mother/father family pattern In this case, one of the children substitutes for the missing parent by performing a role not corresponding to him/her.
Children cannot perform such roles, and if they do, they are likely to grow older.
The pseudo-democratic family pattern In this kind of family, parents are incapable of imposing discipline on their children.
Under the pretence of being flexible, they do not set the necessary limits, this allows the children do whatever they like.
The symbol of authority is confusing and the children show a disproportionate, destructive and unlimited degree of competitiveness.
The unstable family pattern In this family, goals are uncertain and vague, there is no planning; instead, there is much improvisation.
The child is insecure, distrustful, and fearful and experiences difficulty in developing his/her identity.
The best parenting approach is not a dictatorship or “authoritative parenting,” but a relationship where parents seek input from the 35 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION children.
Good parenting is characterised by love, good teaching, clear and consistent expectations, and avoidance of severe or harsh discipline.
Numerous studies show that this kind of parenting has the most positive benefits for children.
3.7 Parenting Styles That Foster Responsible Behaviour According to Baumrind (1970), the following types of parenting style foster the development of socially responsible and independent behaviour in children: a.
Parents who lead by example.
b.
Parents who set firm standards of behaviour in which socially accepted behaviour is rewarded and unacceptable behaviour is punished.
c. Parents who are committed to the child in such a way that, they are neither overprotective nor rejecting.
d. Parents who provide security for children and an enabling environment for them to showcase their creative talents, skills and rational thinking.
e. Parents who have high demands for achievement and are receptive to a child’s rational demands.
3.8 Tips for Good Parenting According to the Teacher’s Training Manual on Sexuality Education (AHI, 2001), parents need to acquire good parenting skills in order to ensure proper training of the child.
Some tips for good parenting are: • Parents should take interests in their children by asking questions about their concerns, worries, schooling, relationships etc.
• Parents should listen to their children’s feelings.
• Parents should let their children know that they love them and have their best interest at heart.
• Discuss the rules they set with their children.
(For instance the time to come back home from an outing etc.)
• Parents should not feel shy or uncomfortable to discuss sensitive issues with their children such as sexuality issues.
• Recognise the fact that, sometimes, children need to be independent and therefore give them a little bit of freedom and trust them to make good decisions and judgments.
• Help children find interests and hobbies.
• Praise and encourage children when they do positive things.
• Correct them lovingly when they make mistakes.
36 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Discuss parenting across life span.
2.
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of three types of family planning.
3.
Enumerate four negative parenting patterns.
4.
Discuss four tips for good parenting.
3.9 Parenting Children with Disabilities While families with children with disabilities experience challenges, it is important for such parents to provide the necessary support that will make the child live a happy healthy life.
Some tips for coping with such situations include: • Maintaining a strong marital relationship Acknowledging the special need of the disabled child can be traumatic, hence, keeping their relationship strong and healthy will increase their ability to adapt to the new situation.
• Stay positive and have realistic expectations Researchers say that families which cope well with special child have a positive attitude, realistic expectations of their child, and are less preoccupied with negative thoughts (Yau & Li-Tsang, 1999).
• Recognise that the child cannot help the situation Remind yourself that the problem the child is experiencing comes from a special need he/she cannot control.
• Avoid being anxious It is normal to be concerned about the future of the child, but excessive anxiety can get in the way of making good decisions.
• Let the child grow up at his/her own pace Parents should not compare the child with another or subject the child to pressure of keeping up with his/her peers.
He/she should be allowed to grow and learn at his/her own pace.
37 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Help the child to maintain self-confidence Accept the child as he/she is.
Allow him/her to feel unconditionally loved irrespective of whom he/she is, not by what he/she achieves.
• Turn to religious faith for strength Religious faith and beliefs provide many families with strength, support, and hope during times of difficulty.
Believe in a divine plan allows many fathers and mothers find meaning in their situation and to rise above discouragement.
Many parents see their special child as a divine gift from God and often consider it as a blessing to be entrusted with this special spirit in their home.
• Actively seek support Joining a parent support group where parents can share experiences and worries with others in a similar situation can be helpful.
Educate relatives, friends, or neighbours about the child's disability and communicate the child’s needs and feelings.
Also, actively seeking support can greatly decrease stress and anxiety for you and your family.
Begin by talking with doctors, schools counsellors and religious leaders.
4.0 CONCLUSION Parents ought to recognise the fact that every child is unique and special.
Parents have the responsibility of loving, teaching, and encouraging their children.
When there is a child with disability in family, parents should recognise the great challenge and provide the necessary support to help the child live a good life.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about parenting, different roles and responsibilities of a parent, tips for good parenting and characteristics of negative parenting styles.
In Module two, you will learn more about functions and responsibilities of each member of the family.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What does it take to be a good parent?
2.
What are the tips for parenting a child with special needs?
38 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Action Health Incorporated.
(2001).
Comprehensive Sexuality Education Teacher Training Manual on Sexuality Education.
Carroll, J. S.; Robinson, W. D.; Marshall, E. S.; Callister, L. C.; Olsen, S. F.; Dyches, T. T.; et al.
(2000).
“The Family Crucibles of Illness, Disability, Death, and other Losses.” In D. Dollahite (Ed.
), Strengthening our Families: An in-depth look at the Proclamation on the Family (pp.
278-292).
Salt Lake City, UT: Bookcraft.
Hamner, T. J.
& Turner, P. H. (2001).
Parenting in Contemporary Society.
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
http://www.nichcy.org Website for The National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities.
Provides Information on Disabilities and Health-Related Issues; National/State Organisations and Resources; Special Education Rights and Programs; Parent Material and more).
Jackman, C. (2009).
“Parenting”.
Written by Research Assistant, edited by Stephen F. Duncan, Professor, School of Family Life, Brigham Young University.
Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parenting 39 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 5 COMMUNICATION AND THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Communication 3.2 Importance of Communication 3.3 Forms of Communication 3.4 Factors that Hinder Communication 3.5 Reasons for Communicate between Parents and Children 3.6 Tips for Effective Listening 3.7 Importance of Sex Education 3.8 Basic Sexuality Education Tips for Parents 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Effective communication between parents and children lead to variety of positive outcomes.
Some of these include higher self-esteem, greater adherence to moral standards, compliance with parents' wishes, less aggression and other problem behaviour.
Father’s supportive messages foster cognitive development, masculine sex-role identification and academic achievement of sons; mother’s supportive messages foster the cognitive development and feminine sex-role identification of daughters.
Other communication-related factors contributing to positive child outcomes include a mother's responsiveness, discussion and acceptance of feelings and the reinforcement and modelling of positive social behaviour.
Negative control messages such as physical punishment lead to greater aggression in children, coercion, which weakens a child's adherence to moral standards, rejection, which leads to greater dependency.
Positive control messages such as giving reasons and explanations to situation help children develop the social competence they need to be successful.
Since effective communication is vital to successful parent-child relationship, it is therefore, important to learn the necessary communication skills for proper behavioural attitudes.
40 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define effective communication • explain the elements of the communication process • describe various forms of communication • identify barriers to effective communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Communication Communication is a process through which we convey thoughts, feelings or ideas to other people in our family and in society and having those ideas, thoughts, and feelings understood by the people we are communicating with.
3.2 Importance of Communication Communication is the centre of human interaction.
Without communication, people cannot relate with each other or one another.
If we can understand the communication process better and improve it, we will become more effective and successful communicators.
41 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.3 Forms of Communication People communicate in different ways.
Some forms/types of communication include: 1.
Verbal Communication Involves expressing ideas, thoughts or feelings through spoken words (or messages).
It entails speaking clearly and using terms that can be easily understood.
2.
Non-verbal Communication Involves expressing oneself using body language, facial expressions, gestures, nods, smiles, etc without speaking.
3.
Intra-personal Communication This is talking within oneself.
It is the thought going on within a person.
This form of communication takes place before any other form of communication.
Before anybody communicates with another person or takes any action, he/she must have thought about it.
4.
Inter-personal Communication This involves face-to-face verbal and non-verbal exchange of information, ideas, or feelings between individuals or groups.
It is used in all areas of human endeavour.
5.
The Mass Media This involves communicating with a large group of people through specialised media such as electronic (television, radio, etc) and print (newspaper, magazines, posters, etc.)
media.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is communication?
2.
Why is communication important?
3.
Mention four forms of communication.
3.4 Factors that Hinder Communication Barriers keep us from understanding other’s ideas and thoughts.
Barriers can appear at any point of the communication process.
There are two types of barriers—internal and external.
Examples of internal barriers 42 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION are poor listening skills, lack of interest in the message, mistrust, etc.
Examples of external barriers include noise, distractions, server (internet) problem, bad phone signal; use of technical words by the sender.
3.5 Reasons for Communicate between Parents and Children Parents often have the most influence over their children.
Communication with children affords the parents the opportunity to pass family values and useful information that will help the children make good decisions.
Other reasons are: • to satisfy their curiosity and inquisitiveness.
• to form and strengthen bonds that last a life-time and are beneficial to both the parents and children.
• to build up children’s trust and confidence in their parents.
• to forestall being wrongly informed from outsiders.
3.6 Tips for Effective Listening • Be attentive and maintain eye contact to show that you are paying keen attention.
• Demonstrate that you are listening by nodding and show encouragement.
• Do not interrupt.
• Be mindful of your facial expression and body language, for example, do not smile at a sad story or experience 3.7 Importance of Sex Education In many cultures, it is a taboo to discuss sexuality in public.
Many parents do not talk to their children about sexuality because they feel uncomfortable, embarrassed, or fear that letting children know about sexuality may encourage the experiment with sex.
However, because children are curious by nature, they get to learn wrong things about sexuality from the media and their friends.
Some reasons why parents should discuss sexuality with their children include the following.
• Research has shown that more children are engaging in sexual activity at increasing younger ages.
The result of this is the increase in teenage pregnancy, committing unsafe abortions, and contacting sexually transmitted diseases including HIV and AIDS.
43 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • By not talking about sexuality, parents are indirectly telling children it is wrong, evil and dirty, this can give them problems in their sexual relationships when they become adults.
• By not preparing children to handle sexuality issues, parents might be exposing their children to dangers that will make them victims of sexual abuse, harassment, and rape.
For these and other reasons, it is clear that children need to be informed about their sexuality early enough by their parents.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List four reasons why parents should communicate with their children.
2.
Mention three tips for effective listening.
3.
Give four reasons why parents should discuss sex education.
3.8 Basic Sexuality Education Tips for Parents Parents need to know exactly what areas to address when opening discussions about sexuality.
Some critical areas include: • Boosting the child’s self esteem Self esteem means that the child feels good about himself/herself and thus, will develop self-confidence.
Children who feel good about themselves and their bodies, whether they are short or tall, fat or slim, light or dark, see themselves as people of worth and are not easily influenced by their peers.
They will not allow themselves to be used, abused or taken advantage of.
During adolescence, teenagers tend to be shy and unsure about themselves, particularly when their bodies begin to change rapidly and their emotions become unsteady.
They begin to wonder if the experiences they are having are normal or if there is something strange happening to them.
It is important at this stage for parents to reassure them that all teenagers are going through the same growing process, but that each teenager has his/her own pace of growth and that whatever the case, they are unique and special.
This will help them feel good about good about themselves and develop high self- esteem.
• Set a good example Parents should be role models for their children; they should lead by example.
For instance, parents should show genuine love, affection and respect for each other in the presence of their children, they should also avoid social vices such as alcoholism, smoking and extra marital affairs.
44 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION These will make their children learn to do the same as they become adults.
• Create time for open communication Many parents stop their children from asking questions about sexuality.
Some even abuse them for wanting to know about such “dirty” subject.
However, if a parent does not educate his or her child, the child will turn to someone else.
The danger in this is that children may be misled and wrongly informed by other people.
If parents take time to speak with their children and keep the lines of communication open, the children will be guided aright and is likely to make fewer mistakes and take appropriate decisions.
• Prepare children well ahead of time It is important to prepare girls for menstruation and boys for erection and wet dreams before it happens.
This is because when a child experiences menstruation or erection and wet dreams for the first time, they may become scared and uncertain.
But if they have been properly educated before then, it will not take them by surprise.
• Focus on responsibility It is important for parents to let teenagers know they can become a father or mother if they engage in unprotected sexual activity.
Encourage them to abstain from sexual activity until they are older.
• Emphasise values, norms and attitudes Parents need to emphasise on values such as self control, letting them know they cannot do everything they feel like doing unless they are ready to face the consequences.
Also, values such as responsibility and accountability can be achieved when they insist on appropriate behaviour.
Also, children should be taught to demonstrate values of love, respect, commitment, patience and tolerance in relationships.
• Teach children to prevent sexual abuse Parents should teach their children from tender age that, no one is allowed to touch their bodies or do anything to them that makes them feel uncomfortable.
They should be taught how to say no and be assertive and how to find help in problematic situation.
Children should be made aware of dangerous situations and how to avoid them such as being alone in a dark place with someone of the opposite sex, taking free ride, walking alone in isolated or dark places and so on.
45 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is a two-way process.
There is a sender and a receiver.
Effective communication is a major part in achieving successful parent- child relationship.
The more you become an effective communicator, the more you achieve your goals as parents.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit addressed important information about a man’s capacity for communication within the family.
You learnt to understand the messages sent by different members of the family which gives them the tool and confidence to interact with larger members of the society.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss four basic sexuality education tips for parents.
2.
Family relationships cannot be effective without open communication.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING AHI & UNFPA (2002).
Can We Really Talk It?
A Self-Help Guide for Talking with Your Adolescent.
Burr, W. R.; Yorgason, B. G. & Baker, T. R. (1982).
Marriage and Family Stewardships.
Salt Lake City: Bookcraft.
Faber, A.
& Mazlish, E. (1980).
How to Talk so Kids will Listen and Listen so Kids will Talk.
New York: Avon.
Goddard, H. W. (1994).
Communication: Building a Strong Bridge between you and your Children.
Auburn, AL: Alabama Cooperative Extension Service.
Ginnott, H. (1969).
Between Parent and Child.
New York: Avon.
Goddard, H. W. (1994).
Being Understanding: A Key to Developing Healthy Children.
Auburn, AL: Alabama Cooperative Extension Service.
46 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION MODULE 2 PHYSICAL AND HEALTH DEVELOPMENT IN THE FAMILY Unit 1 Important Physical and Health Issues that Affect Family Life Unit 2 Some Traditional Practices that Affect People’s Health Unit 3 Healthy Practices that Promote Good Health Unit 4 Healthy Family-Friendly Foods and Recipe Unit 5 Family Fun and Entertainment UNIT 1 IMPORTANT PHYSICAL AND HEALTH ISSUES THAT AFFECT FAMILY LIFE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Drug Abuse, Signs, Effects and Remedy 3.2 Guarding Children against Use of Alcohol and Drugs 3.3 HIV and AIDS 3.4 Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about specific diseases that can affect the growth and development of members of the family.
You will learn about the causes of these diseases, how they can be prevented and what family members can do if a member of the family has any of these diseases.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss drug abuse and its effects • identify and describe general symptoms of STIs in males and females • explain the difference between HIV and AIDS • discuss how to prevent drug abuse, HIV and STIs • discuss what should be done to someone in the family with HIV.
47 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Drug Abuse, Signs, Effects and Remedy What is a Drug?
A drug is any medicine or substance that causes physical and or mental changes in the body.
What is Drug used for?
Generally, drugs are used to treat infections and diseases.
Some drugs such an immunisation drugs are used to prevent sickness.
Types of Drugs: There are two types of drugs - licit and illicit drugs.
Licit drugs are legal drugs used to cure illnesses.
Illicit drugs on the other hand, are illegal drugs.
They are also called “hard drugs” and are used to alter the mind and an individual’s state of consciousness.
They affect the functions and chemistry of the body, causing changes in behaviour.
A person who uses these drugs can be arrested because the law forbids the use of such drugs.
Examples of these drugs include cocaine, marijuana, heroine, etc.
Drug Addiction and Abuse: A person is said to be addicted to drugs when a drug user becomes preoccupied with seeking out the drug, using it compulsively, and not being able to stop or reduce its use.
According to the World Health Organisation, some characteristics of drug addiction include the following.
• An overwhelming urge to continue taking the drug and to obtain it by any means.
• A tendency to increase the dose.
• A psychological and sometimes physical dependence on the effects of the drugs.
Drug abuse refers an inappropriate use of drugs.
The use of illicit drugs or substance is also an act of abuse.
People who use drugs without a doctor’s authorisation and people who use drugs for a purpose different from what it is prescribed for are involved in drug abuse.
Drug or substance abuse can affect the brain and mind by stimulating, depressing, or disorganising it.
Signs of Drug Abuse • Constant untamed mood swings.
• Possession of drugs.
• Signs of physical deterioration.
• Stealing and engaging in illegal practices to obtain money for purchasing the drug.
48 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Memory lapses and short attention span.
• Bloodshot eyes and dilated pupils.
• Being secretive an isolation from family and friends.
• Increased absenteeism from work, unexplained absences from important meetings, dishonesty, etc.
• Engaging in risky behaviour such as unprotected sexual activity, sharing of sharp objects, etc.
Effects of Drug Abuse • The addict may develop mental illness after prolonged use.
• The family also experiences shame and disappointment because of the addict’s behaviour.
• Personality disorders that may result in suicide or crime.
• Health problems arising from medical effects such as permanent memory loss, liver and brain damage, etc.
• Social problems such as poverty and failure in career or academic pursuits, rejection by society and family members.
• Involvement in violence and crime.
Others are • Lower educational achievement/ability.
• An inability to think through the consequences of behaviour.
• Poor self-image.
This can also be a form of self-stigmatisation where the adolescent begins to view him or herself as “bad” and unable to fit into society.
• Greater susceptibility to behavioural health problems.
Changes in brain chemistry may make the child vulnerable to diseases like depression or bipolar disorder (also known as manic-depression).
• Difficulty managing emotions without alcohol or drugs.
Changes in brain chemistry caused by drug abuse may affect emotions.
Also, the addict may fail to develop the ability to manage emotions rationally.
For instance, the addict may resort to using a substance instead of working through a problem.
When the effect of the substance is gone, the addict has little or no ability to manage the “raw” emotion.
What Family Members Can Do To Help an Addicted Family Member.
• It is important to refer someone who abuses drug to the hospital or a drug rehabilitation centre.
• Family members should show an addicted child or parent love and provide necessary support such as ensuring that the 49 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION medications are taken or that the person attends a rehabilitation home.
• Family members should ensure that the addict sees a professional counsellor.
• It is also important that family members of the addict should strengthen their religious beliefs in God’s ability to provide help to deal with the issue.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define drug and explain two major types of drugs.
2.
Enumerate four signs of drug abuse.
3.
Discuss what family members can do to a family member with drug addiction problem.
3.2 Guarding Children against Use of Alcohol and Drugs There is usually a connection between alcohol and drug use and other problems.
Children, especially adolescents who indulge in alcohol or drug abuse are known to have problems listed earlier.
Drug abuse by adolescents can cause serious problems that can follow them into adulthood.
Further, adolescent drug abuse use is also a frequent cause of family upheaval.
Therefore, parental monitoring and supervision are keys to preventing alcohol and drug abuse among children/adolescents.
Parents need to set clear limits, enforce them, and demonstrate they are aware of what their child is doing, and provide necessary support including counseling from professionals to enable their children overcome these challenges.
Better still, parents should ensure that their children do not attempt the use of these drugs in the first place by guarding against peer influence which is also crucial in this regard.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention and explain three crucial effects of drugs and alcohol abuse on children or adolescents.
2.
List two things parents can do to prevent their children from engaging in drug or alcohol abuse.
3.3 HIV and AIDS What is HIV?
HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency Virus.
It destroys the body's immune system, which protects the body from illnesses and diseases.
50 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION What is AIDS?
AIDS means Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
AIDS is caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
The body normally has a system that fights off infections and diseases called the immune system.
HIV is a virus that slowly breaks down this immune system.
During this period, the person may look healthy and feel well, but the virus remains active.
He/she may infect another person if he/she engages in unprotected sexual intercourse.
Eventually, the immune system of the individual will become weaker and the body will no longer be able to fight off infections.
Consequently, the person with HIV will become ill more often and it takes a longer time to recover from each illness.
When HIV has permanently damaged the immune system, the immune system can no longer do its job and at this stage, the person with HIV will develop AIDS.
The period of transition from HIV to AIDS cannot be easily determined, but on the average, it takes about four to eight years.
How is HIV Transmitted?
HIV is transmitted through certain body fluids- semen, vaginal secretions, blood, or breast milk from an infected person that has been infected with the HIV.
HIV can enter the body in four ways: • Having unprotected sexual intercourse (vaginal, anal, or oral) without using a condom with someone who is HIV positive.
• Getting blood transfusion from an HIV infected blood.
• Sharing sharp objects such as syringes and needles for drugs and tattoos or other skin- piercing tools, razor blades and surgical instruments for circumcision or scarification with someone who is HIV positive.
• Babies born by or breastfed by women who are HIV positive (who do not take anti-retroviral drugs) are also at high risk of contracting the virus.
HIV/AIDS is NOT spread by • Talking/playing with an infected person.
• Sneezing or coughing.
• Sharing meals with an infected person.
• Shaking hands with an infected person.
• Sharing toilet facilities with an infected person.
• Cooking, drinking water, or eating food with an infected person.
• Insect bites.
51 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION How Can HIV be prevented?
• Abstinence is 100per cent effective in preventing the sexual transmission of HIV.
• Engage in protected sex by using condoms.
• Avoid sharing needles, syringes, or other personal items that could be contaminated with blood.
Important Precautions to be taken at Home • Have a first aid kit at home so that injuries can be treated immediately and children should be taught how to stop their own bleeding.
• Teaching children not to touch other people’s blood with bare hands, rather they must wear gloves if they have to do so.
• Every member of the family should have their individual barbing or hair dressing kit.
• Every member of the family should go to a government designated HIV screening centre to know their HIV status.
What should be done if a family member has HIV • Do not condemn or stigmatise the person.
• Show he/she love and do not send him/her away from the home.
• Ensure that the HIV status is medically ascertained and provide financial and moral support for the treatment.
• Help him/her to maintain good health, good nutrition and personal hygiene to prevent infections and ill health.
• Encourage the person to continue to live a normal happy life.
• Strengthen the person’s spiritual faith.
• Encourage the person to join a support group.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
What does HIV and AIDS stand for?
2.
Describe how a person who is HIV progresses to AIDS.
3.
List four ways by which HIV can be contracted.
4.
Enumerate precautions that can be taken at home to prevent HIV infection.
5.
Discuss what members of the family should do to a family member who is HIV positive.
52 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.4 Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) What are STIs?
STIs (Sexually Transmitted Infections) are infections passed from one person to another through sexual intercourse or genital contact.
These diseases infect the sexual and reproductive organs.
Sometimes it can have long-term effects such as infertility, miscarriage, and stillbirths.
It can also make a person more vulnerable to contacting HIV.
Common examples of STIs are gonorrhea, syphilis, genital herpes, genital warts, Chlamydia and HIV.
Signs and symptoms of STIs Most of the time, a man will know if he has STI because of the itching and severe pain in the reproductive organs.
Sometimes, he may experience unusual discharge or pus from the penis.
On the other hand, a woman may not know that she has STI because they are sometimes itching and the itching may go away while the infection is still there and with no other signs or symptoms.
How can STIs be treated?
Most STIs can be cured with certain treatment; however, there is no cure for HIV at this time.
Proper and complete treatment should be sought from a good hospital.
How Can STIs Be Prevented 1.
Sexual abstinence completely eliminates the risk.
2.
Engage in protected sex by using condom.
3.
Mutual monogamy between uninfected partners reduces risk.
4.
Sexual partners should get checked for STIs at the hospital regularly.
5.
Use birth control methods such as foam, cream or jelly.
These chemicals kill most STI germs.
However, they are not recommended for women at high risk of HIV (that is, sex workers).
4.0 CONCLUSION Some diseases with serious implications for health and development such as drug abuse, HIV and STIs can be avoided with great efforts from parents.
It is important to teach children about the negative effects of these preventable diseases and how to avoid them.
Children also need to be taught skills such as assertiveness skills, negotiation skills, and abstinence skills.
These skills will equip children to resist negative peer 53 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION pressure and know how to avoid or confront risky behaviours that can make them vulnerable.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about drug abuse and its effects, HIV and AIDS and STIs.
These are serious infections and diseases that can affect the entire family.
Knowledge of and necessary precautions will go a long way in keeping family members healthy.
In the next unit, you will learn about harmful traditional practices that can hinder a family’s physical health and development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Distinguish between the signs and symptoms of STIs presented by a male from a female.
2.
What should a person do if he or she suspects that he/she has an STI?
3.
STIs can be treated at home by an individual.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Department of Education, HIV and AIDS Unit, S/A.
(2003).
“HIV and AIDS in Your School: What Parents Need To Know.” 54 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 2 SOME TRADITIONAL PRACTICES THAT AFFECT PEOPLE’S HEALTH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 4.0 Main Content 3.1 What are Harmful Traditional Practices?
3.1.1 Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) 3.2 Early Marriage 3.3 Nutritional Taboos 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION While some traditional practices are valuable and should be promoted, others are harmful and should be discontinued.
However, some of these harmful traditional practices are still in existence in some communities.
In particular, some traditional practices are harmful to a girl/woman’s health and well-being.
They are regarded as forms of violence against women because they usually have physical and psychological consequences that affect the woman’s health and well-being.
Some examples of traditional practices that affect girls’/women’s health in Nigeria are discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • enumerate some harmful traditional practices in Nigeria that affect people’s health • state reasons why the traditional practices are harmful • discuss what can be done to stop harmful traditional practices.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What are Harmful Traditional Practices?
Harmful traditional practices are those practices that have physical, psychological or health consequences such as infections, excessive 55 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION bleeding, and sometimes death.
Some traditional practices that affect people’s health in Nigeria are discussed below.
3.1.1 Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) or female circumcision is an age long practice on women which involve the cutting of female genitals.
The World Health Organisation describes female circumcision as comprising all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external genitals or other injury to female organs for cultural or any other non-therapeutic reasons.
Female circumcision is widespread in Nigeria; it is done in all states of Nigeria, even though it is not as widely spread in some states as in others.
Types of Female Circumcision The World Health Organisation has classified female circumcision into four types.
These include: • Type I This is also called clitoridectomy (or suna), is the excision or removal of the head of the clitoris (prepuce), sometimes along with parts of, or the entire clitoris.
(That is, part or the entire clitoris is removed.)
• Type II This is also called excision.
It refers to the cutting out of both the clitoris and, part or all, of the labia minora.
(That is, partial or total removal of the clitoris and labia minora without stitching).
• Type III This is also called infibulation.
It is the removal of part or all of the external genitalia with or without the stitching of the raw surfaces together.
When stitched together, a small opening (sometimes the size of a pen head or the tip of a small finger) is left to allow for the flow of urine and menstrual blood.
This process is known as infibulations.
• Type IV This is unclassified and sometimes called angurya (or gishiri cuts).
It involves cutting from the vaginal opening anterior or posterior into surrounding tissues that can damage the urinary bladder/urethral opening or rectum and anus.
56 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Reasons for Female Circumcision Many cultures hold strong beliefs about the values of female circumcision.
Some of their reasons for practicing it are as follows.
• It is a traditional rite of passage into womanhood.
• To prevent a girl from being promiscuous.
• As an important part of a culturally defined gender identity and for social acceptability.
• To make the vagina look beautiful.
• For cleanliness of the female genitalia.
• To enhance fertility and child delivery.
• To improve male sexual performance and enhance sexual pleasure of men.
In spite of these traditional views for FGM, there is no scientific proof to justify female circumcision.
Rather, the practice has been proven to be harmful to girls and women.
How Is Female Circumcision Carried Out?
Female circumcision is usually performed by elderly women and men who use unsterilised special knives, sharp stones, glass, or blades.
Boys or hefty men or women hold down the females while the circumcision is performed.
To reduce the risks of HIV and other infections, some modern girls and women get circumcised in hospitals.
Implications and Effects of Female Circumcision Over the years, women have been victims of female circumcision sometimes with serious immediate and long-term implications for a woman’s physical, emotional, and reproductive health.
Examples of these include: • excruciating pain.
• infections such as HIV, pelvic infection, tetanus, etc.
• excessive bleeding leading to shock and death.
• painful sexual intercourse.
• prolonged and obstructed labor leading to complications such as Vesico Vaginal Fistula (VVF) or Recto Vaginal Fistula.
• Keloid formation.
• Sexual problems such as frigidity and lack of orgasm, etc.
• Infertility resulting from chronic infections.
• Difficulty with urination (burning, retention, etc).
• Psychological trauma, including feeling of inadequacy and lack of self-confidence.
57 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Family members need to recognise that female circumcision is a form of discrimination against women and the girl child, and a violation of their rights to health and freedom of choice.
They should discourage their girls and mothers from participating in such practices.
Parents, especially fathers should also take time to educate their grandparents and other extended family members about the dangers of the practice and firmly let them know that they oppose the practice.
Girls who refuse to be circumcised should be protected from communal sanctions and should not be stigmatised.
Finally, already circumcised family members should be treated with empathy and provided necessary medical care and support to live healthy happy lives.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is FGM and why is it practiced?
2.
Describe four types of FGM according to the World Health Organisation.
3.
List six harmful effects of FGM.
4.
What can a family do about FGM?
3.2 Early Marriage Early marriage is the marital union between a girl below age 18 and an older man.
This marriage may be with or without the consent or knowledge of the girl.
The marital arrangement is usually made by older members of the family.
Reasons for Early Marriage • Cultural/religious reasons In places like northern Nigeria, it is culturally acceptable for a teenage girl to be given away in marriage to ensure that the child is married to someone whom the family believes will take care of her.
Also, it is argued that some religious beliefs state that a girl’s first menstrual experience should not meet her at home, so fathers strive to make her get married before her first menstruation.
• Economic reasons Some parents give away their daughters in marriage to collect the bride price, which may be in terms of money and material items.
Others marry off their daughters to settle financial debts that they cannot afford to pay.
58 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • To preserve the chastity of the girl Some parents encourage early marriage among their teenage daughters to avoid the teenage pregnancy and promiscuity.
Consequences of Early Marriage Some consequences of early marriage include: • Obstructed labour This occurs when early childbearing results in complications because of the immature state of the birth canal.
At this age, the birth canal of the girl is small and not physically strong enough to allow for the passage of the baby’s head.
This leads to obstructed labour.
As a result, the head of the baby becomes stuck in the pelvis and the head presses the vagina.
The prolonged and unrelieved pressure on the girl’s pelvic wall causes the inability to hold urine.
This results in the continuous leaking of urine from the bladder through the vagina.
This condition is called Vesico Vagina Fistula (VVF).
In some cases, the rectum is affected and the woman becomes unable to control the leaking of faeces.
In addition to this condition, these women may also lose their babies (they die) and have to undergo a surgical repair to rectify the damage.
Subsequent births would also have to be through caesarian sections.
The women are usually sent away from their husband’s house, and their family and friends reject them.
They are socially stigmatised, humiliated, and discriminated against for as long as they remain in this condition.
• Disruption of education Most girls who marry early become school dropouts especially when they get pregnant.
This may mark the end of such girl’s education which eventually affects other opportunities in life such as a good job.
• Social isolation A lot of the married adolescent girls become miserable and unhappy, because they cannot mix up or attend parties like their other age mate.
They are obligated to act like older married women.
• What parents can do Parents can do a lot to prevent early marriage.
They can decide that their daughters should complete secondary and higher institution before giving approval to marriage.
They should ensure that she marries the one she really wants to marry at a mature age.
They should support her 59 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION to resist peer pressure to marry at a tender age.
They should protect her from societal stigmatisation.
They should also educate their family members about the implications of early marriage for the girl-child.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Why is early marriage a harmful traditional practice?
2.
What are the reasons for early marriage?
3.
What can parents do to stop this harmful traditional practice?
3.3 Nutritional Taboos Women are prohibited from eating certain foods that are rich in vitamins and protein because of traditional belief of some cultures about the effects of such food on women.
Most of the claims are myths that have no scientific basis.
Some examples of these foods are: • Women and girls are not allowed to eat the head of goat or chicken, as well as gizzard, liver, and snail, because it is meant for males.
• Babies are also prevented from taking colostrums (first milk secreted by nursing mothers; it is slightly different in composition from the normal breast milk, with higher content of protein, fat- soluble vitamins and electrolytes) immediately after birth, resulting sometimes in low resistance to diseases, and infection, etc.
The child’s survival and development may also be in jeopardy due to maternal malnutrition.
4.0 CONCLUSION Lot of compromises to health and physical growth and development has been made under the guise of tradition and cultural practices.
While good cultural practices should be promoted, others such as widowhood, early marriage, FGM, and nutritional practices should be stopped because of the short and long-term effects on the lives of the victims.
7.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about some traditional practices that are harmful to health and what a family can do to prevent their family members from becoming victims.
Since women have little say as far as cultural practices are concerned, fathers, sons and other men have a significant role to play in educating extended family members and in insisting that their children and wives will not participate in such cultural practices.
60 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 8.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Our traditions and cultures are legacies that should not be compromised.
Discuss.
2.
Women and girls should be protected from harmful cultural practices.
What roles can families play in this regard?
3.
Discuss two traditional practices that should be prohibited in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Clegg, A., Bio, F., & Clegg, P.C.
(1973).
Man against Disease.
London: Heinemann Educational Books.
Olugboji, W. (1998).
Before the Doctor Arrives.
Ibadan: Atlantis Books.
61 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 3 HEALTHY PRACTICES THAT PROMOTE GOOD HEALTH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personal and Household Hygiene 3.2 Preventing and Treating Fever 3.3 Preventive Health Care for Babies 3.4 General Rules for First Aid Treatment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Prevention of diseases is a cost-effective means to ensuring a healthy happy family.
There are certain practices that can promote good health such as, good hygienic practices, first aid sanitation and clean water etc; all these will be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss tips for ensuring personal and household hygiene • ways of preventing and treating fever • discuss preventive measures for care of the baby • enumerate ways of controlling bleeding from a wound • list general rules for administering first aid treatment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personal and Household Hygiene A clean environment is essential in preventing many diseases such as diarrhea, worms, malaria, skin rashes, typhoid fever, and cholera, which are easily spread within a dirty environment.
Good hygiene helps prevent diseases for the whole family.
Below are some tips for promoting personal and household hygiene: 62 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Wash hands before preparing food.
• Keep food clean and covered.
• Wash cooking pots and dishes.
• Bathe regularly.
• Wash clothes and bedding frequently and sun- dry them.
• Drink clean tap water or treat water before drinking.
• Do not allow stagnant water to accumulate in the environment.
• Dispose garbage and waste appropriately.
• Wash your hands after using the toilet.
• Keep surroundings clean.
• Always wear clean pants and underwear.
• Men and women should wear cotton underwear.
• Roll-ons and perfumes should be moderately used.
• The nails should be kept clean at all times.
• Shoes should be aired after use.
3.2 Preventing and Treating Fever One of the most common symptoms of fever is a very hot body temperature.
Fever is an indication of different sicknesses.
However, high fever can be dangerous if not properly handled.
When a person has a fever, family members should: • uncover her/him completely and use cold water to sponge down the body until the temperature goes down.
• expose the person to fresh air.
• let him/her drink lots of water, juices, or other liquids.
• take the person to a doctor.
Avoid self-medication.
One of the best ways of preventing fever is to keep the environment clean, use insecticide and treated mosquito nets in the bedrooms.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention five ways of maintaining personal and household hygiene.
2.
How can one tell if a person has fever?
3.
List two important things you can do to prevent fever?
3.3 Preventive Health Care for Babies Personal and household hygiene can keep baby in a family healthy and strong.
During a baby’s first year, he/she must be taken to the hospital regularly to be examined by qualified health professionals.
Otherwise, the baby can become very sick and eventually dies from some 63 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION preventable deadly diseases.
Parents need to ensure that certain health preventive measures are taken for the care of a baby.
These include: • Immunisation Immunisation means giving medicines called vaccines to a person to prevent specific diseases.
The baby must receive the entire series of immunisations to be protected against six deadly diseases: diphtheria, pertussis (whooping cough), tetanus, polio, measles, and tuberculosis.
• Monitor Baby's Growth A healthy baby should gain weight every month.
If a baby is not gaining weight, gaining weight slowly, or is losing weight, it may mean that the baby is not eating the right foods or seriously ill. A baby should be weighed regularly up to the age of five.
Each time the baby is weighed, the health worker will mark the baby's weight on a chart so as to keep track of the baby’s growth and development.
• Periodic medical check-up A baby in the first year should be taken regularly to the hospital for routine check and immunisation.
Parents should go to qualified health professionals at primary health centers, maternity hospitals, clinics, and hospitals.
Mothers and fathers should ensure that their babies receive all immunisations, the weight is checked for growth and development, and the baby is examined for early detection of disease.
Mothers should also breastfeed their children exclusively for the first six months.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss three ways of preventing babies from developing health problems.
3.4 General Rules for First Aid Treatment First aid is the emergency care and treatment given to a sick or injured person before professional medical services are obtained.
First aid measures are not meant to replace proper medical diagnosis and treatment, but only to provide temporary support until professional medical assistance is available.
The purposes of first aid are to: • save life.
• prevent further injury.
• minimise or prevent infection.
64 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Every member of the family must know how and when to render first aid and be prepared to provide competent assistance to the sick and injured in all circumstances.
While administering first aid, the primary objectives should be to maintain: • an open airway.
• breathing.
• circulation.
General tips for first aid are as follows.
• Keep the casualty lying down, head level with the body, until you determine the extent and seriousness of the illness or injury.
• Vomiting or bleeding around the mouth: If the casualty is vomiting or bleeding around the mouth, they should be placed on their side or back with head turned to the side.
• Difficulty breathing: If the casualty has a chest injury or difficulty breathing, they should be placed in a sitting or semi- sitting position.
• Do not touch open wounds or burns with your fingers or unsterile objects unless it is necessary.
• Wash your hands with soap and warm water immediately after providing care, even if you wore gloves or used another barrier.
• Do not give the casualty anything to eat or drink because it may cause vomiting and because of the possible need for surgery.
If the casualty complains of thirst, wet her/his lips with a wet towel.
• Do not attempt straightening broken or dislocated bones because of the high risk of causing further injury.
Do not move the casualty if it is not necessary.
• When transporting, carry the casualty feet first.
This enables the rear bearer to observe the casualty for any complications.
• Keep the casualty comfortable and warm enough to maintain normal body temperature.
• Take the person to the hospital immediately and call or inform the family members of the victim.
4.0 CONCLUSION Health is an important aspect of life that should never be compromised.
This is the reason members of a family should be educated about basic health prevention tips.
This should in no way be replaced with professional health care.
First aid preventive measures are to provide temporary assistance; all health issues should be referred to a qualified health professional for appropriate medical care.
65 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about how to maintain good health in the family.
You have also learnt basic tips about personal and household hygiene, care of the baby, prevention and treatment of certain diseases and ways of applying first aid in emergencies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State and discuss five tips for promoting personal and household hygiene.
2.
Discuss three ways of preventing babies from developing health problems.
3.
State the objectives of first aid and discuss five tips for conducting first aid.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Clegg, A.; Bio, F. & Clegg, P. (1973).
Man against Disease.
London: Heinemann Educational Books.
Olugboji, W. (1998).
Before the Doctor Arrives.
Ibadan: Atlantis Books.
66 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 4 HEALTHY FAMILY-FRIENDLY FOODS AND RECIPE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Food to the Family?
3.2 Types of Food and their Functions 3.3 Examples of Nutritious Foods 3.4 Cautions for Food Taking 3.5 Family-Friendly Recipes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Food is important to human beings to stay healthy and for life-time sustenance throughout their lives.
One of the primary functions of the family, especially parents, is to provide healthy and balanced meals that will make their children healthy, develop physically and mentally.
Parents’ also have the responsibility to teach their teenage children how to make meals for themselves and their future families.
This unit examines the importance of food to a family, the classifications of types of foods and their functions, as well as family-friendly recipes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list four reasons why food is important to a family • mention classifications of types of foods • discuss the functions of food • explain why certain foods should be avoided • describe some family friendly recipes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Food to the Family?
Food is thing that people and animals feed on, such as vegetables or meat while nutrition is the study of food and the effect it has on our 67 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION bodies.
Good nutrition is important for healthy; hence, family plays a central role in the choice of food that is eaten.
Providing food for the family is an important role that parents play within the family.
This is essential because children need nutritious and balanced diet so that they can develop well and grow into healthy adults.
Food is also important to adults because it helps them stay healthy.
Food is very important in the family for the following reasons: • It keeps a family healthy and strong.
• It helps to prevent diseases and death within a family.
• It is essential for children’s growth and physical and mental development.
• Families that feed well save more money (which otherwise would have been spent on hospital bills).
• Meal preparation and eating time provides the family an opportunity to spend time together as a family.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is food?
2.
List four reasons why food is important to a family and why?
3.2 Types of Food and their Functions Different types of foods perform different functions in the body.
There are certain types of foods that the body needs to function well and keep an individual healthy.
As children grow, parents should teach their children what type of food they should eat and why it is important for them to eat these types of foods.
Some of these essential foods are hereby classified as: Energy giving foods These foods are sometimes called “stable foods”.
Most families eat at least one or two types of energy-giving food in a day.
Examples of such foods include food made from cassava meals like garri or eba, cassava flour; yam, bread, plantain, rice, amala, Irish potatoes, sweet potatoes, maize, millet, and so forth.
Most of these foods are easy to prepare and children usually give their mothers a helping hand during the preparation of these meals.
Protective Foods Sometimes these types of foods are called “glow foods”.
They contain essential vitamins and minerals that the body needs to function well and shining.
Examples of protective foods are vegetables (such as spinach, 68 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION pumpkin), tomatoes and carrots.
Most fruits such as pawpaw, mango, orange, and pineapple contain important vitamins.
It is important for parents to teach their children to take these protective foods at least once in a day to prevent diseases.
It also helps children’s brain to develop properly and helps them to perform well in school.
Children also need to know the length of time required to cook these foods and how to preserve the vitamins in them.
Most protective food should be taken fresh after thorough washing with clean water and where necessary, cooked lightly.
Body Building Foods These types of foods are also referred to as “grow foods”.
They contain protein, which is regarded as the building block of the body.
Protein helps the body to grow and develop properly.
As children become adolescents, they require protein to develop to transit from their child- like body to that of an adult.
Protein foods also help the body to heal and repair itself, when someone gets a cut.
Examples of food that contains protein are groundnuts, peas, beans, and meat, chicken, fresh fish, dried fish, snails as so forth.
Other types of food that contain protein are chesses, yogurt, milk and eggs.
Many sources of protein are also rich in iron, which is also good for the body, especially green and dark leafy vegetables.
Iron is very important especially for girls and women when they are menstruating and when they get pregnant.
Fats, oils and sweets These types of foods are sources of energy.
Examples include groundnut oil, palm oil, coconut oil, and butter.
While these types of food are important for the body, they should be taken in small quantity because they are fatty foods which contain much of energy, whereas the body needs only a limited level.
Eating too much of these foods can cause some health problems in future.
Another example is sugar.
But sweets are generally not healthy for the teeth.
Usually, parents should encourage their children to keep to healthy diets and avoid eating too much fats, oil and sweets.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention four types of food.
2.
List two examples of each of the four types of food.
3.
Which types of food should one avoid and why?
69 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.3 Examples of Nutritious Foods Our bodies need a variety of foods to help us grow, give us energy, and prevent sickness.
Table 3: Examples of Nutritious Foods Milk Meat/Sea- Vegetable Grain/Tuber Fruit Other Group food/Poultry Group Group Group Group Milk Snails Vegetable White Rice Banana Akara yoghurt Fish Salad Jollof Rice Orange (Bean soya Crab Carrots Fried Rice Grape Balls) beans Egg Onions Yam Mango Moinmoin milk Chicken Okro Gari Pineapple Pap Cheese Turkey Melon Amala Pear Corn Coconut Liver Ikong Semolina Apple Flakes Milk Stock fish Ubong(Telfaria Fufu Pawpaw Oats Kidney occidentalis) Potato Water- Shrimp Afang Beans melon Pork Water Leaf Corn Meal Cray Fish Ogbono Bread Bush Meat Spinach Fried Ewedu Plantain Banga Pounded Yam Yam Porridge 3.4 Cautions for Food Taking Food is important to every human being, but too much food or junk food can cause ill health for an individual later in life.
Energy foods in particular should be taken in moderation.
This is because energy is measured in calories.
Therefore, if a person eats food containing more calories (or energy) than the body needs, during the day, the calories will turn into fat and the body will store up the fat until such a time when it is needed.
For most people, the storing up of fat is healthy and normal; however, it can become a problem if too much fat is stored up in the body.
Sometimes, people need to exercise to burn off the fat from the body system.
This explains the reason why people should avoid eating too much fried food.
Although fried food is easy and quick to prepare, it can be harmful to the body and may damage the heart and blood vessels later in the person’s adult years.
70 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.5 Family-Friendly Recipes Yam Pottage Recipe (2 servings) • 1 small yam (about 6 medium pieces) • 1 medium smoked fish • ½ cup of palm oil (milk- can) • 1 small onion • 1 table spoonful ground crayfish • 1 small bunch of green fresh vegetables • Salt (to taste) • Pepper (to taste) • 2 cups of water Method • Peel the yam, cut it up into rectangular pieces, wash. • Prepare all other ingredients(fish, pepper, onion, vegetable) • Put the yam into a sauce pan add water, put to boil.
• Add oil, salt, pepper, Cray fish, tomatoes and onions.
• When the yam is almost cooked, add vegetables.
• Turn gently to make a fairly thick pottage.
• Taste for salt • Dish out and serve hot as lunch or dinner.
71 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Akara (Bean Cake) Recipe: • 1 cup of beans (cowpea) • 1 small onion • 1 large red pepper • Salt to taste • 1 cup of water • Vegetable oil or bleached palm oil Method 1.
Pick any stone, sticks, and dry pod from the beans.
2.
Soak the beans for few minutes in water and remove seed coats or skins.
Wash properly.
3.
Grind or blend into a smooth paste using grinding stone or a blender.
4.
Put in a small mixing bowl or mortar.
Add ½ cup of cold water.
5.
Beat with a wooden spoon or whisk with a pestle to incorporate air.
6.
Continue beating until the mixture becomes fluffy and can easily drop from the spoon.
Add more water if necessary.
7.
Add chopped onion, pepper and salt to taste.
Beat to obtain light mixture.
8.
Fry in deep hot oil, dropping the mixture with long spoon.
9.
Turn the Akara balls and fry until light brown.
10.
Drain in a clean basket or sieve 11.
Serve hot with any type of porridge or as snack.
Jollof Rice Recipe (2 servings) • 1½ cups (milk-can/about 300g) rice • 150g meat or 300g fresh fish • medium size fresh tomatoes (or 1 table spoon of tomato puree) • 1 small onion • 2 tablespoon of vegetable oil • ¼ teaspoon each of thyme, curry and/or seasoning powder • Salt to taste • Pepper to taste • About 3 cups of water or more • Green vegetables (for garnishing) e.g.
green peas, cabbage or African spinach.
72 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Method 1.
Wash the meat and cut into pieces of desired size.
2.
Place meat in a sauce pan and season with salt, onion, thyme and curry.
3.
Grind/blend tomatoes and pepper, cut the remaining onion.
5.
Make the stew as follows: • Heat the vegetable oil.
• Fry the cooked meat to a golden brown colour.
• Add the onions, fry on a gentle heat.
• Add the tomatoes and other ingredients.
Fry gently for about 10 minutes.
• Add the meat stock and mote water for the cooking of the rice.
Remove the stew from fire.
6.
Prepare the rice as follows: • Pick the stones or grits from the rice.
Winnow to remove any husks.
• Wash and boil for 10 minutes.
Drain.
• Wash again and drain.
7.
Pour the rice into the stew, add remaining water and salt to taste.
Mix properly.
8.
Cook gently over low heat.
Add extra water gradually if necessary until the rice is cooked.
Cook at low heat to avoid burning.
9.
Stir the cooked rice to obtain uniform colour and taste.
10.
Prepare the vegetable as follows: • Pick the vegetables, wash thoroughly and drain.
• Shred or cut up as desired.
• Sauté with onions.
That is, toss vegetable with onions in little vegetable oil in a frying pan over sharp heat for short time.
• Dish the jollof rice and garnish with vegetables.
4.0 CONCLUSION Cooking and meal times are important periods that a family can spend together.
It also presents an opportunity for children to learn how to make healthy foods.
Parents should provide for and encourage their children to eat a nutritious balanced diet and help them to refrain from eating junk unhealthy foods containing too much fat and oil and sweets.
73 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that different types of foods perform different functions in the body.
Food is important for every human being especially growing children.
Energy, protective and bodybuilding foods are essential for good health, growth and development and should be taken at least once or twice a day.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Draw a diagram depicting how cooking and eating periods can be utilised in the family.
2.
State one function of each of the following types of foods: a. Energy-giving foods b.
Protective foods c. Bodybuilding foods 3.
Discuss reasons why certain foods can be harmful to the body.
4.
Describe two healthy family-friendly recipes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okoye, Z.
(1992).
Biochemical Aspect of Nutrition.
Jos: Prentice-Hall of India Private Ltd. Watson, C., & Brazier, E. (2000).
You, Your Life, Your Dreams: A Book for Adolescents.
Kenya: Family Care International and Straight Talk Foundation.
74 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 5 FAMILY FUN AND ENTERTAINMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Family Traditions 3.2 The Value of Family Traditions 3.3 Classification of Play Activities 3.4 Motive and Mode of Play 3.5 Child Play Theories 3.6 Roles of Schools in Family Entertainment and Children’s Play 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Family recreation is important in building a happy successful family.
It promotes and strengthens family unity and love.
Parents can strengthen the bond between family members, teach important principles they want their children to understand and live by spending time together.
In this unit, you will learn about ways by which family can have fun together and child play strategies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define family tradition • discuss the values of family traditions • list three classifications of play activities • discuss the motive and mode of play • explain child play theories • discuss the role of schools in family fun and entertainment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Family Traditions Traditions are practices or beliefs that create positive feelings and are repeated at regular intervals.
They are more than routines, which are 75 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION ordinary, everyday activities that require no special behaviour and involve little emotion.
Often traditions are handed down from generation to generation, but every family can create its own traditions as well.
Some traditions are based on God's commandments, such as praying before meals; others come from cultural or ethnic heritage, such as serving dumplings on cold winter nights.
3.2 The Value of Family Traditions Traditions cultivate connection between immediate family members and between generations.
Family scholars, Nick Stinnett and John DeFrain, say that traditions are the “we always” of families, like “We always make snow ice cream at the first snowfall,” or “We always have games and popcorn on Saturday night.” Family traditions have meaning that is special to an individual in a family hence; they create feelings of warmth and closeness.
By spending time together in a fun and special setting, family members grow closer.
Effective traditions promote a sense of identity and a sense of belonging.
They also promote a feeling of safety and security within the family by providing a predictable and familiar experience.
Family members have something to look forward to which gives them a sense of assurance in a hectic and ever-changing world.
In his book, “The Intentional Family”, William Doherty says that as family bonds are weakened by busy lifestyles, families can stay connected only by being intentional about maintaining important rituals and traditions.
Regular participation in meaningful traditions helps families overcome an inclination toward what family scholars call “entropy.” In the physical sciences, entropy is the tendency of a physical system to lose energy and coherence over time, such as a gas dissipating until it is all but gone.
As Doherty explains, an “entropic family” is one that loses its sense of emotional closeness because members neglect the family's inner life and community ties.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define family tradition.
2.
Discuss the values of family traditions.
3.3 Classification of Play Activities Educators and psychologists have propounded many theories to explain children’s play, none of which seems to embrace all aspects of the subject.
It is difficult to make a list and classify the games children play; it is not easy to define the word ‘play’ and ‘game’.
76 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Traditionally, Raum (1940) classified play activities under three headings.
1.
Playful exercise of sensory and motor apparatus resulting in the adaptation of the organism to its physical environment; 2.
Imitative play consisting of representation of adult life to fit the social needs of childhood; and 3.
Competitive games which test the physical, intellectual, and social qualities of the individual.
He concluded that, through play or games, the African child develops physical assets which will serve him in good stead when he grows older.
The world ‘game’ comes from the old Teutonic ‘gaman’ meaning ‘joy’.
‘Play’ is the English verb corresponding to the noun ‘game’, the old Teutonic form of which is “plegan” meaning to be glad’.
Two distinct present day use of the words ‘play’ and ‘game’ can be distinguished.
In a broad sense, they both denote any activity indulged in for the sake of pleasure it affords rather than for any purpose it achieves.
In a narrower sense, they denote a contest carried out according to recognised rules and decided by the strength, skill or luck of the contestants.
No such distinction is absolute.
But the play of pre-school children and the ritualistic games, rhymes and chants of infants and younger primary school children are the best examples of the first sense.
Play in its second sense is exemplified by the organised games of older children.
Research has shown that playing develops from predominantly individual spontaneous and imaginative games of young children into competitive game of older children and adults, which are predominantly carried out in groups and governed by recognised rules.
3.4 Motive and Mode of Play The motives and the mode of children play vary according to whether it belongs to the first or second type.
When children play ball games sometimes, the social motive seems to be predominant (they are playing as a group), sometimes the competitive (two groups have firmed sides and are playing a match).
A child will play by himself throwing a ball up into the air or against a wall and catching it.
He may be practicing his skill, or just “having fun”, feeling sheer joy from the bodily movement and the skill he has acquired.
His fantasy may reveal a social motive (he is “taking turns” with an imaginary companion) or a competitive one (he is taking turns with a rival and ‘heating’ him each time).
Play can be fun; it gives pleasure and a sense of high-spirited merriment.
Play is generally regarded as spontaneous and free, while games have rules.
Play often implies pretence; children’s absorption in their play 77 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION causes them to lose the sense of pretence.
Play is linked with the tangible artifacts of the culture-a chair, a table and the space beneath it, large boxes and so on.
Such play takes the child imaginatively beyond his limited capacities and outside his restricted status as a child.
He is an engine driver, a captain, a father or mother.
Play is conceived as activity carried out for its own sake.
It is not ‘necessary’ in the sense of directly serving an obvious biological need; though, it serves other purposes.
The urge to play, like the urge for food and drink when hungry or thirsty, is very powerful.
Children must play.
One sure sign that a child is physically ill or psychologically distressed is when he does not play.
3.5 Child Play Theories The surplus-energy theory Those who propounded this as a theory are of the opinion that because children and young animals do not expend their energies in self- preservation (that is, food-gathering, hunting, defense) or in preservation of species (reproduction) they have a large quantity of surplus energy which they use for play.
Children tend to have more energy for play, because unlike adults, they do not have to worry about all the things mentioned above.
The 19th century industrial society tolerated play, though qualifies it as a wasteful expenditure of energy which we must put up with until the energy can be channelled into the industrial process.
Play is positive in the sense that through play, excess energy, which might otherwise be used for destructive purposes, is expended in harmless ways.
This corresponds to one of the early justifications (a negative one) of games and physical exercises in schools and colleges, and of playgrounds in city schools.
The recreation theory The recreation theory is associated with the German philosopher, Moritz Lazarus (1824-1903).
It emphasises the restorative value of play; change to an interesting and absorbing activity is more recuperative than complete idleness.
A person in an industrial society tends to become fatigued in specific parts of the body, though he/she has an abundance of energy left within the body as a whole.
This finds expression in large- scale bodily activity characteristic of much of adults’ and children’s play.
This theory has been used to explain the leisure time activities of adults; teachers and academics who engage in certain activities during their vacations; students and office workers who ride bicycle; statesmen who play golf and tennis.
It has also been used to justify physical exercises, games and play-time in schools, but for a more positive reason than a 78 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION mere release of energy which might otherwise be used for destructive purposes.
The instinct-practice theory This theory, which is the result of the work of Groos (1861-1946) who devoted himself to the study of the play of animals and children, may be summarised as follows.
Animals and humans have instincts - a term which is used to mean an innate tendency to be active (to see, to feel, to behave) in ways which serve essentially preservative ends: self- maintenance, self-preservation, preservation of the species.
Play is a means by which these instinctive activities are practiced and perfected.
As Groos’s theory puts it, “Animals cannot be said to play because they are young and frolicsome, but rather they have a period of youth in order to play.” To him, play is preparatory in two aspects.
Generally, it involves the practice of bodily skills and their co-ordination, that is, mastery of the physical self; and more specifically it provides practice in miniature of the roles the animal or child will fulfill when grown up.
Groos’ study of children’s imaginatively symbolic play also revealed, that children convert everyday objects - a chair or table or the like – into whatever takes their fancy; or they create a whole environment – domestic, school or hospital.
The place is not just a living- room; it is a hospital.
The settee is not a settee, nor the length of rubber tubing just rubber tubing; rather, one is a hospital bed, the other a stethoscope.
Groos’ theory had a strong influence on educationists, particularly on Maria Montessori (1876-1952) whose methods of teaching kindergarten children were revolutionary.
The basis of her teaching was to allow freedom of action in order to encourage children do things for themselves.
Provided with furniture and equipment of appropriate size, children were encouraged in small- scale adult activities such as, to lay meals, wash up, and so on.
The recapitulation theory According to Stanley Hall (1846-1924), the games children play form a sequence of age stages.
These stages follow one another in the same order as the course of human evolution.
Through play children recapitulate man’s ancestral past.
The function of play according to him is to liberate the child from atavistic residues of behaviour.
The theory is no longer accepted because it implies the questionable doctrine that acquired characteristics are inherited.
79 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List three classifications of play activities.
2.
Discuss the motive and mode of play.
3.
Explain child play theories.
3.6 Roles of Schools in Family Entertainment and Children’s Play In providing comprehensive education for the family, the school should provide the following.
a.
Introduction and basic instruction in a variety of activities with the potential for development of lifelong leisure interests, including intellectual, social, artistic, physical, and service activities.
b.
Encouragement and instruction leading to the development and maintenance of the organic systems of the body to a sufficient degree that the individual is capable of participation.
c. Stimulation of original thought and creative self-expression and guidance of creative energies towards individual self-fulfillment.
d. Encouragement of desirable attitudes toward play, recreation, leisure, activity, rest, and relaxation.
e. Encouragement of the development of socially acceptable standards of conduct which make the individual a desirable companion, competitor, and humanitarian.
f. Opportunities and encouragement to develop skills that will proof satisfying and useful after graduation as well as during the school years.
g. Some appreciation and understanding of the role of play/entertainment and of particular leisure-time activities in one’s own and other cultures.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt that children often take the roles of adults in their play.
When playing by himself/herself a child may alternately take complementary roles, for example, he act as a bus conductor and passenger, shop keeper and customer, or teacher and pupil.
Or he/she may invent an imaginary companion with a name of his/her own, to whom he/she assigns one of the roles while playing the other him/her.
5.0 SUMMARY Play in context allows the child the freedom of participation and control over the choice of role interpretation, as well as being bound by the 80 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION behaviour appropriate to the accepted role(s).Play also gain social relevance when two children get the idea that each can take a separate role- for instance, as mother and father.
,.
Each child is then ‘set’ to behave in a way appropriate to his/her role.
Each has expectations that the behaviour of the companion will align with the companion’s role.
Games like football and basketball allows the child to learn and practice special techniques.
Because there are many people involved, the child has to know exactly what each member of his/her team and what each member of the opposing team will do in response to any move he/she makes.
This complex reciprocity and techniques provide skills in organisation, which is further ‘tightened’ by the institution of rules.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention five roles of schools in family entertainment and children’s play.
2.
Discuss any two child play theories.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING “Creating Meaningful Family Traditions” Written by Marisa Beebe, Research Assistant, and edited by Stephen F. Duncan, Professor, School of Family Life, Brigham Young University.
Source: http://www.foreverfamilies.net/xml/articles/family_ traditions.
aspx Doherty, W. J.
(1997).
The Intentional Family.
Addison-Wesley.
Stinnett, N. & DeFrain, J.
(1985).
Secrets of Strong Families.
Boston: Little, Brown, & Company.
Stinnett, N.; Beam, J.
& Beam, A.
(1999).
Fantastic Families: 6 Proven Steps to Building a Stronger Family.
West Monroe, LA: Howard Publishing Company.
81 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION MODULE 3 TYPES OF EDUCATION AVAILABLE FOR THE FAMILY Unit 1 Traditional Family Education Unit 2 Teaching Children Family Values Unit 3 Educational Resources in the Family Unit 4 Financial Resources and Management in the Family UNIT 1 TRADITIONAL FAMILY EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Traditional Education in Africa 3.2 Aims of Traditional Education in Nigeria 3.3 Characteristics of African Traditional Education 3.4 Methods of Teaching in Traditional Education 3.5 Contemporary Types of Education Available to the Family 3.6 Non-Formal Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A society is said to be traditional, when the behaviour of the members is directed by customs and traditions.
Most societies in Africa, before the colonial rule, are often referred to as traditional societies.
Some were autonomous and highly organised socially and politically, while some were acephalous.
The Hausa-Fulani, Yoruba, and Edo people belong to the first group while the Tiv, Igbo and Ibibio were said to be acephalous.
However, in spite of the political differences, traditional Nigerian societies were marked by certain distribution traits.
In this unit, you will learn about traditional and contemporary education promoted in the family.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss traditional education in Africa • state and explain aims of traditional education in Nigeria 82 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • describe the characteristics of traditional education in Nigeria • discuss some methods of teaching traditional education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Traditional Education in Africa Fafunwa (1982) noted that in old Africa, the warrior, the hunter, the nobleman, the man of character or anyone who combined the latter feature with a specific skill was adjudged to be well-educated and well- integrated citizen of his community.
Functionalism was the main guiding principle of education in old African society.
Traditional African societies regarded education as a means to an end and not as an end in itself.
Basic traditional education was generally for an immediate induction into society and a preparation for adulthood.
Traditional African education emphasised social responsibility, job orientation, political participation and spiritual and moral values.
Children and adolescents learnt by doing; in other words, they are engaged in participatory education through ceremonies, rituals, imitation, recitation and demonstrations.
They were involved in practical farming, fishing, weaving, cooking, carving, knitting and so on.
In the words of Fafunwa (1982) “Recreational subjects included wrestling, dancing, drumming, acrobatic display, racing, etc”.
While intellectual training included the story of local history, legends, the environment (local geography, plants and animals), poetry, reasoning, riddles, proverbs, story-telling, story- relays, etc.
Traditional African education was an integrated experience, because it combined physical training with character-building and manual activity with intellectual training.
At the end of each stage, demarcated either by age level or years of exposure, the child was given a practical test relevant to his experience and level of development and in terms of the job to be done.
The assessment process is continuous and eventually culminated in a “passing out” ceremony or initiation into adulthood.
The secret cults served as institutions of higher or further education for the selected or elected young adults who pass the initiation stage.
They get the opportunities to master the secret power (real or imaginary), profound native philosophy, science and religion of their ancestors.
The level of education and training given during the pre-colonial days in Africa was functional because the curriculum was relevant to the needs of the society.
Fafunwa (1982) stated that “the aim, the content and the methods of traditional education are intricately interwoven; they are not divided into separate compartments as in the case with the westernised system of education.
83 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.2 Aims of Traditional Education in Nigeria According to Fafunwa (1974), there were seven broad aims of traditional education.
They are: • To develop the child’s latent physical skills: The average African child likes to explore his/her immediate environment, observe adults in their activities, and imitate them - he/she enjoys discovering new situations.
The child in traditional African intuitively jumps, climbs a tree, dances or performs a balancing act because his/her siblings or elders do the same.
Every child discovers his/her limbs and their uses in no time.
The variety of African dance movements offer the child one of the best media for physical exercise.
The dance and the music also serve as cultural vehicles, encouraging team work, etc.
Through play or games, the African child develops physical assets which will serve him/her older.
• To develop character: Character training is a major aspect of indigenous African education.
All members of the society wants the child to be sociable, honest, courageous, humble, persevering and of good report at all times, thus, the parents, siblings and other members of the community participate in the education of the child.
The education of the young person in the codes of manners, conventions, customs, morals, superstition and laws of his/her society is therefore achieved through various members of his/her family and household, his/her kindred and his/her neighbourhood.
Though a large part of the early training is regarded as the direct responsibility first of the mother and other members of the child’s immediate family; the full training is a cooperative effort in which members of each of the more inclusive groups must play a part.
It is through this process that the child builds up his/her code, whether of manners or of morals, item by item as they come incidentally into the field of his/her experience.
• To inculcate respect for elders and those in position of authority: It has been stated that the Africans have the most complicated verbal and physical communication system in the world, and the child must master the various salutations of his/her own ethnic group before he/she reaches maturity.
Respect for elders or those who are in authority, particularly the chief, the cult leaders, the diviners, relatives (especially uncles) and older neighbours, is closely related to character-training.
Verbal greetings are often accompanied by physical gestures.
In the traditional settings, a Yoruba man will prostrate to his/her elders 84 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION and chief even if the chief is younger.
There are greetings for various situations-swimming, walking, convalescing; and there are special salutations for birthdays, burials, marriages, yam festivals, observance of ancestors worship, egungun festivals, etc.
• To develop intellectual skills: The African child or adolescent learns the local geography and history of his/her community.
Local history is taught by the elders in each household and the songs of praise which accompany many of the historical events make the oral traditional history a stimulating experience which is hard to forget.
Botany and zoology are taught or understood through observation; animal behaviour is an important subject both for protective reasons and for rearing purposes.
Proverbs and riddles constitute a formidable intellectual exercise.
They are used as media for developing the child’s reasoning power and skill in decision making.
Fafunwa (1982) opined that as the child grows into adulthood, he/she is exposed to advanced programmes which must be mastered before the initiation ceremony; these serve as qualifying entrance examinations.
As he/she matures and becomes eager to learn more, the riddles, proverbs, become more complicated and philosophy, reasoning and judgment are introduced.
• To acquire specific vocational training and develop a healthy attitude towards honest labour: It has been noted that the aim of education in traditional society is character training and job orientation.
The various traditional vocations can be divided into three groups: a.
Agricultural education, which includes farming, fishing and veterinary science (animal care and animal rearing) b.
Trades and crafts, that is made up of weaving (baskets and cloth), smiting (iron, gold, etc), hunting, carving (wood and bronze), sculpture, painting and decorating, carpentry, building, etc.
c. Professions: Witch doctors, village heads, priests, chiefs and kings, tax collectors, heralds, judges, shrine-keepers, etc.
d. In the traditional society vocational training is largely run on the apprenticeship system and is a time-honoured device for educating millions of African youths and adults.
• To develop a sense of belonging and to participate actively in family and community affairs: The child in the traditional system is made to appreciate his/her role as a member of his/her immediate and extended family as well as that of the community at large.
Age groups in traditional societies are generally engaged 85 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION in communal work.
They help other members of the group in clearing, planting or harvesting or help the community as a whole, in road-building, or the chief in performing a given task or assignment.
• To understand, appreciate and promote the cultural heritage of the community at large: The main purpose of education is the perpetuation of the culture of society.
The child grows into and within the cultural heritage of his/her people, and imbibes it.
In traditional society culture is not taught, the child learns by observation, imitation, and mimicking the actions of his/her elders and siblings.
Events like naming ceremonies, religious services, marriage rituals, funeral obsequies, coronation of a king or chief, the annual yam festival, the annual dance and acrobatic displays of guilds and age-sets provides the child with opportunities to imbibe the culture of his/her people.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
State seven aims of traditional education.
2.
Identify and describe the three divisions of traditional vocational education.
3.
How does traditional education help in the development of respect for elders.
3.3 Characteristics of African Traditional Education Along the same line of thought, Moumouni (1968) presents the characteristics of African traditional education as follows.
1.
The great importance attached to it and its collective and social nature.
2.
Its intimate tie with social life, both in a material and a spiritual sense.
3.
Its multivalent character, both in terms of its goals and the means employed.
4.
Its gradual and progressive achievements, in conformity with the successive stages of physical, emotional and mental development of the child.
3.4 Methods of Teaching in Traditional Education Various methods were adopted in teaching children in the traditional society.
Some of these methods include the following.
86 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Story telling: Stories were narrated about great heroes and heroines, about bad people and the consequences of their bad behaviour.
These stories were usually told at night when parents had arrived from farm or market and were gathered together before or after dinner.
After listening to the stories, children were expected to share lessons they had learnt from the story.
This was an effective way of learning about right and wrong behaviour and decisions.
• Rites of passage and traditional age-grade ceremonies: Children were expected to follow the examples of the elders during the traditional era.
Key lessons were reinforced during rites of passage and age-grade ceremonies that presented opportunities for adults to test lessons that young people had learnt from their elders.
Initiation ceremonies were done in secret after oral lectures and trainings from the eldest members of the family.
This also made it easy to pass down family traditional practices from one generation to the next.
• Observation and imitation: This involved following the examples set by adults.
Some of such training included learning incantations, family praise songs (oriki), family history, songs proverbs, and so forth.
Boys followed their fathers to the farm and learn how to cultivate and harvest farm produce, while girls assisted their mothers in cooking, fetching water, cleaning and taking care of the family.
For example, people blamed a mother for not teaching her daughter properly, if she did not know how to cook.
Therefore, children learn how to behave by observing what the adults are doing.
Also, when they erred, they were corrected immediately by any adult observing the unacceptable behaviour.
• Memorisation: Much learning took place through memorisation.
Children learnt the language, traditional oral history, religious practices including incantations and other important aspects of the culture by memorising and practicing what they heard their adults saying.
• Sanctions: There were also laid down unwritten rules and sanctions that guided the behaviour of the people.
For instance, a girl was expected to maintain her virginity until marriage, before them she was to avoid intimate relationships with males.
Failure to obey this rule attracted sanctions such as banishment from the land or rejection of her hands in marriage by the suitor or returning of her bride price by her parents.
Also for the boys, they were to act responsibly and respect females.
Any boy caught 87 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION attempting to rape a girl was forced to marry her and pay her parents for damages done to the girl.
This way, the society was able to inculcate traditional values for respect in the community.
3.5 Contemporary Types of Education Available to the Family Scholars of education in contemporary discourse have identified six themes which represent a composite picture of the types of education available for the family.
These themes are also suitable for the needs of newly emerging and developing nations such as education for good citizenship, education for health improvement, education for vocational competence, education for professional and managerial competence, education for industrial and commercial development, and education for adults.
The six themes are discussed below.
• Education for Citizenship: This should help individuals to come to terms with their environment and with other people living within the same environment.
This type of education also helps family members to gain an appreciation and an understanding of their own environment.
It deals with the organisation and processes of government and the rights and responsibilities of citizens.
It helps family members gain an appreciation and understanding of their own culture and its history, legends, art, music and dances and social structure.
This type of education does not need to be narrowed, negative or excessively nationalistic; it can be positive and broad.
Nigerian children first learn Nigerian songs and dances while Ghanaian children first learn Ghanaian songs and dances.
Citizenship education moves from family to the neighbourhood, to the school, to the community, to the nation and to the world.
But the roots remains deeply planted in one’s own culture.
• Health Education: This important aspect of education is being stressed or emphasised in many developing nations today.
Preventive health measures are included in the curriculum in many ways.
For example, in some countries home economics and homemaking courses for girls include detailed lessons on nutrition, food preservation, disposal of wastes and disease prevention and cure; and social studies classes include lessons on the social aspects of disease, as well as community action programmes for public health.
Priority/emphasis on health education may be necessary for a family that hopes to ensure proper physical and health development of its members and reduce unplanned or unexpected expenses on health care.
88 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Vocational Education: Education by introducing new trades is helping families to diversify their types of occupation to achieve more rewarding and more reliable patterns of livelihood.
In the years immediately after World War II, leaders in some new countries sought to raise quickly economic standards through rapid industrialisation, but they generally came to realise the fallacy of that priority.
They found that more could be accomplished by increasing the productivity of agriculture than by increasing the productivity of industry, because a relatively low capital output for agricultural yields a fairly high increase in crops.
This improvement can be achieved through land and credit reforms, cooperatives improved seeds, improved techniques and methods such as better breeding of live stock, and adapted fertilizers, while industrial development requires skilled workers and trained management and large expenditure for construction, equipment and machinery.
The transition from subsistence agriculture to agriculture for exchange and the further evolution towards an industrial society may be accomplished in a few generations, if the importance of vocational education is appreciated by all families within a nation.
• Professions and Managerial Education: In some countries the curricula for training students for the civil service and for professional and managerial competence are developed along with curricula that emphasise health education and rural education in the same school building.
In other countries such education is developed in a separate school.
The question of government involvement in terms of finance, policy and supervision of this type of education is largely a matter of economics.
A nation cannot afford to train large numbers of skilled people unless the economy can provide jobs for them.
• Industrial and Commercial Education: Every developing country must have highly skilled people, but it also must have laboratory technicians and hospital assistants, carpenters and brick layers, accountants and clerks, and welders and machine operators, foremen, inspectors, production supervisors, draftsmen, electricians, mechanics and so forth.
Education for industrial, technical and commercial competence usually takes place in special programmes.
For example, students at the Yaba College of Technology in Lagos study for three years initially (Ordinary National Diploma) such courses as building wood work, joinery, metal work and auto mechanics.
In some countries like Nigeria, students can go directly from primary schools to 89 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION trade schools and then enter technical schools.
In nearly all countries the trend has been towards emphasis on industrial technical and commercial training.
• Adult and Non-formal Education: This is a concomitant in the sense that it is usually developed with the other themes but generally in a separate stream.
It is separate, yet it is inextricably related to the effectiveness of the school programme.
Since parents exercise strong influence over their children in most countries, some advantages of school will be lost unless parents get the opportunity to be enlightened along with the children.
Scholars in education have found that a well planned, integrated programmes of adult education is necessary for progress in over- all development, especially in relation to rural and fundamental family education.
3.6 Non-Formal Education The National Policy on Education of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004) defines adult and non-formal education as “all forms of functional education given to youths and adults outside the formal school system” (NERDC, 2004:25).
According to Olagunju (2008), contrary to the opinion held by lot of people, non-formal education is different from informal education.
This is because, non-formal education is targeted at people who had gone beyond the age of the formal system of education, or those who are deprived of the formal system, as well as those who are deprived of the opportunity due to socio-economic constraints.
Since the non-formal education is not structured, it can be held anywhere and at any time (morning, afternoon or evening).
It does not have a specific venue.
It can be held in the church, mosque, palace of a traditional ruler, community centre, village square or a market.
On the other hand, informal education is the type of education you acquire when you do not actually know you are acquiring it.
For example, the unconscious education a child receives from the mother, father, sister, uncle, etc especially when he/she is corrected for saying or doing something wrong.
It is informal system of education because, knowledge is acquired unconsciously in an unorganised settings.
In the Nigerian educational system, non-formal education encompasses mass literacy which is much more than people being taught how to read and write A, B, C. It entails the ability to acquire and make use of information.
Reading and writing is just the basic form of it.
Corroborating this view, Adesanya (2005) confirms that non-formal education “covers a broad spectrum of learning and emerges as the need of the environment dictates.
For example, the ongoing campaign to 90 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION educate the masses especially women on the advantages of polio vaccination for children (Adesanya (2005) cited in Oderinde & Ekpo, 2005).
According to Harbison (1973) cited in Oderinde & Ekpo (2005), non- formal education can be described using three categories.
• Activities oriented primarily to the development of the skill and knowledge of members of the labour force who are already employed.
• Activities designed primarily to prepare persons, mainly youths for entry into employment.
• Activities designed to develop skill, knowledge and understanding that transcend the world of work.
Some of the characteristics of non-formal education include the following, that it: • is a programme which emerges as an innovation to solve pressing problem in a given society.
• is a goal and purpose -oriented not certificate- oriented.
• emphasis on tackling specific problems rather than learning abstract subject matters.
• is flexible (learners learn without interfering with their normal daily activities).
• is learner-oriented and participatory.
• is more practical rather than theoretical.
• is more economical (because it uses existing structures).
• is a continuing life long process.
• enables the rural or urban people to acquire useful knowledge, attitudes and skills.
It also allows a wide range of learning activities associated with work.
• Iearners are not full time students.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Discuss four characteristics of African traditional education.
2.
Examine four methods of teaching in traditional education.
3.
List six themes of contemporary types of education available to the family.
4.
Mention three non-formal education categories described by Harbison (1973).
91 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION The understanding of traditional education is an essential foundation for proper appreciation of modern education and its benefits.
5.0 SUMMARY Traditional education in Africa was defined.
The aims of traditional education in Nigeria were also highlighted.
Characteristics of African traditional education were discussed alongside the various methods of teaching it.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is traditional education?
2.
Discuss five aims of traditional education in Nigeria.
3.
Describe four characteristics of African traditional education.
4.
Discuss three methods of teaching in traditional education in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fafunwa.
A.
(1967).
New Perspectives in African Education.
London and Lagos: Macmillan.
Moumouni, A.
(1968).
Education in Africa.
London: Deutsch.
Raum, O.
(1940).
Chaga Childhood.
London: Oxford University Press.
92 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 2 TEACHING CHILDREN FAMILY VALUES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 5.0 Main Content 3.1 The Basic Values a Child Should Learn 3.2 How a Child Learns to Distinguish between Right and Wrong 3.3 Ten Basic Behavioural Rules a Child Should Know 3.4 Basic Table Manners 3.5 Nurturing Feelings of Self-Worth in Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Parents play a vital part in the educational process and growing experiences of their children.
Schools activities will improve when parents become more involved in their children's education.
According to Anne Henderson, in a study she conducted, “When schools work together with families to support learning, children tend to succeed not just in school, but throughout life.” According to her, the most accurate predictor of a student's achievement in school is not income or social status, but the extent to which that student's family is able to create a home environment that encourages learning; family that expresses high (but not unrealistic) expectations for their children's achievement and future careers and become involved in their children's education at school and in the community.
This unit will focus on education available in the home and the role parents can play in a child’s education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • mention basic values a child should learn • discuss ways a child learns to distinguish between right and wrong • explain basic behaviour rules a child should know • discuss basic table manners a child should exhibit • examine ways of nurturing feelings of self worth in children.
93 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Basic Values a Child Should Learn • Always be honest as much as possible.
• Keep your promises.
• Be punctual for all appointments.
• Always dress properly.
• Do not gossip.
• Promptly return anything borrowed from anyone or institution (for instance books borrowed from the library or from a friend).
• Do not embarrass anyone.
• Always acknowledge people’s effort.
3.2 How a Child Learns to Distinguish between Right and Wrong Children learn from their parent’s behaviour.
Therefore, if a parent persistently does something that is wrong, in the presence of a child, it becomes the right thing to do for the child.
Likewise, if a child does something wrong and the parents do not correct or reprimand him/her, the child will continue in that behaviour thinking it is right or acceptable.
Below are a few examples of scenarios where the family teaches a child to learn between what is wrong and right.
• When a parent regularly returns from office with a bag full of office supplies and begins to use them at home, the child will conclude that it is okay to steal things from the office.
• When a parent throws waste items out on the streets, the child believes that it is okay to throw items anywhere on the floor and on the streets.
• When a parent tells a child to lie to the landlord or neighbour that he/she is not at home in order to avoid being confronted over payment of an outstanding rent or loan, the child learns that it is a right thing to lie to people to avoid taking responsibilities for their actions such as paying house rents or loans.
• When a parent drives past a traffic light without obeying the rules, the child concludes that it is right to disobey traffic regulations.
• When a child watches a parent lie to a police officer about his/her car particulars, the child learns that it is right to disrespect the law and that telling lies to a policeman is okay.
There are several other instances where a child learns to choose the right or wrong things from their parents.
Children always do what they see 94 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION their parents do, not what they say.
Therefore, when children see their parents accept situations that are morally wrong, it inspires them to grow up to immoral adults.
On the other hand, when parents show good example, their children grow up to be law abiding citizens, honest, and responsible adults.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention five basic values a child should learn.
2.
Discuss five ways a child learns to distinguish between right and wrong.
3.3 Ten Basic Behaviour Rules a Child Should Know Socialisation is one of the primary functions performed by a family.
Parents teach their children to interact with others in good manners.
Some examples of basic behaviour rules that children should know include the following.
1.
Learn simple courtesies such as saying “please”, “thank you”, “excuse me” or “I’m sorry” when the need arises.
2.
He or she should have good table manners.
(For instance not talking while eating).
3.
He/she must talk to an adult with respect and decorum.
4.
He/she should speak politely and respectfully to people, whether older or younger and refrain from yelling at people.
5.
He or she should answer when spoken to and not just maintain a rude silence.
6.
He/she should listen to others and not interrupt rudely when someone is speaking.
7.
A child should do any assigned household chores without wearing a long face.
8.
He/she should not jump queue, especially in public places.
9.
He/she should be punctual at meetings or any appointments.
10.
He/she should obey rules whether they are generated in the family, school, religious body or by government.
3.4 Basic Table Manners It is important for parents to spend time with their children at the table to teach them good table manners.
It may be difficult to do this in the morning when everyone is rushing off to work, but dinner period presents a good opportunity to learn basic behaviours to be followed while on the dining table.
Some basic table manners parents are to teach their children are: 95 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION a.
“Please” and “thank you” are basic table manners: Rather than reach across the table to take something, asks the person nearest to the item to please pass it to you and say thank you when you receive it.
b.
When serving yourself, take modest portion of food: You should request to have more only when the food has gone round and is enough for everyone on the table.
c. Cut your meat one piece at a time: Cut one piece of meat and then eat it, before cutting another piece.
d. Eat quietly: Chew only small bites of food, and swallow them with the mouth closed.
Do not make noise with your mouth while eating.
e. Wipe your fingers and mouth often with a napkin: Children should be taught not to lick fingers or rub it on their clothes.
f. Never use a toothpick at table: Children should be taught to excuse themselves to go to the rest room to use the toothpick.
g. Hold and use your fork and knife correctly: Children should be properly educated on how to use cutlery.
That is, holding the fork with the left hand and the knife with the right hand.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List four basic behaviour rules a child should know.
2.
Discuss four table manners a child should display while at the dining table.
3.5 Nurturing Feelings of Self-Worth in Children It is important for a child to develop high self-esteem.
This helps the child to feel good about him/her self and be able to resist peer pressure to do wrong thing things.
Below are suggestions for fostering self-worth in children.
• Listen and be attentive to the child: When parents listen attentively to their children, they make the child feel that he/she matters to them.
Showing interest in a child’s activities, spending time with them at home, dropping them at school, attending events where the children show their talents, such as school plays, musical performances, or sporting events and so on are effective ways of making them feel that they are special.
• Treat children with respect: Children should be acknowledged, even if parents are busy.
Parents should avoid criticising them and talk positively about their children to other people in situations where they can hear parents praising them.
96 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Be affectionate with children: Parents should show children affection both physically and verbally.
Most young children love to be held, hugged and kissed.
Older children also appreciate hugs and pats on the back.
Spending time with children also communicates affection.
• Communicate appreciation to children: Parents should praise their children when they do the right things.
It is important for them to know that they are loved just because of who they are.
• Discipline children in positive ways: Parents should never discipline their children when angry.
Rather, they should take time to think of positive ways to teach and correct him/her.
A child responds much more positively to kind and gentle teaching than to harsh discipline.
• Allow children to be independent and responsible: Children should be taught principles and then allowed to explore and learn.
Parents should set tasks for them and allow them to carry them out and support and direct them.
Let change and improvement come about through your patience and example.
However, while it is important for children to be independent and responsible, parents should perform tasks for and with them occasionally, even if they are capable of doing it on their own.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt important manners parents should teach their children to order make them become responsible adults, and have a better nation at large.
Good manners, together with ethics, values and morals are the basis of character.
Children need to learn about these important aspects of life for them to become responsible parents, leaders and nation builders in the future.
The hallmark of good manners is rooted in discipline and having a sense of right and wrong and doing the right thing.
9.0 SUMMARY Parents should be the primary teachers of children in moral values and attitudes.
They should teach them by precepts and example and through religious values.
This will enable them make wise choices, even in the face of temptation and peer influences.
97 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 10.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify and describe ten basic behaviour rules that a child should know.
2.
Discuss five basic table manners.
3.
State and discuss five ways of nurturing feelings of self-worth in children.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Duncan, S. & Northrup, M. “Disciplining with Love”.
School of Family Life, Brigham Young University.
Goddard, H. W. & Jensen, L. (2000).
“Understanding and Applying Proclamation Principles of Parenting”.
In: D. C. Dollahite (Ed.
), Strengthening our Families: An in-depth look at the Proclamation on the Family.
(pp.
124-134).
Salt Lake City, UT: Bookcraft.
Hart, C. & Newell, L. (2000).
“Proclamation-Based Principles of Parenting and Supportive Scholarship”.
In: D. C. Dollahite (Ed.
), Strengthening our Families: An in-depth look at the Proclamation on the Family (pp.
100-123).
Salt Lake City, UT: Bookcraft.
98 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 3 EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES IN THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Community Resources 3.2 School Resources and Materials 3.3 Use of Resource Person 3.4 Using Computer at Home 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Traditional education especially in Nigeria was discussed in the previous unit.
In this unit, you will learn about educational resources for the family.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify environmental/community materials • describe school resources and materials • discuss the process of using resource person.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Community Resources This type of educational resources is important because it is effective in learning and also provides competent instruction given by dutiful teachers to their pupils.
The immediate surroundings of a school contains vital store of resources for all school learning levels.
It provides rich opportunities for learners to examine, question, survey, discuss, document and to carry out all sorts of fieldwork, and to undertake a variety of social action, or community service works.
Places around the community where academic research work can take place include banks, companies, markets, industries, construction sites and so forth.
Inspection made on these sites can be discussed, analysed and interpreted in the classroom.
Professionals can be invited to speak to 99 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION stimulate educational processes.
This can also be done especially at the tertiary level.
Visual learning is one of the best ways to remember what is being taught for a longer period of time.
As such, learning from the environment should be greatly encouraged to enhance the ability of students’ interpretation of things they see from the environment, analyse them and thus, use the information to solve a particular problem.
In a fully utilised environment, teachers can devise ways of teaching their students such that they there would be no dull moment in the teaching process.
3.2 School Resources and Materials The use of text books to study will not be adequate for mastery of subjects.
As such, there is need for an enormous range of materials and resources for effective and efficient teaching-learning processes.
With changes in the social environment, topics in school subjects will need to be regularly re-directed and or introduction of modern resources; new topics will demand completely new design and improvised learning materials.
Therefore, the introduction of individual coursework, small groups work or the whole class activity would require the provision of a broad variety of materials and resources to impel the learning process.
More resources and materials are needed in today’s educational system to aid learning hence, there should be provision of adequate materials for pupils of extensive choice of ages, abilities, and interests, produced in such a way that will meet the needs of both students and educators.
Teaching topics in various subjects depends largely on the ingenuity of teachers in the classrooms.
As such, the teacher needs to be creative to generate his or her own materials in line with the objective of the topic being treated.
The main aim of using teaching materials and resources is to develop appropriate knowledge in students.
Teaching aids has been defined as “things or objects brought into play to emphasise, clarify, strengthen or vitalise the teacher’s instruction” (Mills, 1982; Agun, et al.
1988).
Educational technologists have developed these teaching aids to make learning processes easy as they are designed to practically appeal to pupils.
These aids are materials, devices, and resources used in learning environment to supplement the written or spoken words, in the transmission of knowledge, attitudes, ideas or concepts and values.
The basic professional materials and resources that may be needed to carry out effective teaching may be grouped into six categories.
100 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 1.
The print materials.
2.
The non- print materials.
3.
The visual materials.
4.
The audio recorded materials.
5.
The audiovisual materials.
6.
The relia materials.
• The Print Materials These are everyday aids used in the classroom for education and instruction to pupils.
They offer infinite quantity of information on the surroundings and the activities that are essential for study.
Basically, these materials can be found in school libraries and other educational libraries.
Examples of these printed materials include textbooks, magazines, pamphlets, biographies, brochures, catalogues and other library materials.
Teachers should try to get aids applicable to subject topic being taught for easy understanding of the pupils.
• The Non-Print Materials These are usually called MEDIA.
They are now important in teaching social studies.
They include models, painted pictures, posters, slides, filmstrips, movie film-tapes, video tape, photographs, etc.
Their impact in the classroom has been observed to be very great especially in the primary and lower secondary school level.
Schools should organise to have these materials for use whenever necessary.
• The Visual Materials These are aids that can be seen, but with no sound in the classroom.
Instructional resources can be produced by teachers for detailed instructional purposes.
These materials can be made from old newspaper, cardboard, papers, flash cards, maps, graphs, diagrams, and sketches.
They may also include costumes, puppets, models, and construction of all kinds that a teacher may need, such as chalkboards, magnet boards, flannel boards, display boards, globes, and sometimes graphics.
The visuals should, however, have topic sentence.
• Audio Recorded Materials These educational aids can both be seen and heard, but what makes the sound cannot be seen or heard by the learners.
Examples include voices from radio, records or phono-discs and audio tapes, audio cassette instruction, phonographs, telephone-lectures, and radiovision.
Effective use of these materials can be through the use of other auxiliary gadgets such as radio, record players, tape recorder, payers.
Due to the costly 101 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION nature of these equipments, care must be taken to ensure their safety especially during usage in the classroom.
• Audiovisual Materials These materials are often refer to as still films- projected or unprojected; motion pictures- silent and sound; television, video tapes.
Places and gadgets through which these materials can be viewed and heard could be through sound and picture projector, episcope, slide projector, educational television and radio.
Audiovisual materials enhance memory retention of factual ideas, concepts and information as students experience direct contact with what is being taught.
The use of these audiovisual materials helps to develop the efficiency of communication and learning of concepts, interaction, skills and executive ability of the students.
Experiments carried out in recent times in classrooms have established two principles.
Pupils learn more rapidly or faster when audiovisual materials are employed, while fewer explanations and repetitions were needed from the teacher.
Secondly, pupils who use audiovisual for learning remember longer more of the facts that were being thought.
• Relia Materials These are tangible things or objects of educational worth in the community.
The term ‘relia’ means real articles, items, real material that students can see, touch, feel, examine, and study, in order to concretise their concepts and imaginations about how to live in their various environments and the developments of man in these societies.
Real objects can be found in museum, exhibitions, and historical activities.
These real objects can make learning fun because what is being taught is real and makes more meaning to the students.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List four examples of places around the community where learning process can take place.
2.
Discuss four types of school resources that enhance education and learning.
3.3 Use of Resource Person A resource person in a school setting is a person who comes into the classroom as a guest speaker to present information or shares his experience on a specific topic with the students on a particular topic.
A consultant or a professional in a special field can share specialised 102 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION information to develop certain skills and perceptive required for discovering solutions to community or any environment problems that the group of students deems suitable.
Usually, resource people will be more effective if they are requested to focus specifically on a particular issue.
Their contribution ought to assist students on various aspects of the issue, to think answer in light of information, plan further investigation or social action, or coach the students in some new skills.
Students therefore need to get ready in advance to meet with the resource person to enhance the utmost benefit.
It is known that any content or information presented by resource persons to pupils is better received than it would have been if presented by the class teacher.
Resource person that can be invited by the school include the following.
• Government officials-(Local Government officers or the Chairman local councilors, town planners, health, welfare, public works, fire, police, immigration, customs and other officials).
• Media representatives- (radio and television officials, newspaper reporters, Nigerian Union of Journalist officials.).
• Business representatives –(local executives, supermarkets owners, insurance agents, real estate agents, bankers, builders, chamber of commerce officials, others).
• Members of religious organisations –).
• Members of educational organisations-(museum officials, librarian, historical societies, college and university lecturers, federal and State Teacher, and Foundations local official).
• Judicial Officials- (Judges, lawyers, probation officers, and others).
• Health representatives – (hospital officials, doctors, nurses, drug and health protection agencies, experts and others).
• Others- ( Women Council Officials, farmers, veterans, senior citizens, club officials and locally recognised authorities and foreign bodies- UNESCO,UNICEF, UNDP and others).
Most classroom presentations by these invited resource people are expected to be a brief lecture, followed by questions and answers from both the guest and the students.
The presentation can be brightened up by inviting two or more guest speakers with conflicting views to discuss a controversial issue, topic or a specific social problem or small groups of students can visit resource persons outside the school.
There should have clear and well formed objectives to guide the interview.
Information gathered should be analysed and after assignments completed, they can be invited to come before the class to present their views.
103 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Enumerate five types of resources persons that can be invited for educational presentations in schools.
2.
How can resource persons be effective used in schools?
3.4 Using Computer at Home • Using a computer at home will likely have a positive impact on your children’s education.
• The suggestions below should help you and your children on how to use the computer at home.
• Study and know the operations of the computer yourself.
• Set an example by using the computer for your own personal needs such as typing letters, keeping records, doing the household budget, etc.
• Use the computer with your children.
• Use quality software for the computer.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about various educational resources that are available in the community that can provide educational support to children.
In the next unit, you will learn about financial resources and management in the family.
104 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY Learning can become more interesting and effective when teachers creatively made use of resources that are available within the community.
In addition to classroom activities, teachers should encourage children to learn outdoors from the resources in the environment.
When children actively learn by seeing, hearing and doing, they perform exceptionally well compared with previous learning activities restricted to the classroom only.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify and discuss environmental/community materials.
2.
What are school resources and materials?
3.
Discuss the process of using resource person 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinlaye, F. (2002).
Social Studies Methods for Teachers.
Lagos: Pumark Nigeria Ltd. 105 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION UNIT 4 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND MANAGEMENT IN THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Causes of Family Financial Problems 3.2 Factors that Influence Financial Behaviour 3.3 Financial Security in the Family 3.4 Financial Patterns of a Family 3.5 Ways of Changing Financial Behaviour 3.6 Strategies for Cutting down Family Expenses 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Money management is important to the success and happiness of any relationship, including the family.
Parents, especially have a moral duty to provide for their children’s needs.
A financially stable family is likely to be more peaceful and serene.
Money can enhance or destroy a family and can lead to mistrust, name-calling, selfishness, dishonesty, and even divorce.
In this unit, you will learn the important skills required to manage financial resources in the family and ways of managing resources in the home.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list and discuss causes of family financial problems • explain factors that influence the financial behaviour of an individual • enumerate qualities of a marriage that affect financial security • state ways of understanding financial patterns of a family • describe three ways of changing financial behaviour • identify five ways of cutting down family expenses.
106 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Causes of Family Financial Problems There are many factors responsible for financial problems in a family.
Some of these factors include lack of financial understanding, personal behaviour problems, and relationship problems.
3.2 Factors that Influence Financial Behaviour There are certain factors that influence financial behaviour.
Some examples of these factors include emotions, personality, and an individual’s attitude toward money.
Emotions: Money can be strongly linked to our emotions.
Some people spend money to cover-up some emotional issues.
For instance, some people go out for shopping to overcome sadness or loneliness.
While some other people spent money on others in order to control them.
Others have incurred debt to buy gifts and relieve feelings of guilt because they are neglected by someone.
For instance, a man who has been coming home very late from work for a long time and forgot his wife’s birthday may decide to borrow money from a friend to buy a very expensive gift for his wife to cover up his guilty conscience.
Personality: Our personalities also affect our financial behaviour.
A person who is carefree may not value the need for financial planning, budgeting, and saving.
On the other hand, another person who values order, control and authority may oppose extravagant spending except only on necessities.
Such an individual will not be happy to share financial control with a spouse with a different personality.
Individual’s attitude towards money: Financial behaviour can be influenced by an individual’s approach toward money which is, to some extent, determined by a person’s childhood experience.
Sometimes, money can symbolise feelings like control, fear, guilt or abandonment.
For instance, a man may refuse to discuss financial matters with his wife because his parents argued about money regularly when he was young and this affected him greatly.
Another example is a wife who grew up in a wealthy family and, consequently, does not understand the need for budgeting and saving.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention three factors responsible for financial problems.
2.
How does individuals’ personality and emotions affect financial decision making.
107 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.3 Financial Security in the Family In addition to an individual and his or her spouse’s personal financial behaviour, the type of relationship existing between couples also has a remarkable impact on financial resources and management in a family.
If the relationship between a husband and wife is affected by some other issues, such family is likely to have financial problems.
Some examples of the other issues that can lead to financial distress in the family are enumerated below.
• Poor communication • Control and manipulation of others • Ill-defined roles • Selfishness • Disrespect • Mistrust Therefore, to foster better resource management in a family, some experts have identified the following tips that can affect financial security: communication, emotional intimacy and mutual respect and consideration.
Each of these is discussed below.
• Communication It is important for family, especially the husband and wife, to effectively communicate about family goals and finances.
This is critical to financial resource management in the family.
It is essential for couples to know and understand his/her spouse's attitude towards money and his or her financial goals.
Talking about this will help them identify ways of planning for the financial needs of the family.
It is equally important for a spouse to discuss his/her plans before making a large purchase.
Whatever the need may be - school fees, family home keeping expenses, needs of extended family members and so forth, should be discussed openly between a couple.
• Emotional Intimacy The role of emotional influence on an individual’s attitude to money has been discussed above.
Since this is an important aspect of family resource management, couples need to understand their spouse's feelings towards money; why money matters make them anxious, and how a spouse can be motivated to save money for unanticipated and future family needs.
108 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION • Mutual Respect and Consideration If a spouse respects and considers his partner, he/she will not use money to control him/her, spend money lavishly on shopping sprees and exceed the family budget.
If this happens, the partner is likely to get angry and this can cause stife and disagreements in the family.
It is essential for a spouse to recognise a partner’s wish or desire to save money for a family project, such as buying a land to build a permanent family home, rather than spending it on an expensive car to keep up with social status.
The spouse's feelings should be considered before making financial decisions.
• Trust and Love Within a family, a couple should trust each other well enough to know that the other partner has his or her interests at heart and be able to openly communicate with each other about their financial income rather than Keeping money away from each other.
3.4 Financial Patterns of a Family There are different things that members of the family can do to mange financial resources within the family.
Some of these can be done through seeking understanding in the following areas.
• Set financial goals together: Couples should realise the fact that individual has different values, standards and goals that influence his or her view of money and its uses.
• Understand the family financial rules that existed in your spouse's family of origin and how they affect his or her financial perspective.
Develop understanding and respect for your spouse’s attitude about money.
Consider your spouse’s feelings when you spend money or discuss finances.
• Communicate openly and lovingly with your spouse about your wish for a family financial pattern.
Review your current family financial rules and decide which ones you want to keep and the ones you want to change.
Talk to your spouse before making large purchases or investments.
• Plan a family activity to teach all family members about the family finances.
For example, showing them your paycheck and show your children how the money is allocated to various expenses and savings programmes.
Make weekly or monthly appointments to discuss money matters with your spouse and family.
109 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 3.5 Ways of Changing Financial Behaviour a.
Draw up a budget.
b.
Make a list defining each spouse's financial roles and responsibilities.
Share some of the financial responsibilities like budgeting, shopping, investing and paying bills.
c. Make purchases that are within your income level.
d. Separate your basic needs from your wants.
Consider the needs and wants of family members before making impulsive purchases.
e. Keep expenses constantly even when your income increases.
f. Give family members some allowances to spend how they choose without being accountable to anyone.
Give each spouse an allowance to spend how he or she chooses.
Allocate a portion of the family income to each spouse to spend without being accountable to anyone.
g. Communicate with your spouse about each other’s expectations and desires.
Seek to understand your spouse’s feelings.
3.6 Strategies for Cutting down Family Expenses Below are some tips for reducing expenses within the family: • Avoid impulse purchasing: Make a shopping list and stick to it.
• Set up a limit to the amount of money either spouse can spend before consulting his or her partner: This limit will vary according to the life-stage of the couple; whether they are established couple or newly married.
• Consult your spouse before purchasing expensive items: For example, buying a set of furniture, an expensive electronic device, a car or land for family.
• Avoid debt and interest payments: Keep away from buying items on credit, especially for things you do not really need.
• Establish an emergency savings fund: It is ideal to have at least three months' income savings, if both couples are earning an income.
However, if the family has only one breadwinner, consider having savings of six months’ income.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Discuss four ways of understanding financial patterns of a family.
2.
Describe three ways of changing financial behaviour.
3.
List five strategies for reducing family expenses.
110 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION One of the key lessons learnt in this unit is that, once a family is set-up, the husband and wife should be prepared to make sacrifices and be willingly to change their behaviours and attitudes in order to manage their financial resources effectively.
This includes learning to differentiate between needs and wants, communicating openly and honestly about family finances, using a budget or financial plan, and understanding the connection between money and family relationships.
It is important to learn the act of effectively managing resources in the family to avoid debts and other forms of financial crisis.
5.0 SUMMARY From the discussions in this unit, it is clear that families need to consider several factors including open communication, emotions, attitude to money, personality, mutual trust and respect, among others in order to successfully manage their family finances effectively.
We have also discussed ways of understanding financial patterns of a family and described some ways of changing financial behaviour and also identified ways of cutting down family expenses.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State and discuss three factors responsible for financial problems in families.
2.
Identify and discuss five qualities of a marriage that affect financial security.
3.
What major lesson have you learnt in this unit?
4.
Discuss four ways of understanding family financial pattern.
5.
Identify and describe six ways of changing financial behaviour.
6.
State five ways of cutting down family expenses.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Hogan, J.
& Bauer, J.
(1988).
“Problems in Family Financial Management.” In: C. S. Chilman, F. M. Cox, and E. W. Nunnally (Eds.
), Employment and Economic Problems.
(137-53).
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Poduska, B. E. (1993).
For the Love and Money: How to Share the same Checkbook and Still Love each Other.
Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book.
111 PED320 FAMILY EDUCATION Williams, F. (1985).
Family and Personal Resource Management as Affecting Quality of Life.
Thinking Globally - Acting Locally.
Washington, DC: American Home Economics Association.
“How to Manage Your Finances and Strengthen Your Marriage at the Same Time” Written by Susan Sheldon, Graduate Research Assistant, and edited by Bernard E. Poduska, Associate Professor, and Stephen F. Duncan, Professor, School of Family Life, Brigham Young University retrieved from Source: http://www.foreverfamilies.net/xml/articles/manage_fam_finance s.aspx 112
