 Course Code PED150 Course Title Primary Science Curriculum and Methods Course Team Dr. A. M. Olagunju (Developer/Writer) - UI Dr. Femi A. Adeoye (Editor) - NOUN Dr. Mercy F. Ogunsola-Bandele (Prog.
Leader) - NOUN Dr. Femi A. Adeoye (Coordinator ) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2006 Reprinted 2010 ISBN: 978-058-087-5 All Rights Reserved Printed by: Goldsworth CONTENTS PAGE 3  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Module 1 Meaning, History of Science and Science Teaching in Nigeria ………………………………… 1 Unit 1 Understanding Science and History of Science……….
1 Unit 2 Primary Science Education ………………………...… 6 Module 2 Curriculum and Primary Science Teaching Methods ………………………………………......... 10 Unit 1 Basic Principles of Curriculum Development and Primary Science ………………………………..…... 10 Unit 2 The Elements of Curriculum …………….……….... 14 Unit 3 Methods of Teaching Primary Science…….............. 21 Unit 4 Resources for Primary Science Teaching ……..…... 27 Module 3 Basic Foundations of Primary Science……..…….. 31 Unit 1 Introduction to Biology …………………………….. 31 Unit 2 Introduction to Chemistry………………………...... 37 Unit 3 Introduction to Physics…………………………....... 48 Unit 4 Cell Structure and Physiology………………….......... 54 Unit 5 Machines, Pulleys and Friction………………..….. .. 63 Module 4 Current Infusion into Primary Science Curriculum ……………………………………....... 69 Unit 1 Environmental Education (EE)…………………….. 69 Unit 2 Drug Abuse and Drug Misuse……………………… 74 Unit 3 HIV/AIDS…………………………………………….
78 4  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 1 MEANING, HISTORY OF SCIENCE AND SCIENCE TEACHING IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Understanding Science and History of Science Unit 2 Primary Science Education UNIT 1 UNDERSTANDING SCIENCE AND HISTORY OF SCIENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Science 3.2 Brief history of Science 3.3 Science Programs in Developed Countries 3.4 History of Science Teaching in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Science is the systematic study of the physical world.
Scientists observe and try to impose meaning to what is observed.
They infer a set of pattern in what they observe.
Such observations require the use of their sense organs.
The observations are made into logical sequence involving formulation of hypotheses and probably the development of theories after the hypotheses have been tested through experimentation.
Even after the development of theories, scientists have suspended judgments because science is dynamic, involves doing and being curious.
This unit examines the meaning of science, its history in terms of development and teaching.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define science  discuss the history of science  identify science programs in developed countries 5  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS  discuss the history of science teaching in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions of Science These are some working definitions of science.
(a) Science is a human activity, where people are actively searching, seeking and verifying new knowledge.
(b) Science involves content and process.
Content refers to library of knowledge and the linguistic aspect of science.
Process is the way of doing something e.g.
experimentation and observation.
(c) Science is an all embracing process.
It is what scientists do.
Scientists describe, try to answer questions about nature in the universe and explain events in nature and make predictions, thereby extending knowledge to new situations.
(d) Science is a product oriented process.
This involves two aspects (i) Applied product of technological benefits i.e.
material products, and (ii) Laws of nature, theories, facts, principles, linguistic, materials etc.
(e) Science involves the development of attitudes e.g.
how scientists behave towards the world and respond to situations.
Scientific attitudes include curiosity, open-mindedness, suspended judgment, search for cause and effect, accuracy etc.
3.2 Brief History of Science The history of science could be traced to the period between 4000-3000 BC when ancient scientists were pre-occupied with useful art such as melting, heating and building.
Greek philosophers adopted speculations which heralded scientific theories.
For example, Thales (640BC-546BC) proposed theories on the universe and its materials.
In his logical theory, he affirmed that water is the fundamental substance of all things since it can exist in all the three states of matter- Solid, Liquid and Gas.
He pointed out that the earth was in form of a disc floating on water and with water above serving as the source of rain.
His student, Anaximander (611BC – 541BC) proposed an opposing theory on solid substance as fundamental, stating that something that can constitute the material world should not be made up of any specific substance but must be characterless.
6  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Anaximander Menses (585BC – 525BC) based his cosmology on four elements – Earth, Air, Fire and Water.
He affirmed that any two or more of these can form the materials in the universe.
The popular pupil of Socrates – Plato (428BC – 347BC) later introduced logic to explain nature.
He explained that the universe has geometrical existence.
He asserted that fire, water, air and earth form the solid base of the universe but they all derived from water.
Not long after, Democritus (470BC-380BC) conceived the atomic concept and he is often referred to as the Father of Atom.
To Aristotle (384BC – 322 BC), all things below the sphere of man are composed of water, air, fire and earth just like Empedocle.
He also viewed the heaven as composing the fifth element quintessence to form the universe.
It must however be noted that the theories were based on speculations, not on sound data and observation and predictions were absent from the processes.
By 1750, academic discipline of Science became institutionalized.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the meaning of the term “Science”.
Discuss the contribution of three named Greek philosophers to the development of Science.
3.3 Science Programmes in Developed Countries In the 60’s, movements started in USA and Britain to reform science.
A major development in the field of science was the launching of the first satellite into space by the U.S.S.R in 1957 at a time the USA was unable to do same.
A number of reforms were then put in place in the USA which included the setting up of curriculum development projects at the Primary, Junior and Senior Secondary School Levels.
These projects include: (a) Elementary Science Study (ESS) in 1960 (b) Science Curriculum Improvement Study (SCIS) in 1962 (c) Science – A Process Approach (SAPA) in 1962 (d) The Physical Science Study Committee (PSSC) in 1956.
(e) Biological Science Curriculum Study (BSCS) in 1959.
(f) Chemical Bond Approach or Chemical Education Material Study (CHEM Study) in 1960.
7  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS In Britain, Nuffield Science Project (NSP) was established in 1962 under the auspices of Nuffield foundation.
In 1965, Africa also came into limelight with the inauguration of the African Primary Science Programme (APSP) which later became Science Education Programme for Africa (SEPA).
3.4 History of Science Teaching in Nigerian Schools The first known primary school in Nigeria is the Methodists’ Missionary in Badagry which was established in 1843.
Only rudiments of science were introduced by missionary doctors attached to the theological and medical centres.
Between 1861–1897, rudiments of science were also taught in the Secondary and Teacher Training College levels.
The Education ordinance of 1908 which stipulated grants to schools encouraged the acquisition of scientific educational equipment.
In 1909, Kings School, Lagos was established as the first secondary school and it had a chemistry laboratory with a European teaching staff to teach science.
In 1927, the Government established the Queens School in Lagos for girls, one Government College each in Ibadan and Umuahia with provisions for the teaching of science.
In 1934 a major development at the tertiary level was the establishment of Yaba Higher College, a Science tertiary institution to provide intermediate manpower development in Medicine, Engineering, Survey and Teaching of basic sciences at the Secondary School Level.
Other major initiatives include: (i) The establishment of the University College, Ibadan in 1948 to admit students including science students.
(ii) Formation of the Science Teachers Association of Nigeria in 1957.
Inspite of current efforts in the field of science teaching, a number of factors still militate against effective science teaching.
Some of these factors are: (i) Inadequate number of quality science textbooks in Nigeria (ii) High cost of setting up science laboratory (iii) Inadequate number of trained teachers 8  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (iv) Poor motivation for science teachers (v) Poor funding of schools in general.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Enumerate the major curriculum development projects instituted between 1957 – 1965.
2.
Trace the historical development of science in Nigeria between 1843 – 1957.
4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of science can not be overemphasized and efforts towards its development in Nigeria would bring about monumental growth and development.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: (i) The history of Science could be traced to the period between 4000 BC – 3000 BC when the then Greek Philosophers adopted Speculations in the formulation of their theories instead of sound data.
(ii) A number of science programmes were put in place in USA and Britain in the 60’s and subsequently in Africa in 1965.
(iii) Elements or rudiments of science teaching started in Nigeria in 1843 with the establishment of the first missionary school in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1(a) Explain the meaning of science as a human activity, an all embracing process and as the development of a peculiar attitude.
(b) Briefly explain the history of science teaching in Nigeria.
2 Discuss the problems militating against the development of science in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullahi, A.
(1982).
Science Teaching in Nigeria.
Atoto Press Ltd. Ilorin.
Matthews (1994).
Science Teaching – The Role of History and Philosophy of Science.
London.
Routledge.
Ogunniyi M. B.
(1986).
Science Teaching in Africa.
Ibadan: Salem Media (Nig) Ltd. 9  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 2 PRIMARY SCIENCE EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Rationale for the Teaching of Primary Science 3.2 Objectives of Teaching Primary Science 3.3 Suggested Steps for Effective Primary Science Learning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Science is taught in the primary school for the sake of the child and the society.
This helps to release the child’s potential and ensures a better understanding of the world around him.
Primary science has to a large extent, contributed to the physical, emotional and social development of children and consequently to the achievement of the goals of the National Policy on Education.
It is meant for children between 5 – 12 years old which is the period of primary education for normal children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  highlight the rationale for teaching primary science  enumerate the objectives of teaching primary education  state a brief history of teaching primary science in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Could you explain the necessity for formulating a philosophy for science education in Nigeria?
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Rationale for the Teaching of Primary Science The basic philosophy of science education in Nigeria include (i) To enable the learner to utilize science for self-realization.
10  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (ii) Equip the learners with intellectual knowledge, skills and scientific attitudes which will enable them to contribute significantly to the development of the country.
(iii) To prepare the more able youths for higher education in science.
The Federal Government stated the specific rationale for teaching primary science as: (i) to prepare pupils for useful living in the society (ii) provide an increasing number of primary school pupils with the opportunities for education of a higher quality irrespective of sex, social, religious or ethnic background.
(iii) to diversify the curriculum to cater for differences in talent, opportunities and roles possessed by or open to students.
(iv) to equip pupils to live effectively in our modern age of science and technology (v) to raise a generation of people who can think of themselves, respect the views and teachings of others, respect the dignity of labour and appreciate those values specified.
3.2 Objectives of Teaching Primary Science In the revised edition of the National Core Curriculum for Primary School Science, the objectives of elementary science are stated below: (i) to observe and to explore the environment (ii) to develop basic science process kills including observing, manipulating, classifying, inferring, hypothesizing, interpreting data and formulating models.
(iii) to develop a functional knowledge of science concepts and principles (iv) to explain simple natural phenomena (v) to develop a scientific attitude including curiosity, critical reflection and objectivity (vi) apply the skills and knowledge gained in science to solve everyday problems in his environment (vii) develop self-confidence and self reliance through problem- solving activities (viii) to develop a functional awareness and sensitivity to the orderliness and beauty of nature.
It is suggested that the stated objectives should include the following: (a) The understanding that the achievement of the national objectives depends on the use of science and technology 11  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (b) An understanding of the methods of investigation used by scientist (c) An appreciation of the excitement and satisfaction involved in a career in science (d) An understanding of the contributions of science to the achievement of optimum physical health.
(e) Preparation for effective participation in local and national decision making on issues that involve the understanding of scientific information and principles.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain to what extent the objectives of teaching primary science are being achieved.
Give specific examples.
3.3 Suggested Steps for Effective Primary Science Learning Broadly, the objectives of science teaching is a set of goals or behaviour expected of a learner after exposure to learning instructions in science therefore the teacher must ensure the following steps are taken by the student.
He must be: (i) actively involved in the learning process (ii) develop motivation and ability to work independently (iii) recall information (iv) derive schemes for solving problems (v) use and classify information (vi) interprete information showing subjection and assessment (vii) communicate effectively and selectively (viii) relate experiences from one subject area to another.
4.0 CONCLUSION Being the foundation for effective science learning, primary science education, if well handled and supported, would be a catalyst for the achievement of national goals and objectives in science and technology.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt: (i) The rationale for teaching of science by emphasizing the basic philosophy of science education in Nigeria.
(ii) The specific rationale of primary science in Nigeria 12  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (iii) The objectives of teaching primary science through the analysis of the revised edition of the National Core Curriculum for Primary School Science.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 (a) Enumerate the rationale for teaching of Primary Science in Nigeria 2 (a) What are the main objectives of teaching primary science?
(b) Which other objectives will you suggest for effective teaching and learning of Primary science?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullahi, A.
(1982).
Science Teaching in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Atoto Press Limited.
Udo E. Uyoata (1997).
Innovation in Primary Science.
40th Proceedings of Science Teachers Association of Nigeria pp.
280 – 287.
13  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 2 CURRICULUM AND PRIMARY SCIENCE TEACHING METHODS Unit 1 Basic Principles of Curriculum Development and Primary Science Unit 2 The Elements of Curriculum Unit 3 Methods of Teaching Primary Science Unit 4 Resources for Primary Science Teaching UNIT 1 BASIC PRINCIPLES OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND PRIMARY SCIENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Curriculum 3.2 Elements of Curriculum 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Curriculum is a term which means different things to different people.
On many occasions, people interchange curriculum for course of study, syllabus, subject matter or even lesson note.
It is therefore, not surprising that even students at various levels who have had courses in different areas of curriculum design development and implementation still exhibit partial or complete ignorance of basic concepts in issues relating to curriculum development.
Some of these concepts are explained below.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 14  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS  define the term curriculum  differentiate between curriculum and other terms like syllabus, subject matter and lesson note  highlight the elements of curriculum.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is your own understanding of the term “curriculum?” 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Curriculum Curriculum is said to have been derived from the Latin word “currere’ meaning “a running course”.
It then means literarily that curriculum is a running course leading to the attainment of a goal.
In education, it is more than this, but one must quickly point out that curriculum has been variously defined with a lot of disagreement among scholars.
Some of these definitions are: (i) A curriculum is all the learning of students which is planned and directed by the school to attain educational goals - Tyler (1949).
(ii) A curriculum is all planned learning experiences provided by the school to assist the pupils in attaining the designated learning outcomes to the best of their ability- Neagley and Evans (1967).
(iii) It is all the learning which is planned or guided by the school, whether it is carried on in groups or individually inside or outside the school- John P. Kerr (1968).
(iv) A good curriculum is the total environment in which education takes place; that is the child, teacher, subject, content, the method, the physical and psychological environment A.
B. Fafunwa (1997).
(v) A curriculum is a programme of learning planned for a target group of learners for a specific period of time in order to achieve certain predetermined educational goals.
Ayo Dada (1999).
3.2 What Curriculum is Not A lot of misconceptions exist in respect of the term “curriculum”.
Some people use curriculum interchangeably with subject content syllabus, schemes of work, lesson note or even course of study as stated earlier.
15  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.3 Curriculum and Subject Content One often hears Biology Curriculum, Agricultural Science Curriculum, Mathematics Curriculum etc.
From the definitions above, it would be understood that the concept curriculum is broad and extends beyond subjects or subject contents.
3.4 Curriculum and the Syllabus A syllabus is just the condensed outline of the main points of a course or subject to be covered within a specified period (usually year by year).
It contains topics, provisions for practical activities, learning methods and resources required including textbooks.
3.5 Curriculum and Schemes of Work The scheme is the adaptation of the syllabus to the needs of a particular class in a school.
It is the breakdown of the syllabus into clear and logical instructional units according to the number of lesson periods allotted to a particular topic or subject in the school timetable.
It is usually shows what the teacher wants to do for each class, each week, each term and the three terms in a year.
It helps to ensure continuity of the learning process.
It is a guide and should allow for flexibility.
3.6 Curriculum and Lesson Notes Lesson notes interprets the actual learning activities from the scheme of work.
It explains what is to be done within a lesson period of twenty- five to forty minutes and in some cases double period of eighty minutes.
Each lesson unit must have its own lesson note.
It is a record of what is taught and learnt during each lesson period.
It shows the steps to be taken to ensure learning takes place.
It is a product of lesson preparation which itself is a process in which the teacher considers what to teach, whom to tech and how to teach it.
3.7 Curriculum and Course of Study This refers to the content area to which a learner is exposed in a particular subject or educational programme.
It could be an Agricultural Science course, a Yoruba course, an NCE course, an OND course, a Bachelor of Science course etc.
In summary, the above terms are just different aspects of the curriculum.
3.8 Elements of Curriculum 16  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Curriculum design is influenced by many factors but there are common denominators.
There is what is referred to as elements of curriculum.
These are: aims and objectives, content, learning experiences and evaluation.
These four elements would answer those questions posed by Ralph Tyler (1949) in his own attempt at offering a definition for curriculum.
He posited that the curriculum attempts to answer four fundamental questions about the child’s learning.
(i) What educational purposes should the child seek to attain?
(ii) What educational experiences can be provided that are likely to attain these purposes?
(iii) How can these educational experiences be effectively organized?
(iv) How can we determine whether these purposes are being attained?
(v) How can we determine whether these purposes are being attainted?
4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing, importance of the curriculum can not be over- emphasized as it takes place amongst learners.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: (i) Curriculum literarily means a running course leading to the attainment of educational goal (ii) Curriculum is neither subject content nor syllabus nor schemes of work not lesson notes (iii) Subject content, syllabus, schemes of work and lesson notes are all aspects of the curriculum 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Examine the definition of curriculum by three scholars.
2.
Explain how curriculum is not synonymous with syllabus and scheme of work.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dada, A.
(1999).
The Teacher and the Curriculum Development.
Ibadan: Olu-Akin Publishers.
17  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Tyler, R. W (1949).
Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
18  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 2 THE ELEMENTS OF CURRICULUM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to Aims and Objectives of Curriculum 3.2 Sources of Aims and Objectives 3.3 Classes of Aims and Objectives 3.4 Contents 3.5 Criteria for Selection of Content 3.6 Learning Experiences 3.7 Criteria for Selection of Learning Experiences 3.8 Evaluation 3.9 Evaluation of Instruments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As it was noted in the previous unit, the common denominators of curriculum design referred to as elements of curriculum.
These are aims and objectives, content, learning experiences and evaluation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning of aims and objectives of the curriculum  discuss the term content in curriculum design  explain what learning experiences mean in curriculum design  enumerate and explain the different forms of evaluation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 19  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.1 Introduction to Aims and Objectives Aims refer to broad statements of purpose and intention.
In education it helps to guide educational activities to its long term ends.
However, before the aims can be achieved there would be the need to break them down to short-term ends.
These short term ends are referred to as objectives.
A lot of confusion exists in literature about the terms aims, objectives and goals.
It should be noted that aims and goals are more or less synonyms referring to long term ends.
Objectives as stated earlier are short term ends.
Generally however, aims are stated in terms of what the educational system intends to achieve with respect to the learner while objectives indicate what the learner would achieve.
The National Policy on Education (2004) states the aims of our educational system as: (i) the inculcation of national consciousness and national unity (ii) the inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian Society.
(iii) The training of the mind in the understanding of the world around, and (iv) The acquisition of appropriate skills abilities and competencies both mental and physical as equipment for the individual to live and contribute to the development of his society.
In respect of primary school level, the aims are specifically stated as follows: (i) The inculcation of permanent literacy and numeracy and the ability to communicate effectively (ii) The laying of a sound basis for scientific and reflective thinking (iii) Citizenship education as a basis for effective participation in and contribution to the life of the society.
(iv) Character and moral training and the development of sound attitudes.
(v) Developing in the child the ability to adapt to his changing environment.
(vi) Giving the child the opportunities for developing manipulative skills that will enable him to function effectively in the society within the limits of his capacity.
(vii) Providing basic tools for further educational advancement including preparation for trades and crafts of the locality.
20  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.2 Sources of Aims and Objectives The main sources of aims and objectives are: (i) The learner – Aims and objectives should be formulated based on the needs of the learner.
To ensure the development of his physical, mental and emotional potentials.
(ii) The society - Aims and objectives can also be derived through the study of the nature of the society.
In the national policy, the need for the learner to develop a sense of togetherness as a nation inspite of our ethnic and religious differences informed the inclusion of the development of national consciousness and national unity.
(iii) The subject matter-objectives are also derived from available learning experiences within subject area.
Infact, most teachers concentrate their objectives on “learning” the subject matter.
It is however important that teachers should incorporate and utilize all the three sources to arrive at their objectives.
3.3 Classes of Objectives Objectives can be classified according to the kinds of learning that they lead to.
Bloom (1956) and his associates referred to these classes as Taxonomies of objectives.
They are placed into three domains – cognitive, affective and psychomotor.
(i) Cognitive domain – It is the domain of intellectual development involving reasoning, understanding, memory etc Six levels of cognition have been identified and include knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis and evaluation starting from the simple to the complex.
(ii) Affective domain: It is the domain of interest, attitude, feelings, appreciation etc.
It could be in five levels: receiving, responding, valuing, organization of values and characterizing values when arranged from the lowest to the highest.
(iii) Psychomotor domain – this is the domain that emphasizes motor skill manipulation.
This domain is reflected in five levels of human activity, namely: physical movement, showing conceptual ability of the human senses, showing abilities related to physical actions such as strength, endurance, dexterity etc, making skilled movements in games, sports and art and lastly communicating non-verbally.
21  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate between aims and objectives.
3.4 Content The content or subject matter is usually organized in disciplines.
Each discipline has its own structure built up over the years by experts in that area.
It consists of what is known and believed in various disciplines.
The choice of content is a dynamic one because of knowledge explosion and the fact that it is rapidly changing as the society itself changes.
It is therefore imperative that certain criteria must be established for the inclusion of some areas of learning and exclusion of others.
3.5 Criteria for Selection of Content (i) Significant of the content: Only important aspects of content that would contribute significantly to the body of knowledge and thinking process are selected.
Trivial issues are left out.
(ii) Balance between scope and depth: Attempt is often made to ensure a balance between coverage of wide area and indepth study of specific areas.
(iii) Appropriateness of the content to the needs and interests of the learner (iv) Ability of content to withstand the test of time (durability) (v) Incorporation of related topics from other fields to emphasize the interdependence of contents.
(vi) Relevance of topics to the needs of the society (vii) The contents should be such that the learner can learn i.e.
they should not be too difficult for the learner.
3.6 Learning Experiences These refer to the various activities learners engage in which brings about the desired learning or change.
The changes could be mental, physical or behavioural.
3.7 Criteria for Selection of Learning Experiences (i) Nature of subject matter – The nature of Agricultural Science is different from that of History.
Ditto other subjects.
The 22  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS activities that are relevant to the subject matters would also be different.
(ii) Nature of learning – While some learning activities require only memorization, others may require understanding and analysis.
(iii) Nature of learners - It is easier for some learners to understand simple information but others require stress and emphasis.
(iv) Nature of interest and capabilities of teacher – Learning experiences to be selected should be those that an average teacher in that area would be able to handle, otherwise he would attempt to avoid it.
(v) Nature of the objectives.
The intended objectives could also be selection of learning experiences.
For instance, some objectives may include ability to solve some practical problems and this will require solving the problems together in the class.
(vi) Available learning resources.
The instructional materials available to the teacher and learner will directly influence the selection of learning activities.
3.8 Evaluation Evaluation is the process of determining the extent to which educational programme objectives and expected learning outcome have been achieved.
It also includes the worth of data generated from the exercise as a decision making tool.
Evaluation is carried out before, during and after the teaching – learning process.
Assessment and measurement are just aspects of evaluation.
3.9 Forms of Evaluation There are two main forms: (i) Formative (ii) Summative Formative Evaluation This is the periodic assessment activities that take place during the course of the programme.
It could be during and at the end of a lesson or unit.
It is not a once and for all affair.
It helps in monitoring progress and making necessary adjustments.
Summative Evaluation This is a comprehensive evaluation that takes place at the completion of an instructional programme.
It is used to assess the worth of the products of the programme.
23  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How do you classify the following types of evaluation – short test during classes, JAMB examination, terminal examination, assignment and verbal questions during the class?
Evaluation Instruments There are a number of devices for evaluating performance or achievement.
The include: (i) Interview (ii) Observation (iii) Questionnaires (iv) Paper and Pencil Tests The most important thing however is that the instrument must measure what it is supposed to measure, it must be reliable and should discriminate among tastes by showing that weak candidates perform worse those strong candidates.
4.0 CONCLUSION Finally, each element of the curriculum is interlinked with other elements.
The realization of this will ensure an effective teaching learning process.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: (i) Aims are broad statements of purpose and intention.
They are long term ends.
(ii) Objectives are short term ends (iii) Objectives are classified into the following taxonomies of objectives – cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains (iv) Content is usually organized in disciplines (v) Learning experiences are various activities learners engage in which brings out desired learning (vi) Evaluation is the process of determining the extent to which educational programme objectives and expected learning outcome have been achieved 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 24  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Briefly discuss the four elements of curriculum.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dada A.
(1999).
The Teacher and the Curriculum.
Orukotan A. F. (1996).
Basic Issues in Curriculum Development.
Ibadan; Olu-Akin Publishers.
Tyler, R. W. (1949).
Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
25  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 3 METHODS OF TEACHING PRIMARY SCIENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Methods of Teaching 3.2 Problem-Solving Method 3.3 Advantages of Problem-solving 3.4 Disadvantages of Problem solving 3.5 Project Method 3.6 Advantages of Project Method 3.7 Disadvantages of Project Method 3.8 Discussion Method 3.9 Advantages of Discussion Method 3.10 Disadvantages of Discussion Method 3.11 Field Trip Method 3.12 Advantages of Field Trip 3.13 Disadvantages of Field Trip 3.14 Lecture Method 3.15 Advantages of Lecture Method 3.16 Disadvantages of Lecture Method 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The method of teaching science, resources available for teaching it and its evaluation are known to greatly affect achievement in science.
It is therefore, important to examine these concepts in relation to primary science.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the major methods of teaching primary science  discuss the human and material resources available for teaching primary science  explain improvisation in primary science  identify innovations in teaching of primary science  define and enumerate the importance of evaluation in primary science.
26  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Methods of Teaching Primary Science It is the duty of a teacher to transmit the subject matter to the learner.
In doing this, at least one teaching method is required.
A number of these methods however exists.
A teaching method can be defined as a systematic and orderly procedure in teaching and learning.
The method or technique is a way of impacting knowledge while strategies are the required skills to impact such knowledge.
There is really no good or bad method per se but the handling makes the difference.
Sometimes a combination of methods would be required for effective learning to take place.
Some of the methods used in teaching primary science are: problem–solving method, field trip method, project method, discussion method, lecture method etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Suggest the best method of teaching.
Give reasons for your choice.
3.2 Problem solving Method This is a method which involves the identification of a problem for students to solve with minimum guidance from the teacher.
It consists of placing before the learners a true-to-life, specific and well defined problem requiring solutions.
Such problems would have grown out of the learners’ experiences and the problem solving skills acquired helps in moulding their existing knowledge and skill.
The learner is able to pay attention to details which may later influence the outcome of the problem and identifies similarities and differences between typical situations.
The learner is guided to identify problem, have a fair knowledge of what he intends to accomplish and how to gather necessary data for the solution to the problem.
The learner passes through the following stages in arriving at a solution.
- Identification of the problem requiring solutions - Definition and delimitation of the problem - Collection of necessary data required to solve the problem - Formulation of hypothesis for solution - Testing of the hypothesis 27  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS - Checking whether the result leads to the solution otherwise the procedure is revised and the process repeated until the problem is solved or he gives up.
It is the duty of the teacher to ensure the learner is guided at every stage of the process.
3.3 Advantages of Problem-Solving Method (i) It encourages creativity among learners (ii) It really engages learner leading to real understanding (iii) It allows the learner to relate class work to true-to-life situation (iv) It allows the learner to learn at his own pace (v) The learner learns from his successes and failures.
3.4 Disadvantages of Problem-Solving Method (i) It could waste a lot of time (ii) Confusion can set in leading to loss of interest by the learner (iii) Learner may not benefit much from the process if too much guidance is given by the teacher 3.5 Project Method This is a planned activity undertaken by a person to achieve a particular goal.
The person or persons involved investigate(s) and solve(s) problem.
It is advisable that the project must be of measurable benefit to the learner.
Meaningful projects often involve three major stages, namely; planning, implementation and evaluation.
The teacher is only involved in providing guidance on the procedure.
Projects could be done individually or in small groups such as weaving of baskets or planting of portions of farm land by agricultural science students in groups.
Projects could be on individual or group basis depending on whether it is carried out by a single pupil or more than one student.
A good project must be meaningful to students, and useful to some other subjects.
It must be beneficial and a source of motivation to the students.
It must instill self-discipline and encourage the development of imaginative and initiative skills.
28  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.6 Advantages of Project Method (1) It is practical and real in nature which improves learning (2) It encourages learners to know how to gather information without depending on the teacher (3) Students are able to appreciate the benefit of working as a team (4) Students integrate other experiences.
3.7 Disadvantages of Project Method (i) It could be time consuming (ii) It allows lazy students to go undetected because of the group work involved.
(iii) Projects may be expensive (iv) There is the tendency to over concentrate on some aspects of the curriculum and neglect the others (v) Students may not know much about the projects others are doing.
They concentrate more on their own project.
3.8 Discussion Method This is a participatory approach in which learners are involved in the process of learning by allowing them to also raise issues of their own and arriving at solutions through participants’ analysis and synthesis.
The teacher is also involved but he must not dominate the discussion.
3.9 Advantage of Discussion Method (i) It can help in achieving attitudinal change among learners.
(ii) It encourages logical and constructive thinking by the students.
(iii) It is a good way of finding solution to problems (iv) It makes students to be actively involved in lessons (v) There is a cordial relationship and interaction among students and between them and their teacher 3.10 Disadvantages of Discussion Method 1.
It can only be used among mature students since the level of knowledge and expression of young pupils may be low.
2.
It is only useful where the participants are knowledgeable otherwise it becomes an expression of ignorance 3.
There is the tendency of a few outspoken and bold ones to dominate the discussion 4.
Unless rightly guided, the discussion may not be focused.
29  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.11 Field-Trip Method This is perhaps the best method when there is the need for direct or real- life experience.
It is used to discover knowledge in a real-life situation.
It involves leading students into natural life setting or for excursion.
It could also involve leading students to natural settings such as forest reserves, lakes, sea, factories, industries and other similar establishments.
It helps to break the monotony of class teaching.
3.12 Advantages of Field-Trips (i) It enhances learning and arouses the interest of students (ii) It exposes students to new learning experiences (iii) It helps to reinforce what has been taught in the classroom through practical experience (iv) It promotes interaction amongst the students 3.13 Disadvantages of Field Trip Method (i) It could be time consuming (ii) It is expensive especially in terms of transportation (iii) It could sometimes be risky 3.14 Lecture Method This is perhaps the oldest method.
It is an organized verbal presentation of a subject matter dominated by the teacher.
It is a system in which the teacher gives out all the facts he wants the learner to know and master without caring whether or not the students participate.
The teacher may sometimes use illustrative materials.
It is however highly discouraged at the primary level.
3.15 Advantages of Lecture Method (i) It helps to teach a large number of students at a time (ii) It helps in covering much ground at a time (iii) It helps the students to write very fast and improve their coordination (iv) It promotes learners oral and written expression.
3.16 Disadvantages of Lecture Method (i) It is teacher dominated (ii) It does not take care of individual differences (iii) It could easily become boring 30  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (iv) It is not ideal for young learners (v) It gives no room for students’ participation and interaction during lessons SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Despite the disadvantages of the lecture method, why is it still being used?
4.0 CONCLUSION It would be noted that even though there are different teaching methods, none is perfect.
A good teacher should therefore, learn to use appropriate method or a combination of methods at the right time.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, five teaching methods have been examined, namely; problem solving, project, discussion, field-trip and lecture methods.
Advantages and disadvantages of each method were highlighted.
None of the method is however suggested as the best.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (a) Explain the importance of teaching methods to potential teachers (b) Lecture method should be discouraged in teaching primary science.
Why?
(c) Write short notes on the following teaching methods.
(i) Problem-solving method (ii) Discussion method (iii) Field trip (iv) Project method 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abimbade A.
(1997).
Principles and Practice of Educational Technology.
Ibadan: International Publishers Limited.
Adelodun R. E. (1993).
A Handbook on Principles and Practice Teaching.
Oyo: Inlet Educational Publishers.
Adewuyi J. O.
(2000).
Introduction to Teaching Methods.
Bello J. Y.
(1981).
Basic Principles of Teaching.
London: Oxford University Press.
31  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 4 RESOURCES FOR PRIMARY SCIENCE TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to Resources for Primary Science Teaching 3.2 Human Resources 3.3 Material Resources 3.4 Innovation in Primary Science 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Meaningful learning can only take place when teaching is properly and professionally handled by the teacher.
For teaching to be effective necessary resources must be available and utilized properly.
These resources include both human and material resources.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  classify resources required for teaching primary science  discuss human resources required for teaching primary science  discuss materials resources necessary for teaching primary science  discuss the need for innovation in teaching primary science.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify the various resources utilized in teaching this course.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to Resources for Primary Science Teaching In teaching primary science, learning is facilitated by individuals and instructional materials.
All these form what is referred to as resources in education.
Such resources can be grouped into two: 32  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (i) Human Resources (ii) Material Resources 3.2 Human Resources Human resources refer to individuals that one way or the other aid learning.
These individuals include the science teacher, laboratory assistants, other science students, technicians and other individuals from outside the school such as invited guest speakers, carpenters, blacksmiths etc.
Qualitative primary science education can only be provided where there is the availability of human resources even when material resources are available.
The effectiveness of these human resources especially teachers is however hampered by a number of factors.
Some of these include insufficient fund, use of unqualified teachers, lack of retraining programmes and absence of attractive welfare packages for primary science teachers.
3.3 Material Resources All equipment, apparatus, good textbooks and any other physical object used as an instructional aid in the teaching – learning process are referred to as Material Resources.
These materials significantly aid learning.
Like human resources inadequate funding seriously affects the availability of these resources.
This is why a good teacher would sometimes have to improvise to ensure some learning at least takes place where these resources are either not available or are available in insufficient quantities.
3.4 Innovations in Primary Science Teaching Innovations can be defined as changes or new ways of doing things.
In this context, it refers to creative ways with which a primary science pupil is transformed from a passive knowledge receiver into an active creator of the process in which he learns.
Innovations can occur or take place in all aspects of teaching – learning of primary science including curriculum structure, methodology, teaching and learning environment, evaluation and usage of instructional materials.
The attention here is on instructional materials.
33  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS In the early days, lessons were taught without recourse to instructional aids or materials but because of the importance and relevance of these materials, primary science teaching today requires science equipment and other materials.
These include textbooks, charts, models, improvised materials etc.
Today video-tape cameras, multi-media projectors, close circuit television, simulation and computers are innovations that are used in teaching primary science.
These have made science teaching and learning more interesting.
However, development and implementation of innovations require skill, time and adequate funding.
It also poses a lot of challenges to teachers who are stagnant and are not moving with the ICT trend of our time.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In what ways has ICT aided meaningful learning?
4.0 CONCLUSION If primary science is to survive and be made more attractive and interesting to pupils, there has to be improved funding.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have learnt that (i) Resources in primary science teaching can be classified into human and material resources (ii) These resources are hampered by poor funding (iii) A lot of innovations and improvisations have come into primary science teaching 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 1(a) List five human resources available for teaching primary science.
(b) List five material resources for teaching primary science.
2 Discuss five factors militating against the availability and effective use of resources in the teaching of primary science 34  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Achor, E.E.
(2002).
Assessing Improvised Equipment in Physics Laboratory and its Implications for Utilization and Management of Teaching and Learning Resources Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Science Teachers Association of Nigeria, 92, 416 – 419.
Egbegbedia, E. A.
(1997).
An Investigation into the Attitude of Primary School Teachers towards Improvisation in Primary Science Teaching in Niger State.
Proceedings of the Science Teachers Association of Nigeria Ajumogobia Memorial Conference.
Vol.
52, 285 – 289.
Udo, E. U.
(1997).
Innovations in Primary Science.
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Science Teachers Association of Nigeria Vol.
51, 280 – 284.
35  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 3 BASIC FOUNDATIONS OF PRIMARY SCIENCE Unit 1 Introduction to Biology Unit 2 Introduction to Chemistry Unit 3 Introduction to Physics Unit 4 Cell Structure and Physiology Unit 5 Machines, Pulleys and Friction UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION TO BIOLOGY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Biology 3.2 Characteristics of Living Things 3.3 Movement 3.4 Reproduction 3.5 Nutrition 3.6 Respiration 3.7 Growth 3.8 Excretion 3.9 Irritability 3.10 Classification of Living Things 3.11 Classification of Plants 3.12 Simple Plants 3.13 Bryophyte 3.14 Pteridophyte 3.15 Seed bearing Plants 3.16 Classification of Animals 3.17 Vertebrates 3.18 Invertebrates 3.19 Differences between Plants and Animal 3.20 Taxonomic Groups/Nomenclature 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Primary Science is at attempt all presenting complex scientific processes and activities to pupil in a simple form that will ensure learning amongst the 36  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS pupils.
This may involve leaving out the details to simplify the understanding of scientific concepts.
Primary science contents are mainly fragments of Biology, Chemistry and Physics.
It is indeed an integration of these three science subjects.
This is combined as Integrated Science in Junior Secondary level.
It would therefore, not be out of place to have basic knowledge of these subjects.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define Biology  enumerate the characteristics of living things  classify living things into plants and animals  mention the differences between plants and animals.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Biology Biology is the study of living things, both plants and animals.
All living things possess common features and can be separated on the basis of their similarities.
Living things can move, feed, sense their environment or respond to stimuli, reproduce, grow, get rid of waste products and respire (breath).
These characteristics can be used to sort out things in the environment into living and non-living things.
3.2 Characteristics of Living Things 3.3 Movement All living things can move.
Animals can move from place to place while plants show side movement or growth movement in response to a stimuli.
Animals move in search of food, shelter etc.
but non-living things cannot move unless they are pushed by external force e.g.
wind.
3.4 Reproduction Living things produce young ones which resemble them and this is necessary for continuity of life.
37  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.5 Nutrition Living things feed on one type of food or the other.
The food provides energy for daily activities, body-building and growth.
Non-living things cannot feed.
3.6 Respiration Living things break down the food eaten in order to release stored energy through respiration.
It involves breathing in and out of oxygen and carbon IV oxide respectively by animals.
Plants breathe in carbon IV oxide and release oxygen.
There are two types of respiration.
Aerobic Respiration which requires oxygen for releasing energy.
Anaerobic respiration which does not require oxygen for energy release.
For respiratory process, human beings use their lungs, fishes use their gills, while plants use openings in their leaves (stomata) or stems (lenticels).
3.7 Growth Living things increase in size and height from time to time.
This biological growth is not reversible.
Non-living things do not grow.
For example, an expansion of football or balloon is not growth.
It can also be depressed (reversible).
3.8 Excretion This is the removal of waste products of metabolism.
Metabolism is all the chemical processes taking place within the cells of the body e.g.
building up and using up energy and wastes accumulation.
Such wastes are not useful to the body and may be poisonous or toxic and need to be removed.
Examples of wastes are sweat, carbon IV oxide, urine etc.
3.9 Irritability Living things are sensitive and respond to changes in their environment e.g.
when the leaves of a plant grow towards light rays (phototropism) the immediate withdrawal of the horn of a snail on touch etc.
Such response to external stimuli is called Irritability.
Non-living things do not respond to stimuli.
38  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate how plants and animals exhibit each of these characteristics of living things.
3.10 Classification of Living Things Living things comprise mainly of plants and animals that can be classified into different groups.
3.11 Classification of Plants Plants can be classified into four main groups.
3.12 Simple Plants They are plants that have neither root, stem nor leaf e.g.
Mushroom, yeast, moulds on bread, fungi, spyrogyra, lichens etc.
They have simple body structure (thallus).
Most of them are not green in colour.
3.13 Bryophyte e.g.
Moss and Liverwort They are mostly found in damp wall of fence or trees, logs and rocks.
They lack true root, stem and leaf.
They are attached to the soil or substrate with their rhizoid.
They have specialized reproductive organ.
3.14 Pteridophyte e.g.
Fern They have roots, stems and leaves (that resemble palm frond).
They are commonly found in ponds or stagnant streams.
3.15 Seed-bearing Plants e.g.
Banana, Grasses, Cacao, Pawpaw, Weeds etc.
They are plants with true roots, stems and leaves.
They have green leaves and are able to photosynthesize.
They also have well developed reproductive organs.
They may be monocotyledons or dicotyledons.
3.16 Classification of Animals Animals can be classified into classes on the basis of common characteristics.
These include; (i) Vertebrates (ii) Invertebrates 39  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.17 Vertebrates These are animals with backbone.
They are classified into the following classes.
(i) Pisces e.g.
skate, shark, bony fish etc.
(ii) Amphibians e.g.
frog, toad etc (iii) Reptiles e.g.
lizards, snakes (iv) Aves (birds) e.g.
hen, owl, turkey, duck etc (v) Mammals e.g.
cat, man, goat, lion etc.
3.18 Invertebrates These are animals without backbone.
They can be classified into: (i) Coelentrates (2 – layered animals) e.g.
hydra (ii) Platyhelminthes (flatworm) e.g.
tapeworm, planaria.
(iii) Segmented worm e.g.
earthworm, ringworm etc (iv) Mollusca – shelled animals e.g.
snail (v) Arthropoda (6 – legged animals) e.g.
insects like housefly, cockroach etc (vi) Many legged animals e.g.
crabs (vii) Eight –legged animals e.g.
spider and scorpion (viii) Multi-legged animals e.g.
millipedes and centipedes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention three differences between vertebrates and invertebrates 3.19 Differences between Plants and Animals S/no Plants Animals 1 They remain in one place but They move from one place to move by growth or tropism another (locomotion) 2 They are producers.
They They are consumers.
They produce their food through obtain already made food or eat photosynthesis other animals 3 Possess chloropyll and They lack chloropyll and chloroplast.
And most higher chloroplast plants are green 4 They respond slowly to changes They respond quickly to in their environment changes in their environment 5 They have branching bodies They have compact bodies 6 Growth continues throughout Growth is limited 40  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.20 Ta their live span xonomic Groups/Nomenclature Plants and animals are classified into broad groups based on their common features.
They classification include kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus and species.
In the binomial system of nomenclature, each organism has both genetic and specific names.
The name starts with a capital letter while the specific name is written in small letters.
The names are usually written in italics or underlined.
E.g.
Homo Sapiens.
4.0 CONCLUSION Biological Science unfolds the reality of living things and ensures better understanding of the features of living things.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt the: - Definition of biology as the study of living things - Characteristics of living things – movement, respiration, nutrition, irritability, growth, excretion, reproduction (MR NIGER).
- Different methods of classifying plants and animals - Major differences between plants and animals.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
(a) What is Biology?
(b) Enumerate and explain four (4) characteristics of living things 2.
List the main differences between plants and animals.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ndu, F.O.C.
; Asun, P. and Ama, J. O.
(1991).
Senior Secondary Biology Book 1 – 3.
Nigeria: Longman.
Olagunju, A. M. Primary Education Science.
Unpublished Handout.
Udo, E. Uyoata (1997).
Innovation in Primary Science.
STAN 40th Anniversary Proceedings.
41  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Sarojini T. Ramalingam (1993).
Modern Biology Science Teachers Association of Nigeria (1983) Biology Addison – Wesley Publishers.
UNIT 2 INTRODUCTION TO CHEMISTRY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Chemistry 3.2 Classification of Matter 3.3 Physical Classification 3.4 Solid 3.5 Liquids 3.6 Gases 3.7 Change of State 3.8 Air and Water 3.9 Air 3.10 Characteristics of Air 3.11 Uses of Air 3.12 Air Pollution 3.13 Sources of Air Pollution 3.14 Effects of Air Pollution 3.15 Water 3.16 Uses of Water 3.17 Common Treatment of Water 3.18 Physical Properties of Water 3.19 Chemical Properties of Water 3.20 Hardness of Water 3.21 Removal of Hardness 3.22 Economic Importance of Hard Water 3.23 Elements, Compounds, and Mixtures 3.24 Stoichiometry, Thermodynamics and Equilibra 3.25 Stoichiometry 3.26 Thermodynamics 3.27 Equilibra 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION 42  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS As earlier stated, Primary Science is a fragment of the 3 major science subjects.
A major input comes from Chemistry which explains a number of reactions that take place in nature.
It exposes pupils to the nature of matter.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define chemistry  classify matter physically and chemically  explain the meaning of change of state  state the characteristics and uses of air  state the characteristics and uses of water  explain the meaning and sources of air pollution  describe the separation of constituents of mixtures.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Chemistry Chemistry is the study of matter around us.
Matter is defined as anything that occupies space and has mass.
3.2 Classification of Matter Matter can be classified in two ways (i) Physical classification (ii) Chemical classification 3.3 Physical Classification Based on their physical properties, matter can be classified into solids, liquids and gases.
This is generally referred to as states of matter.
3.4 Solid This refers to the state of matter in which the particles are closely packed together to make them rigid.
The particles cannot move but can vibrate.
Solid have fixed shape and volume.
3.5 Liquids 43  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS In this state, particles are arranged in a manner which makes them flow.
The particles are not as tightly packed but have fixed volume, this explains why liquids are difficult to compress.
They have slightly high density.
3.6 Gases In this state, particles are loosely packed and can move freely about and flow very fast.
Gas particles can therefore, be compressed.
The looseness allows gases to fill the container in which they are put.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In tabular form, list four differences between solids liquids and gases 3.7 Change of State Exposing matter to heating or cooling can bring about a change of state.
For instance, water is normally in liquid form but it can be converted into solid as ice and into gas as vapour.
The temperature at which liquids become solid is known as the freezing point while the temperature at which a solid becomes liquid is known as the melting point.
Solid heat Liquid heat Gas Ice heat Water heat steam Steam cool water cool Ice.
3.8 Air and Water 3.9 Air Air is a mixture of gases consisting of Nitrogen, Oxygen, Carbon IV oxide, Water Vapour and noble gases namely Argon, Neon, Xenon, Krypton and Helium.
Air is present everywhere.
The gases are present in slightly different percentages by volume.
Nitrogen (78.09%), Oxygen (20.95%), Carbon IV oxide (0.03%), Argon (0.93%).
Other gases (0.003%), Water Vapour (varies depending on the degree of humidity).
Activities such as burning can increase the quantity of carbon 11 oxide in the air.
3.10 Characteristics of Air 44  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (i) We can feel air e.g.
when wind blows across the branches or when we fan ourselves (ii) Air occupies space (iii) Air has mass (iv) Air expands especially when heated (v) Air supports burning (vi) Air exists in the soil (vii) Air can be compressed SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Lit 2 candles, cover the first with a bell jar and leave the second open.
What do you observe?
3.11 Uses of Air (i) Oxygen is used to remove excess carbon from molten iron & steel industry (ii) Used by divers & mountaineers for breathing (iii) For respiration by mammals/animals (iv) Carbon IV oxide is used by plants for synthesizing food (photosynthesis) (v) Carbon IV oxide is used as refrigerant (vi) Nitrogen serves as a plant food (vii) Neon is used for producing advertising light 3.12 Air Pollution Air pollution is the discharge of pollutant materials into the air to contaminate or render it impure.
3.13 Sources of Air Pollution Industrial and internal combustion engines of machines, cars and vehicles.
Pollutants from these sources include: (i) Soot – from unburnt fuel, industrial ashes and furnaces (ii) Coal (with substantial content of sulphur) (iii) Smoke (from burning of wood which produces carbon IV oxide and sulphur IV oxide) (iv) Hydrocarbons (from incomplete combustion of petrol and engine oil) e.g.
benzopyrene which causes cancer (v) Sulphur IV oxide (from fuel burning) (vi) Carbon II oxide – (from fuel burning in automobiles) (vii) Nitrogen oxide gas (burning of Nitrogen compounds) (viii) Petroleum and nuclear fall out (toxic waste) 45  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.14 Effects of Air Pollution (i) It causes injury to plants and animals, especially respiratory problem e.g.
sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide combines with blood to reduce blood efficiency (ii) It poisons the atmosphere which can cause health hazards e.g.
cancer (iii) Air pollutants (e.g lead) accumulates in the body and impair body health e.g.
lead and chlorine poison (iv) Radioactive damage tissues and causes gene mutation e.g.
strontium 90, uranium etc.
(v) Radiation from nuclear fall outs causes blood cancer or leukaemia (vi) It upsets ecological balance of biotic life (vii) Air pollutants (e.g.
Carbon IV oxide) causes melting of ice, leading to flood (in temperate regions).
3.15 Water Water is an indispensable substance to life.
It can be obtained from different sources such as well, pond, river, tap, rain, spring, lakes, ocean or seas.
3.16 Uses of Water (i) For domestic purposes such as bathing, washing, drinking, food preservation etc.
(ii) Used in industry as coolant and chemical raw materials for manufacturing variety of items (iii) To drive turbine to generate electricity (iv) It serves as habitat for some plants and animals e.g.
fish, water, lettuce.
3.17 Common Treatment of Water Impure water can be purified by (i) Adding-Alum to muddy water (ii) Filtration, to remove dust and other dissolved particles (iii) Passing away through the filter beds (using primary and secondary filters and disorders) (iv) Boiling water to kill deadly micro-organisms (v) Carrying our distillation to remove dissolved impurities and to kill microbes (vi) Adding calculated quantity of chlorine 46  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.18 Physical Properties of Water (i) Pure water is colourless, odourless, tasteless and has insipid taste (ii) The density of pure water is 1g/cm3 at 400C (iii) Water dissolves many solids such as salt, acid, gases etc (iv) Pure water boils at 1000C (v) Water is neutral to litmus test 3.19 Chemical Properties of Water 1.
Water reacts with metals to liberate hydrogen gas (reactive metals) e. g. Ca + 2H 0 Ca (OH) + H 2 2 2 Calcium Cold water Hydrogen Mg + 2H O Mg (OH) + H 2 2 2 Magnesium Steam 2 Water reacts with non- metals e. g. Chlorine to produce hydrochloric acid solution.
3 Water dissolves some oxides to produce alkaline solution e.g.
Na O + H 0 2NaOH 2 2 Sodium oxide Water Alkaline 4 Water also dissolves some oxides to produce acidic solution e. g. SO + H O H SO 2 2 2 3 3.20 Hardness of Water Water which does not form lather readily with soap is hard water.
There are 2 forms of hardness: Temporary and Permanent hardness.
(a) Temporary Hardness: It is caused by the present of Calcium hydrogen carbonate in water and can be removed by boiling (b) Permanent Hardness: It is caused by the presence of Calcium sulphate salt in water and cannot be removed by mere boiling 3.21 Removal of Hardness of Water (i) By boiling – which decomposes the sodium hydrogen carbonate (in temporary hardness) (ii) By adding slaked lime i.e.
calcium carbonate (for temporary hardness) (iii) Addition of washing soda (sodium carbonate) by participating insoluble carbonate (iv) Addition of chemical called permutit (using ion-exchange principle) for treating large water (permanent method) 3.22 Economic Importance of Hard Water 47  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (i) It wastes a lot of soap (in laundry) (ii) It contains soluble calcium which helps to build up bones & strong teeth.
3.23 Elements, Compounds, and Mixture There are now 103 known elements on earth surface.
Many of these elements are not found pure but in mixtures.
To obtain the pure element, it has to be separated from the other substances in the mixture.
However, it is necessary to recognize a difference in properties between the constituents of the mixture.
Technique for separating Mixtures Technique Type of Mixture 1.
Filtration An insoluble substance from soluble solution 2.
Crystallization A crystalline solid from its solution 3.
Separating funnel or Immiscible liquids (lighter and denser decantation liquids) 4.
Distillation A liquid from a solution of two liquids with widely different boiling points 5.
Fractional Distillation Liquids with boiling points close together 6.
Sublimation Solids, one of which sublimes on heating 7.
Chromatography Substances which are absorbed to differing extents on paper or columns which differ in solubilities in particular solvents Examples of Mixtures (i) Mixture of solid and liquid (e.g.
salt and water) (ii) Mixture of liquid and gas e.g.
carbonated drinks (iii) Mixture of solid and solid e.g.
brass (iv) Mixture of a gas and gas e.g.
air Methods of Purifying Substance.
These are: (i) Sublimation (ii) Crystallization (iii) Precipitation Sublimation 48  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Solids when heated can change directly to gaseous state without changing to liquid state.
This process is called sublimation e.g.
Ammonium chloride, Iodine, Sulphur etc.
Crystallization The impure solid is dissolved, in a suitable solvent, leaving the impurities as an insoluble residue.
The solution is filtered, then concentrated and crystallized.
The crystals are now pure solid substance.
This process is called crystallization.
Precipitation If one substance is soluble, and the other insoluble in a solvent, the soluble one remains in solution while the insoluble one comes down as solid or precipitates and they can be removed by decantation or filtration.
(1) Solid and liquid: (a) Decantation (b) Filtration (c) Evaporation (d) Distillation (2) Liquid and Liquid: (a) Distillation (b) Fractional distillation (c) chromatography SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 In tabular form, list 3 differences between Elements, Compounds and Mixtures 3.24 Stoichiometry, Thermodynamics and Equilibra Chemical reactions have a profound effect on our lives, for example, food is converted to energy in human beings, nitrogen and hydrogen are combined to form ammonia used for fertilizers; fuels and plastic are produced from petroleum; the production of starch in plants from carbon IV oxide and water using sunlight energy; production of human insulin from bacteria in laboratories; cancer is also induced in human by substances from our environment, etc.
In Chemistry, an attempt is made to study these chemical changes – why reactions occur, how fast they occur, and their specific pathways.
3.25 Stoichiometry 49  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Stoichiometry deals with the quantities of materials consumed and produced in chemical reactions.
The average atomic mass for each element is obtained by calculating the average of the masses of naturally occurring isotopes.
Mass percent = mass of element in 1 mole of substance x 100 Mass of 1 mole of substance.
In a chemical reaction, atoms are neither created nor destroyed, but are merely reorganised.
Therefore, all atoms present in the reactants must be accounted for among the products.
A chemical equation shows that the chemical reaction, with reactants on the left side of an arrow and products on the right.
A balanced equation therefore gives the relative numbers of reactant and product molecules.
Amounts of reactants consumed and products formed can be calculated from the balanced equation in a reaction by using the mole ratios relating both reactants and products.
3.26 Thermodynamics This is the study of energy and its interconversions.
The law of conservation of energy is often referred to as the “FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS” which states that the energy of the universe is constant.
The internal Energy E of a system is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of all the particles in the system.
The internal energy of a system can be changed by a flow of Work, heat or even both.
E = q +w E = the change in the system’s internal energy.
q = heat w = work Thermodynamics quantities consist of two parts – a number and a sign.
A number gives the magnitude of the change A sign indicates the direction of the flow.
For instance, if a quantity of energy flows into the system via heat (endothermic process), q = +x, that is system’s energy is increasing.
But when energy flows out of the system via heat (an exothermic process), q = -x, that is system’s energy is decreasing.
3.27 Equilibra Chemical reactions are reversible, for example, when Nitrogen dioxide NO decomposes, it breaks down to NO 2 and O.
This is forward reaction.
2 2N0 (g) 2NO(g) + O (g) forward reaction 2 2 50  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS The reverse reaction can also occur, when NO and O accumulate, they 2 can react to re-form NO .
2 O (g) + 2NO(g) 2NO (g) reverse reaction 2 2 Oxygen Nitrogenoxide Nitrogen dioxide.
When forward and reverse reaction rates are equal, there will be no changes in the concentrations of reactants, or products.
This is referred to as Chemical Equilibrium.
In doing stoichiometry calculations, it is assumed that reactions proceed to completion, that is, until one of the reactants runs out.
But there are many chemical reactions that do not proceed to completion.
e.g.
Dimerization of nitrogen dioxide: NO (g) + NO (g) N O (g) 2 2 2 4 Dark brown gas colourless gas When placed in an evacuated sealed glass vessel at 250C, the NO dark 2 brown colour is converted to colourless N O but the brown colour can 2 4 still remain.
Then, we say that the system has reached chemical equilibrium, the state where the concentrations of all reactants and products remain constant with time.
Any chemical reactions carried out in a closed vessel will always reach equilibrium.
The law of mass action was proposed as a general description of the equilibrium condition.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Differentiate between endothermic and exothermic processes 2.
Explain the term “Chemical Equilibrium” 4.0 CONCLUSION Chemistry is essentially the study of anything that occupies space and has mass.
Air and water are of immense benefit to man and other living things.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt: (a) the definition of chemistry as a study of matter (b) the characteristics and uses of water and air (c) the meaning, sources and effects of air pollution (d) that there are now 103 known elements on earth surface most of which are not found pure but as mixtures.
(e) that stoichiometry deals with the quantities of materials consumed and produced in chemical reactions 51  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (f) that thermodynamics is the study of energy and its interconversions.
(g) that most chemical reactions involve both forward reverse actions, but when forward and reverse reactions are equal, there will be no changes in the concentration of reactants or products.
This is referred to as chemical equilibrium.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1(a) With a specific example, explain the process of change of state.
(b(i) Explain the term ‘Air pollution” (ii) List two sources of Air pollution (iii) Enumerate three effects of Air pollution 2(a) Differentiate between temporary and permanent hardness of water (b) Explain three ways by which hardness of water can be removed.
3 Explain the term (i) stoichiometry (ii) thermodynamic 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ababio, O.Y (1985).
New School Chemistry, Senior Secondary School Series.
February, International.
Bajah, Tunde.
Senior Secondary School Chemistry.
Holum, J. R. (1987).
Elements of General Biology and Chemistry.
USA: John Wiley and Sons.
52  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 3 INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Physics 3.2 Measurement 3.3 Importance of Measurements 3.4 Use of Measuring Instruments 3.5 Light 3.6 Sources of Light 3.7 Properties of Light 3.8 Phenomena Resulting from Light Traveling in a Straight Line 3.9 Sound 3.10 Characteristics of Sound 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION 53  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Physics is a science that deals mainly with concrete objects and measurement of materials.
To a large extend it provides the framework for other sciences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning of physics  define and enumerate the importance of measurement  define light  identify sources and properties of light  identify the colours of light  define sound  list the characteristics of sound.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List all the colours of rainbow.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Physics Physics explains why many things around us behave the way they do.
This process usually involves measurements such as distance, area, volume, current, resistance etc.
These measurements provide the exact descriptions of the objects.
The measurements are in different units e.g.
metres, grammes etc.
3.2 Measurement Measurement is one of the process skills of science by which objects or events are quantified by assigning numbers to them.
Measurement explains scientific results.
3.3 Importance of Measurements (i) It helps to provide accurate, reliable and reproducible information (ii) It gives room for easy and meaningful communication among scientists (iii) It standardizes the report made by scientists after the completion of an experiment 54  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Modern scientists adopt common units in measurement called system International Units (CS.
1.
Units) Fundamental S.I.
Units Sub-Units Instruments used for Quantities measurements Length [L] Metre (m) Millimeter Metre rule, tape, ruler, vernier, calipers, Centimetre micrometer screw Kilometre gauge Mass [M] Kilogram (kg) Grammes Tones Chemical balance, compression balance and equal arm balance Time [T] Second (S) Minutes, hour, Watches, clocks day etc Volume [V] Cubic metre Cubic millimeter Measurement (m3) (mm3) cubic cyclinder, beaker, centimeter (cm3) Jerry can Other measuring units apart from the fundamental units are called Derived Units.
Examples include.
(i) Unit of velocity is metre per second (m/s) or (LT-1) (ii) Volume – Cubic metre derived from unit of length (m3) or (L3) (iii) Area – Metre square derived from unit of length (m) or (L) (iv) Acceleration – Metre per second square from the unit of length and time etc.
(m/s2) or (LT-2) (v) Atmosphere pressure – the unit is Newton per square metre.
(N/m2) or (ML-1T-2) Unit for Length Unit for Mass Unit for Volume 10mm = 1cm 10mg = 1cg 1000mm3 = 1cm3 10cm = 1dm 10 cg = 1dg 1000cm3 = 1 litre 10dm = 1m 10 dg = 1g 1000m = 1km 1000g = 1kg *Derived units are derived from the fundamental units through simple mathematical process.
Quantity S.I.
Unit Instrument 55  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Relative density Kilometer per cubic Hydrometer metre (Kg/M3) Atmosphere pressure Newton per metre Barometer square Electronic current Ampere Ammeter Voltage Volts Voltmeter Relative humidity Percentage Hygrometer 3.4 Use of Measuring Instruments Measurement of Distance: The instrument to be used will depend on the distance to be measured.
For instance, measuring the distance from Iwo to Ibadan, a speedometer will be appropriate; for the distance of a school compound, a metre rule or tape rule would be useful.
Smaller distance like length of wire can be measured by using vernier caliper or micrometer screw gauge (it measures small places of decimal).
3.5 Light Light is a form of energy.
It is the energy obtained when an object become brighter.
Sunlight is the natural and main source of light.
Light energy is used by plants during photosynthesis.
Light makes things visible.
Light can make a plant (or tree) to bend towards it, hence it is a form of energy.
3.6 Sources of Light There are two sources of light.
These are natural sources and artificial sources (i) Natural sources: Objects which produce light on their own are natural sources of light e.g the sun, stars, firefly.
They are self- luminous.
(ii) Artificial sources: These are man-made objects which produce light with the support of man e.g.
torch-light, candle light, electric bulb.
Certain substances do not produce their own light but they reflect light from luminous objects e.g plain glass, clear liquid etc while the non-luminous are book, moon, ground etc.
Objects which allow light to pass through are said to be transparent e.g.
plain glass, clear liquids.
Certain objects which allow light to pass through them but do not allow object to be seen are said to be translucent e,g oiled paper.
Other objects that do not allow light to pass through them are called Opaque object e.g.
wood, rock, moon etc.
56  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.7 Properties of Light (1) Light can travel from one place to the other.
The direction along which light travels is called Ray of Light A collection of rays of shinning stream of light is called Beam of Light.
They are of 3 types.
(i) Parallel Beam - Distant objects like the sun gives parallel beam (ii) Diverging beam of light - Beam formed by rays that spread out.
e. g. a torchlight or a lamp that emits diverging beam.
iii) Converging beam – Beam formed by rays that narrows in as source of light in a projecting lantern.
(2) Light travels in a straight line.
A pin-hole camera works on the principle that light travels in a straight line.
(3) Shadows are formed when light travels in straight lines.
When light rays fall on an opaque object, the rays gazing the edges from shadow.
There are two types of shadow – Umbra (full shadow) and penumbra (partial shadow).
3.8 Phenomena Resulting from Light Traveling in a Straight Line (i) The inversion of images in camera (ii) The eclipse of the sun and moon (iii) When light falls on shinning surfaces e.g.
mirror, they are reflected – bouncing back of light rays on shinning surfaces (iv) When light passes from one medium to the other, the rays of light are refracted i.e.
light rays change direction.
57  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.9 Sound Sound is a form of energy which causes an object to vibrate.
When thunder cracks, buildings shake, when musical instruments are beaten, when building vibrates, sound is produced.
3.10 Characteristics of Sound (i) Sound is due to vibrations e.g.
vibrating musical drum produces sound (ii) Sound travels through a medium e.g.
air, liquid, or solid (iii) Sound waves when reflected, it bounces back on hitting an obstacle e.g.
cliff or high mountain to form an ECHO (iv) Sound travels in the form of waves (v) Sound waves can be compressed and refracted, leading to sound waves on entering different medium (vi) When sound waves interfere, the wave path crosses, leading to NOISE.
Echo can be used: (a) to measure the speed of sound as shown by Isaac Newton (b) in underwater exploration for gas and oil (c) to mop the depths of the sea beds SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain what the following are used to measure – metres, grammes, ampere, volts and %.
4.0 CONCLUSION Physics is a science subject that requires greater understanding of mathematics.
In most instances physical sciences facilitates the achievement of the objectives of other sciences.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about; (a) the meaning and importance of measurement in physics 58  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (b) how measurements are taken in metres, grammes, ampere, volts and percentages.
(c) light as a source of energy and its natural and artificial sources.
(d) sound as a form of energy which causes an object to vibrate.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 (a) Define the term ‘Measurement’ (b) Enumerate five importance of measurements (c) Explain briefly the phenomena resulting from light traveling in a straight line 2.
Explain four characteristics of sound 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ezeburo, G. N. (1998).
Comprehensive Physics for Senior Secondary School.
Lagos: Johnson Publishers.
Nelkon Physics for Secondary Schools (1980).
STAN Physics for Senior Secondary Schools (1983).
Addison Wesley Publishers.
UNIT 4 CELL STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOLOGY 59  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Cell Structure and Physiology 3.2 Similarities and Differences between Plants and Animal Cells 3.3 Differences between Plant and Animal Cells 3.4 Reproduction and Heredity 3.5 Reproduction 3.6 Reproduction in Plants 3.7 Reproduction in Animals 3.8 Heredity 3.9 Dorminant Genes 3.10 Recessive Genes 3.11 Application of Genetics to Agriculture 3.12 Evolution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A cell is the basic unit of life.
When cells combine together, they form tissues which also combine to form organs.
The combination of organs form systems and systems combine together to form a whole individual organism.
How organisms perform their normal body functions is studied under physiology.
An understanding of these units and processes would serve as a necessary foundation in the study of biological science.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 60  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS  define the term cell  draw and label plant and animal cells  identify similarities and differences between plants and animal cells  differentiate between reproduction in plants and animals  discuss heredity and practical application of genetics to agriculture  explain Darwin’s theory of natural selection.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List the nine systems present in a human being 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Cell Structure and Physiology The cell is the basic unit of all living matter.
It is the unit of life and it is able to carry out life’s functions.
It grows, reproduces and dies.
Some living organisms are one-celled or unicellular e.g.
amoeba and paramecium while others are multicellular, made up of millions of cells.
The shapes of cell vary, ranging from rods to spiral, spheres, squares, irregular shapes etc.
Plant cell is hexagonal/square while animal cell is spherical.
61  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Source: Federal Government Book Programme Practical Biology for Senior Secondary Schools – page 2 A Typical Plant Cell Source: Senior Secondary Biology Book 2 by FOC Ndu et al page 3 A typical cell consists of the following parts: (i) Cell Membrane – It is the outer cover or boundary of the cell.
It controls the in and out flow of substance into the cell (ii) Nucleus – It controls the living processes occurring in the cell.
It is the centre for heredity (iii) Cytoplasm – This is every other part of the cell apart from the nucleus (iv) Mitochondria – It is responsible for respiratory activity and release of energy.
It is termed the power house of the cell.
(v) Golgi bodies – It is the part responsible for secretions in the cell for secretion (vi) Vacuole – It contain cell sap meant for osmosis in plants 62  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (vii) Endoplasmic reticulum – It is responsible for the conduction of materials from one place to another within the cell (viii) Ribosome – It is responsible for the building of body protein (ix) Centriole – These forms poles during cell divisions (x) Chloroplast are green organelles or plastids which contain chlorophyll and gives rise to the green colour of leaves and stems and are essential for the manufacture of carbohydrates in plants.
The cytoplasm and the nucleus contain two types of acids: Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and Ribonucleic acid (RNA).
These substances contain sugars, phosphates and certain forms of nitrogenous basis.
The nucleus consists of threadlike structure known as Chromosomes and a small, dense, spherical structure known as nucleus.
The chromosomes contain genes which are units of inheritance or carriers of hereditary traits from parents to offspring.
The nucleus contains nucleoproteins.
Lysosomes – are sites of enzymes responsible for the breakdown of large molecules Microsomes – for manufacture of proteins Cell-wall – outer covering of plant cells, mace up of different substances such as lignin, pectin, tannin and cellulose.
The cell wall is thick, rigid and permeable.
3.2 Similarities between Plant and Animal Cells (i) Plant and animal cells are unit of life (ii) They contain cytoplasm and nucleus (iii) They are bounded by cell membrane 3.3 Differences between Plants and Animal Cells Plant Cell Animal Cell 1.
The outer boundary is bounded by 1.
The outer boundary is rigid cellulose cell wall bounded by thin flexible membrane.
2.
Their cell wall contains cellulose 2.
The contain no cellulose chloroplast which gives rise to chlorophyll especially in green plants 3.
Has centrally located vacuoles 3.
They do not contain 63  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS which are few and large chloroplast, hence no chlorophyll 4.
The vacuole is at the main centre of 4.
Hardly contain vacuole, if the cell, displacing nucleus to the side present, they are small and not at the centre.
Nucleus is at the centre 5.
Middle lamella is present Middle lamella is absent 3.4 Reproduction and Heredity 3.5 Reproduction Is the process of producing new living individuals in all living organisms.
3.6 Reproduction in Plants Plants can reproduce in two different ways (i) Asexual Reproduction Here, an individual plant divides into two or more portions to produce new individuals e.g.
chlamydomonas and Euglena (ii) Sexual Reproduction Here, male and female individuals product reproductive gametes (or cells) which fuse in pairs to form ZYGOTES.
Each zygotes then undergoes division and multiplication of cells to produce a new multicellular individual or organism.
In flowering plants, the reproductive organs are the flowers which may be bisexual or unisexual.
The male gametes (pollen grains) fuse with the female gametes (ovules) of the same flower resulting in fertilization.
A flower has 2 parts; the reproductive part or flowers and a vegetable part or roots, stem, leaves and buds.
Some plants undergo asexual method of reproduction called Vegetable propagation.
For example, each cutting of the stem of Hibiscus plant is able to grow into a new Hibiscus plant.
64  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.7 Reproduction in Animals (i) Asexual Reproduction in Animals Unicellular animals like Amoeba and Paramecium reproduce by a simple process of division or fusion.
The nucleus and cytoplasm of the mature organism divide into two equal halves, each of which grows into an adult.
(ii) Sexual Reproduction in Animals In higher multicellular animals like worms, insects and vertebrates, reproduction is by sexual method.
Each species of animal has specialized reproductive organs, testes in males and ovaries in the females.
There are some other animals with both male and female reproductive organs in each individual, such as hydra, earthworm and snail, such animals are referred to as HERMAPHRODITES.
The female gametes or egg cells are reproduced by ovaries of the female organism and sperms from testes of the male.
The nuclei of the two gametes fuse with each other to form ZYGOTE, which develops to become an adult animal.
The process of fusion is called FERTILIZATION.
When the process of development involves several intermediate states, it is referred to as METAMORPHOSIS.
When fertilization occurs inside the body of the female, it is referred to as INTERNAL FERTILIZATION and when it occurs outside the body of the female, it is EXTERNAL FERTILIZATION.
Mammals like rabbit and man are viviparous organisms because they give birth to living young that develops from eggs within the mother and feeds on the milk from the mammary glands of the mother.
3.8 Heredity Heredity is a process of transmitting heritable traits from parents to their offsprings at conception or birth.
Such heritable characteristics in man include mental, physical and social traits e. g. eye colour, hair colour, albinism, baldness, skin colour, height, diseases e.g Sickle cell anaemia, facial appearance, body stature and posture, head, forehead, nose, jaw, legs, neck and shoulders, eyes, ears, mouth, fingers, voice, speech, intelligence etc.
65  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS In plant, heritable characters include height, size and weight of fruits, colour of leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds, taste of fruits etc.
In human beings, at conception the male gamete fuses with the female gamete to form a Zygote.
The Zygote is unicellular with a Nucleus.
The nucleus contains 23 pairs of chromosomes (23 X from the mother, 22X + Y from the father).
The chromosomes contain genes which are the carrier of hereditable characters from parents to offspring.
There are 2 types of Genes.
They are Dominant and Recessive genes.
However, not all characters are inheritable; some are acquired through adaptations to the environment e. g. stunted growth due to mal- nourishment.
3.9 Dominant Genes These are genes that show physically in heterogygous individuals.
3.10 Recessive Genes These are genes that do not show physically in heterozygous individuals.
Mendel proposed laws of heritance to explain the principles of inheritance.
His first law is the Law of Segregation of germinal units.
He crossed two plants with contrasting characters such as tallness and shortness.
All the offspring in F1 generation showed dominant character while in the F2 generation, some offsprings showed the dominant character while others showed the recessive character.
TT (tall) tt (short) T T t t F1 Tt Tt Tt Tt (First filial generation) T t T t F2 TT Tt Tt tt (second filial pure Hybrid Hybrid Pure generation) tall tall tall short 66  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Chromosomes are the carriers of hereditary factors Heredity sets the potentials of an individual but environment determines how an individual can attain the set limit.
Hence nurture and nature determine individual’s potentialities.
Identical twins results when a fertilised egg divides into two halves and develops.
The two individuals develop from a single cell or cytoplasm.
Fraternal twins results when two eggs are released by the mother and are fertilised separately.
3.11 Application of Genetics to Agriculture 1.
Development of high yielding varieties of plants (e. g maize, rice, oil-palm etc.)
and animals (e. g. cattle, pigs, chickens, etc.)
2.
Development of early maturing varieties e. g. coconut, cassava, oil-palm, etc.
3.
Improvement in quality of yield e. g. tomatoes, mangoes, oranges, oil-palm with more flesh and better taste.
4.
Development of disease-resistant varieties e. g. cassava, maize, groundnuts, (plants) and chickens, goats, sheep (animals).
67  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.12 Evolution Organic evolution implies that present day species have not always existed as such, but must have arisen from previously existing organisms or their ancestors.
However, over several years, organisms have changed tremendously.
In this sense, probably monkeys and man have similar lines of descent or ancestors.
The theories of Lamarck and Darwin attempted to explain how evolutionary changes occur.
Lamarck postulated that new organs or characteristics arose in an animal when they are needed, organs not needed were discarded, or passed on to the next generation.
Darwin postulated the theory of natural selection.
According to Darwin, there is a struggle for survival among members of a population.
Moreover, there is a survival of the fittest and the elimination of the unfit.
In essence, all members of a species vary and some variations are inheritable.
Example of evolutionary trends that occurred in plants and animals include movement from: a. aquatic to terrestrial forms.
b. unicellular to multicellular c. simple to complex organisms.
d. specialisation of cells for particular functions e. g. earthworms, vertebrates, etc.
In animals, there are the development of organ systems e. g. arthropods and vertebrate.
There are many kinds of evidence in support of organic evolution.
For example, evidence from embryology especially from fossils, geographical distribution, comparative anatomy, artificial selection and breeding.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention two differences between sexual and asexual reproduction in plants 4.0 CONCLUSION The continuity of life depends on the ability of organisms to reproduce their likes.
Life is passed from parents to offspring when organisms reproduce.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: (a) A cell is the smallest unit of life 68  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (b) Plant cells are mainly hexagonal or square while animal cells are spherical.
(c ) Sexual and asexual reproduction occur in both plants and animals depending on species.
(d) Mendel proposed laws of inheritance including law of segregation of genes which shows that genes are responsible for the development of individuals.
(e) Genetics is widely applied in agriculture for the development of high yielding, resistant, early maturing and improved varieties of plants (f) Darwin postulated the theory of natural selection which show that only the fittest members of a population survive while the unfit are eliminated 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (a) Draw and label an animal cell.
(b) List three differences between a plant cell and animal cell.
(c) Enumerate two applications of the knowledge of genetics in agriculture.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ndu, F. O.
C, Asu, P. Aina, T. O.
(1991).
Senior Secondary Biology For Senior Secondary School Pupils Book 1 – 3.
Nigeria: Longman.
Science Teachers Association of Nigeria (1983).
Biology, Addison Wesley Publishers.
69  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 5 MACHINES, PULLEYS AND FRICTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Machines Pulleys and Friction 3.2 A Machine 3.3 Simple Machine 3.4 Complex Machine 3.5 Machine and Friction 3.6 Types of Simple Machine 3.7 Inclined Machine 3.8 Screw 3.9 Pulleys 3.10 Advantages of Friction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION 70  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Machines when developed, brought a lot of relief to man and encouraged him to venture into areas he would never have dreamt of.
They make work easier, faster and less tedious.
They vary from simple to very complex types.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain what a machine means  define the terms pulley and friction  enumerate the advantages of friction  explain terms like stoichiometry, thermodynamics and equilibra.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention ten machines you know.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to the Study of Machines, Pulleys and Friction 3.2 A Machine It is defined as a device by means of which a large load is overcome by small effort.
OR any devise which makes work easier.
For example, a carpenter wishing to pull a nail from a wall makes use of a plier to make the work easier.
The plier here is a machine.
There are two types of machine viz: 3.3 Simple Machine This includes levers, inclined planes, wheel and axle, screws and pulleys.
Other examples include bottle opener, knives, scissors, brooms etc.
3.4 Complex Machine 71  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS This includes sewing machine, a bicycle, car jerk.
3.5 Machine and Friction The mechanical advantage of pulley and its efficiency depends on friction.
To prevent these: (a) Ball-bearing are used to ensure that the machine parts are rolling instead of sliding.
(b) Machine should have streamline shape.
(c) The application of an appropriate lubricants to the parts of the various machine in order to increase the mechanical advantage and efficiency of the pulley.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain how friction affects the performance of machine.
Note: it is easier to pull downwards (with one’s weight helping) than it is to pull upwards.
It is equally easier to lift a load when the rope goes round two pulleys.
One end of the rope is fixed and the pushing is made at the other end to lift the bottom pulley and the load.
FRICTION: Is a type of force.
A force is something which: (a) set a stationary object in motion, changes the direction of a moving object or stops a moving object completely.
If a ball is rolled along the ground, it will eventually come to rest.
This is due to the frictional force between the ball and the ground.
Therefore, frictional force is a force which opposes motion.
3.6 Types of Simple Machines 1 Levers – These are common simple machines consisting of arms, and a pivot or fulcrum.
Usually, an effort force is applied on one section of the arm in order to lift up a load force.
The arrangement of the load, effort and the pivot form the basis of classification of levers.
2 Types of Lever (A) First class lever – the pivot is between the load and the effort.
Example is the scissors, crowbar, seesaw, spade, etc.
72  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS load pivot effort (B) Second class lever – the load is between the effort and the pivot.
(C) Example is wheel barrow, nut cracker, bottle opener.
pivot load effort (D) Third class lever – the effort is between the load and the pivot.
E. g. forearm, fishing rod etc.
load effort pivot The study of machine may involve the following simple calculations.
(i) How much the effort force is magnified by the machine is indicated by the mechanical advantage of such machine.
Mechanical Advantage [M.A] = Load Effort (ii) Velocity ratio of a machine = distance moved by the effort distance moved by the load in the same time.
(iii) The efficiency of a machine = work done on the load Work done by the effort 3.7 Inclined Machine An inclined plane is a sloping surface e. g. a staircase, a ramp, a slope on the road etc.
It is easier to raise a load by pulling it along an inclined plane than by lifting it vertically.
The mechanical advantage of a machine depends upon friction.
The more the friction, the less the mechanical advantage of simple machine.
However, the velocity ratio does not depend upon friction.
The 73  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS efficiency of a machine depends upon friction.
The more the friction, the less the efficiency.
3.8 Screw The thread of a screw is an inclined plane wrapped round the screw, the distance between successive threads on the screw is known as pitch.
3.9 Pulleys Are simple machines employed in lifting loads.
The purpose of a pulley is easily observed in laboratories, construction sites especially where tall buildings are being constructed, sea ports (for loading and discharging ships) etc.
The pulleys are useful in lifting loads vertically.
The velocity ratio of a pulley is equal to the number of pulleys used and number of ropes supporting the pulleys.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is the mechanical advantage (M A)?
On what factor does M. A. depends?
In order to improve the mechanical advantage and efficiency of simple machine by reducing friction, the following things are required: (i) By lubricating the machine parts with oil (ii) By using ball bearings to ensure that the machine parts are rolling instead of sliding.
(iii) Designing the machines to have streamline shapes since this would reduce frictions in fluid.
Since it is difficult to totally eliminate friction in real life, the efficiency of a machine is always less than 100%.
3.10 Advantages of Friction (a) It helps in walking because without friction, we would slip.
(b) Friction enables a nail to stay tightly on a hole and so hold two pieces of wood together.
(c) In automobile industry, trains are built with brakes, the friction between the wheels and brakes blocks or slows down the wheels.
74  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (d) Belt drives on various machine do not slip because of friction.
(e) Sand is usually thrown onto railway lines in bad weather (e. g ice and snow) in order that the locomotives wheel can grip the lines better.
(f) The provision of seat-belts in cars to exert opposing force (frictional) that would stop the occupants of a motor from moving when the driver applies brake suddenly or when there is accident or when motor stops suddenly.
4.0 CONCLUSION Machines are simply mechanical devices that make work easier less tiring and of course more interesting.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt: (a) About simple machines such as levers, inclined planes, screws etc and complex machines such as sewing machine, bicycle, car jeck etc.
(b) That friction is a type of force which opposes motion.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (a) Briefly explain the following terms machine, pulley, friction and inclined plane (b) No machine can be 100% efficient.
Explain this assertion.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ezebuior, G. N. (1998).
Comprehensive Physics for Senior Secondary School.
Surulere: Lagos Johnson Publishers.
Science Association of Nigeria Physics for Senior Secondary School.
Addison- Wesley Publishers.
75  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS MODULE 4 CURRENT INFUSION INTO PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM Unit 1 Environmental Education Unit 2 Drug Abuse and Drug Misuse Unit 3 HIV/AIDS UNIT 1 ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to Environmental Education 3.2 Aims of Environmental Education 3.3 Objectives of Environmental Education 3.4 Global Warming and Ozone Depletion 3.5 Water Pollution 3.6 Loss of Biodiversity 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The environment we live deteriorates rapidly every passing second as a result of human activities.
The fragile biosphere land, water and air on which all living organisms depend for survival experiences constant high level of degradation.
This subsequently results in serious negative effects on man and other living organisms.
Activities that have brought about this serious issue of concern include global warming, ozone layer depletion, air and water pollution, desertification and deforestation.
76  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain what environmental education mean  enumerate the aims and objectives of environmental education  explain issues like global warming, ozone depletion, water pollution and loss of biodiversity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to Environmental Education Environmental Education (EE) has been variously defined differently by different authors.
Some of the common definitions therefore include: (i) EE is an integrated process which deals with man’s interrelationship with his natural and man-made surrounding.
It is the study of factors influencing eco-systems, mental and physical growth, living conditions, decay of cities and population problems.
(ii) EE is the study of activities of people in relation to the physical world around them and the study of the socio-political institutions which regulates relationship in the interest of the society as a whole.
(iii) EE is education from the environment, education about the environment (iv) and education for the environment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention two effects of “pure water” sachets on the environment 2.
Enumerate the negative effects of dumping refuse along major road sides 3.2 Aims of Environmental Education (i) To foster a clear awareness of and concern about economic, social, political and ecological inter-dependence in urban and rural areas.
77  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (ii) To provide every person with opportunities to acquire the knowledge, values, attitudes, commitments and skills needed to protect and improve the environment.
(iii) To create new patterns of behaviour of individuals groups and society as a whole towards the environment.
3.3 Objectives of Environmental Education (i) Awareness: To create awareness for social groups and individuals about total environment and its allied problems.
(ii) Knowledge: To enable social groups and individuals gain a variety of experience in, and acquire a basic understanding of the environment and its associated problems (iii) Attitudes: To enable social groups and individuals acquire a set of values and feelings of concern for the environment and motivation for activity and participating in environmental improvement and protection.
(iv) Skill: To enable social groups and individuals acquire the skills for identifying and solving environment problems.
(v) Participation: To provide social groups and individuals with an opportunity to be actively engaged at all levels in working towards the resolution of the environmental problems.
3.4 Global Warming and Ozone Depletion Global warming has been defined as a natural or human induced increase in the average global temperature of the atmosphere near the earth’s surface.
The earth and its atmosphere can be likened to a giant green house whose temperature is influenced by the amount of sunlight it receives and reflects, heat retained by the atmosphere, evaporation and condensation of water vapour.
78  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS The atmosphere is only transparent to short-wave and visible solar radiation but absorbs much of the long-wave radiation before partially re-radiating it back to the surface.
This is what is responsible for the warming up of the earth’s surface.
The presence of carbon IV oxide and water vapour allows the atmosphere to absorb long-wave radiations.
The amount of these gases in the atmosphere therefore dictates its heat retaining and radiating capacity.
Burning of coal, fuel, oil, petrol, kerosene, diesel and natural gas release large quantities of carbon IV oxide into the atmosphere.
This is coupled with the depletion of forest trees that would have absorbed carbon IV oxide for photosynthesis.
The result is that the unabsorbed carbon IV oxide prevents the re-radiation of solar energy into the space leading to the development of harsh climatic changes, devastating hurricanes, skin cancer etc.
Ozone layer depletion is caused by the presence of chlorofluoro carbon (CFC) in the atmosphere.
Ozone gas, which is present in the atmosphere is responsible for the absorption of most of the ultra-violet radiations that are potentially damaging to life on earth.
The ozone layer in the atmosphere is called ozone shield/screen.
A lot of public products such as shaving cream, hair spray, deodorants, paints and insecticides are packaged in many containers that carry CFC as propellant.
The CFC causes the depletion of the Ozone layer.
This depletion make it easy for ultra-violet rays emitted by the sun to pass directly into the earth’s surface.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Identify three effects of global warming on agricultural production 3.5 Water Pollution This is the contamination of water by foreign matter.
The major pollutants of water include sewage and other oxygen demanding wastes, plant nutrients stimulating the growth of aquatic plants which interfer with water uses, inorganic substances such as pesticides and active substances in detergents.
Inorganic minerals and chemical substances can also cause water pollution.
Polluted water gives rise to water-related diseases such as typhoid, cholera, dysentery, diarrhoea and skin diseases.
There is also reduction in productivity, biomass and diversity of communities.
79  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.6 Loss of Biodiversity Biodiversity is the totality of genes species and ecosystems in a region.
Biodiversity loss is a concomitant of series of interdependent man induced processes which include population growth, expansion of cultivated land and soil deterioration with their implications on the ecosystem.
Excessive and unsustainable., consumption of resources by a small but rich minority of the world’s population combined with the destructive impact of the world’s poor and hungry result in loss of biodiversity.
4.0 CONCLUSION The serious negative effects of environmental degradation make it imperative to develop an environmentally conscious citizenry to save the world from self- destruction.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: (i) EE is the education from the environment, about the environment and for the environment.
(ii) The objectives of environmental education include awareness, knowledge, attitudes, skill and participation in respect of the environment.
(iii) Global warming, Ozone depletion, water pollution and loss of biodiversity have very negative effects on life.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) (i) What is Environmental Education?
(ii) List three aims of EE (iii) Enumerate five objectives of Environmental Education.
(2) Briefly explain the following terms (i) Global Warming (ii) Ozone layer depletion 80  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (iii) Water Pollution (iv) Loss of Biodiversity.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajewole, G. (1991).
Strategies for Effective Teaching of Environmental Education: Environmental Education Workshop and Seminar Proceedings VoII.
Olagunju, A. M. (1999).
Strategies for Teaching the Cause, Effects and Control of Desertification in Secondary Schools.
Science Teachers Association of Nigeria.
EE Series 3.
UNIT 2 DRUGS ABUSE AND DRUG MISUSE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to Drugs Abuse and Misuse 3.2 Causes of Drug Abuse and Misuse 3.3 Types of Drugs Commonly Abused and Misused 3.4 Consequences of Drug Abuse and Misuse 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION 81  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Drug abuse is another emergent global issue that has been infused into Primary Science Curriculum.
It is an issue whose understanding and implications would be of immense benefit to the child and the society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define drug abuse and misuse  identify commonly abused and misused drugs  enumerate the consequences of drug abuse and misuse.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List 4 reasons why people use drugs without prescription from doctors or pharmacists 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to Drug Abuse and Misuse Drug can simply be defined as any substance(s) that influences positively or negatively the mood or well-being of an individual.
The use of these substances has specifications.
Drug abuse is therefore the indiscriminate use of drugs or medicinal products without specific instruction of the doctor or pharmacist.
It is the duty of the doctor or pharmacist to recommend which drug to use, how and when to use it for a particular disease.
Drug misuse is defined as the act of using drug in the wrong way or for the wrong purpose.
An example is when malaria drug is used as a pain reliever.
3.2 Causes of Drug Abuse and Misuse A number of factors could lead to drug abuse and misuse.
Some of these factors are: 82  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (i) False pleasurable sensation derived from medication (ii) Proliferation of non-professional handling of drugs and medicinal products (iii) Ignorance of simple rules that would prevent the risks of wrong use of medicine.
(iv) Inferiority complex (v) Failure to recognize that the same drugs are been taken under different trade names e.g.
Phensic, Cafenol, Phengo etc all contain aspirin for analgesic.
(vi) Misleading information provided by the manufacturers and distributors (vii) Deliberate recklessness (viii) Incomplete medication and self-medication (ix) Fear of the unknown if doctor is allowed to diagnose one (x) Level of education (xi) Socio-economic status of people.
3.3 Types of Drugs Commonly Abused and Misused (i) Non-narcotic analgesic or pain killers e.g.
Paracetamol, Aspirin, chloroquine etc.
(ii) Narcotic analgesic or strong pain-killer e.g.
Heroine, Cocaine, Codeine etc.
(iii) Antibiotics e.g.
drugs for treating infectious disease e.g.
Tetracycline, (Red and Yellow), Ampicillin, Ampiclox etc.
(iv) Anti-inflammatory drugs e.g.
Indocid, Buta etc (v) Sleep Inducers (Anxiolytic agents) e.g.
Diazepam (valium), Liberum cap etc.
(vi) Hematinics i.e.
blood supplements.
e.g.
Iron tablets, folic acid, B. complex etc.
(vii) Anti-ulcer drugs e.g.
Gelusil, MMT.
83  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 3.4 Consequences of Drug Abuse and Misuse Drug abuse or misuse can lead to: (i) Madness or Schizophrenes disorder such as mania, depression, manic- depression etc.
(ii) Development of resistance to drugs leading to reduced efficacy.
(iii) Super infection which results from persistent assaults on the micro- organism.
(iv) Therapeutic failure (v) Addiction and dependence.
This is common among users of narcotic analgesic (Psychotherapy agents) such as cocaine, heroine, and Codeine etc.
(vi) Gradual and progressive death (vii) Increased rate of suicide (viii) Psychological problems (ix) Economic burden for the government, parents and society because of the amount spent on rehabilitation and settlement of victims.
(x) Increased incidences of crime such as armed robbery, rape, arson, assassination etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 From your observation, list five common drugs people abuse or misuse.
4.0 CONCLUSION The serious consequences of drug abuse and misuse make it pertinent to enlighten and educate citizens about the need to refrain from these condemnable acts.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about: (i) the meaning of drug abuse and misuse as indiscriminate use of drugs and wrong purpose or way of using drugs respectively.
(ii) the causes of drug abuse such as incomplete and self-medication, recklessness etc.
(iii) the serious consequences of drug abuse and misuse such as madness, super infection, gradual and progressive death etc.
84  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1(a) What does drug abuse mean?
(b) Identify eight causes of drug abuse and misuse.
(2) Explain five consequences of drug abuse and misuse.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Connechen, James (1982).
Pharmacology for Nurses.
London: ELBS NWL 7DX.
Institute of Occupational Health (2004).
Occupational Health Lecture Series.
Ibadan.
85  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS UNIT 3 HIV/AIDS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Introduction to HIV and AIDS 3.2 The Origin of HIV/AIDS 3.3 Transmission and Symptoms of HIV/AIDS 3.4 Transmission 3.5 Symptoms 3.6 Methods of Prevention 3.7 The Society and People Livings with HIV 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Today the world is confronted by a scourge that has defied all solutions.
It would be of interest to note that in 1986 when HIV/AIDS was first reported in Nigeria, only two persons were found infected.
In 1994, the number increased to 148 cases and about 8077 in 1997.
By 2004 statistics revealed that about 6% of Nigerians were living with the virus.
This amounts to over 6.5 million.
This percentage must have increased with time.
Education is a major way of stopping this trend.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain what HIV and AIDS mean  trace the origin of HIV/AIDS  enumerate the symptoms of HIV/AIDS  explain the methods of HIV transmission  highlight the various methods of preventing HIV/AIDS 86  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS  educate people on the importance of accommodating people living with HIV/AIDS.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to HIV and AIDS HIV stands for “Human Immuno-deficiency Virus”.
This is the virus that causes AIDS.
It is retroviral in nature because it is capable of copying itself and multiplies within the body.
HIV has a viral protein called V. This virus disables and destroys antibodies whose role is to protect the body against diseases.
The antibodies encircle and destroy foreign bodies called Antigens.
The antigens cause diseases.
It is these antibodies that the virus destroys leaving the body unprotected against diseases.
The virus is present in the body fluids of an infected person such as blood, semen, vaginal secretions and breast milk.
HIV, destroys the body’s immune system (antibodies defence system) slowly until the system could no longer resist disease.
AIDS means Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
This is the condition that occurs when HIV has successfully weakened the immune system.
The term syndrome refers to a combination of signs and symptoms.
3.2 The Origin of HIV/AIDS A number of suggestions have been made about the origin of HIV/AIDS.
There is the monkey theory which says it originated from infected green monkeys; some say it is a mutant and so on.
However, what is certain is that the first cases of HIV/AIDS were reported in United States in 1981.
Those who were involved were five young men who were homosexuals and drug addicts.
They were admitted into different hospitals in Los Angeles for unusual type of pneumonia.
More cases were reported in New York.
AIDS cases were reported at the end of 1981 in England.
87  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Different names were first given to the disease such as Gay-related Immune Deficiency Syndrome (GRIDS).
The cause of the disease and its mode of transmission was established by French Scientists in 1984.
An American, Jay Levy later discovered the AIDS virus and named it AIDS – Associated Retro Virus (ARV).
In 1986, it was officially named “Human Immune Deficiency Virus (HIV).
It is believed that tourists brought it to Africa with high rate in Botswana (36% of the Population), South Africa, Cameroon and Swaziland (20%).
Currently, it is estimated that over 40 million people are presently living with the virus all over the world.
28 million among them are from sub-Saharan Africa.
Over 6 million are in Nigeria as estimated in 2001. it is estimated that currently over 6% of Nigerians are infected.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain why AIDS was first referred to GRIDS.
3.3 Transmission and Symptoms of HIV/AIDS 3.4 Transmission HIV is contracted when the body fluid of an infected person gain entry into the body of another person by any means.
These include unprotected sexual intercourse, transfusions of unscreened blood, sharing unsterilized skin- piercing instruments such as needles, syringes, razor blade, circumcision instruments etc.
It can also be transmitted from infected mother to the baby during pregnancy, child birth or through breast feeding of the child.
HIV cannot be contracted through physical contact (i.e.
It is non-contagious) e.g.
touching, sharing clothes, dishes, toilet seat, swimming pools or through eating together.
3.5 Symptoms Before the manifestation of signs of disease, there is a period called ASYMPTOMATIC period in between the time of infection and manifestation of signs.
It may be as short as 6 months and as long as 15 years depending on 88  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS individuals.
In some people, HIV will never become AIDS.
These people are called Long Term Non-progressors .
HIV is detected after about 6 months or more of infection using the ELISA test.
However, if transmission is through blood transfusion, detection takes about 6 – 8 weeks of infection using the same test.
Symptoms of HIV/AIDS include: (i) Rapid loss of weight (ii) Prolonged diarrhea (iii) Loss of appetite (iv) Skin infection (kaposisurcoma) (v) Enlargement of glands in the neck, groin and armpit (vi) White coating of the tongue.
It must however be emphasized that until HIV becomes full blown AIDS, one may not be able to recognize an infected person unless a test is carried out.
A person with the HIV infection is said to be HIV positive or is living with the virus.
3.6 Methods of Prevention 1.
Safe Sex: This is the type of sexual relationship that removes the possibility of contracting HIV.
This includes complete abstinence which is the best method (90% of infection is through unprotected casual sexual intercourse) Mutual faithfulness among uninfected couples will also prevent HIV infection.
Regular and right use of condom also provides high level of protection.
Individuals should also keep away from indecent sexual habits which include lesbianism, homosexualism, oral sex, etc.
2.
Avoiding sharing of skin piercing instruments.
People should avoid sharing needles, blades, syringes and other skin- piercing instruments that have not been sterilized.
People who visit saloons should also be advised to own their own clipper or ensure the clipper to be used is sterilized in methylated spirit.
3.
Use of only screened blood for transfusion and does not contain HIV should be used for transfusion.
4.
Mass education of people on HIV/AIDS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 89  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS Mention 3 possible effects of not showing love and understanding to people living with HIV/AIDS.
3.7 The Society and People Living with HIV/AIDS The society would cause a lot of harm to itself if a feeling of love and understanding is not exhibited towards the people living with HIV/AIDS.
They should not be stigmatized or discriminated against.
One should realize that many HIV/AIDS patients did not contract it through immoral sexual acts.
It could happen to anyone innocently, ignorantly, forcefully or by sheer act of providence.
The society should support them and encourage them not to hide their condition so that further spread of the disease would be minimized.
4.0 CONCLUSION The scourge of HIV/AIDS is one that could consume a whole nation within a short time.
Over 36% of the total population of Botswana is infected by the virus.
It is therefore, very important that adequate information and education must be provided to Nigerians of all age grades in order to assure our future.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that: (i) HIV is a virus that destroys the body’s immune system while AIDS is the condition that occurs when HIV has weakened the immune system.
(ii) No one can confidently say where HIV originated from but that the first cases were reported in USA in 1981.
(iii) HIV/AIDS is transmitted through unprotected sexual activities and skin piercing instruments apart from mother to child transmission.
(iv) Abstinence and mutual fidelity between couples are major ways of preventing the spread of the virus.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (a) Enumerate four symptoms of HIV/AIDS.
(b) Explain four ways by which the spread of HIV/AIDS can be stopped 90  PED150 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND METHODS (c) What advice do you have for the society on people living with HIV/AIDS and why?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Denning, John V. (1987).
AIDS the Real Truth about Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
Dorking Publishers.
Global Scourges Scour Seminar Campaign Book (2004).
Who is Next….. Robert Long (ed.).
(1987).
AIDS .
H.W.
Wilson Publishers.
91
