NonePRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING COURSE GUIDE PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) Samuel F. O.
Department of Home Economics Education, Oyo State College of Education Oyo.
Mr. Adeola A.
A.
Department of Home Economics Education, Oyo State College of Education Oyo.
Course Writers Dr. (Mrs.) Samuel Oyo State College of Education Oyo.
Mr. Adeola Oyo State College of Education Oyo.
Course Coordinator Dr. U.S.A Osuji School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Editor Dr. Farinde Obafemi Awolowo University (OAU) Ile-Ife.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: ISBN: 978-058-075-1 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING TABLES OF CONTENT PAGES Introduction……………………………………………... 1 What you will be learning in this course………………... 1 Course Aims…………………………………………….. 1 Objectives of the Course……………………………….... 1-2 Working through this Course…………………………….
2 Course Materials………………………………………..... 2 Study Unit………………………………………………... 3 Assignment File………………………………………….. 3 Presentations Schedule………………………………….... 3 Assessment……………………………………………….. 4 ivPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Introduction The family is the building block of any society.
No society exists without the initial existence of the family.
It therefore follows that issues relating to the family should be taken with all seriousness by all stakeholders in the society.
It is a basic fact that if efforts are not made towards ensuring that the family stands well (in all ramifications), every other developmental activities of both the government and non- governmental organizations would not be achieve.
The family is made up of individuals who play specific roles in upholding the home.
The individuals in the family have different goals and aspirations which may contrast the general goal of the family.
Furthermore, the family, more than often, serves as a training ground where characters are built.
These characters are important in the overall ‘health’ of any nation.
From the foregoing, it could be inferred that a course, such as this, devoted to study of the family is an investment in the right direction.
Also, due to the complex nature of the family, all issues relating to the family cannot be exhaustively discussed within the short time frame allowed in this course.
What you will be learning in this course The overall aim of this course is to let you know the principles and factors that foster blissful, meaningful co-existence and less stressful living in the family.
Aims of the course The major aim of this course is to give you an understanding of the important issues relating to the family.
This issue are: 1. basic issues and concepts of family and marriage.
2. issues relating to feeding the family 3. issues relating to housing the family 4. issues relating to clothing the family 5. issues relating to first aid and health 6. issues relating to energy and money management in the family,e.g energy, money, time, knowledge, and natural resources.
Objectives of the Course To achieve the aim set, the course sets its overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives, which are always stated at the beginning of each unit.
Please read them carefully before you start working through the unit.
It will be helpful to you if you refer to them in the course of vPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING studying the units, so that you can check your progress.
After the completion of the unit, also read over the unit objectives.
That way, you will be sure of doing what is required of you by the unit.
After you have successfully completed the study of this course, you should be able to 1 explain the concepts of family and marriage 2 outline the various stages of family life 3 explain the common crises facing an average Nigerian home and now to overcome such crises.
4. enumerate the basic concepts in food and nutrition 5 explain and outline meal planning and plan adequate meals for different ages in the family 6 describe the use and maintenance of certain basic kitchen equipment.
7 enumerate factors relating to family clothing.
8 explain the principles of good laundry in the home.
9 state the roles and functions of first aid in the family.
10 discuss the issues of energy and money management in the home.
11 identify basis resources of the family and how to manage them.
Working Through this course To complete this course, you are expected to read the study units, read recommended text books and suggested literatures, and other materials provided by the National Open University (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises and at some points in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purpose.
The course should take you about 17 weeks to complete.
You will list all the components of the course list, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order that you may complete the course successfully on time.
Course materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study units 3.
References 4.
Assignment file 5.
Presentation schedule viPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Study Units The study units in the course are as follow: Module 1 The Family Unit 1 The meaning of family Unit 2 The family cycle Unit 3 The concept of marriage Unit 4 Crises in the family Module 2 Feeding the Family Unit 1 Basic concepts in food and nutrition Unit 2 Planning meals for the family Unit 3 Kitchen equipment Module 3 Family Caring Unit 1 Clothing the family Unit 2 Home Laundry Unit 3 Housing the family Module 4 Family Health Issues Unit 1 First Aid in the Home Unit 2 Basic guidelines of healthy living Unit 3 Energy and Money Management in the home.
Assignment File There are some assignments given in the course of studying the units.
Take the assignments with all seriousness as they help you to have a full grasp of the course and help to build confidence in you.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your materials gives you the important dates for this academic year.
You must ensure that you complete your tutor-marked assignments and attend tutorials.
Remember you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guide against lagging behind in your work.
viiPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Assessment There are three aspects under the assessment of the course that you must fulfill as requirements for pass in this course.
First are set of assessment exercises, second are the tutor-marked assignments and the third is a written examination.
You are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises.
You are expected to apply information, knowledge and skill that you have acquired during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assessment file.
The tutor marked assignments and exercises is the continuous assessment (CA), which represent 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final examination, which will also account for 70% of your total works.
viiiPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Course Code PRD 110 Course Title Principles of Family Living Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) Samuel F. O.
Department of Home Economics Education, Oyo State College of Education, Oyo.
Mr. Adeola A.
A.
Department of Home Economics Education, Oyo State College of Education, Oyo.
Course Writer Dr. (Mrs.) Samuel Oyo State College of Education, Oyo.
Course Editor Dr. Farinde Obafemi Awolowo University (OAU), Ile-Ife.
Mr. Adeola Oyo State College of Education, Oyo.
Course Coordinator Dr. U.S.A. Osuji National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Programme Leader Dr. Salawu I.O National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ixPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-075-1 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria xPRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGES Modules 1 The Family……………………………….. 1 Unit 1 The meaning of family……………………….. 1-6 Unit 2 The family cycle……………………………… 7-10 Unit 3 The concept of marriage……………………… 11-18 Unit 4 Crises in the family…………………………… 19-23 Module 2 Feeding the Family……………………….. 24 Unit 1 Basic concepts in food and nutrition………….. 24-31 Unit 2 Planning meals for the family………………… 32-38 Unit 3 Kitchen equipment…………………………….
39-44 Module 3 Family Caring…………………………….
45 Unit 1 Clothing the family…………………………… 45-48 Unit 2 Home laundry………………………………… 49-53 Unit 3 Housing the family…………………………… 54-60 Module 4 Family Health Issues…………………….. 61 Unit 1 First aid in the home………………………….. 61-64 Unit 2 Basic guidelines of healthy living…………….
65-67 Unit 3 Energy and money management in the home… 68-72 xiNonePRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING MODULE 1 THE FAMILY Unit 1 The meaning of family Unit 2 The family cycle Unit 3 The concept of marriage Unit 4 Crises in the family UNIT 1 THE MEANING OF FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Types of family 3.3 Family tree 3.4 Roles of family members 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have just read through the course guide, which explained what this course is all about.
This unit is the first of the fifteen (15) units that make up this course.
It is the bedrock upon which the rest of the course is built.
This unit introduces you to the term family as well as its’ roles and functions.
The specific objectives of the unit guide you to the major contents of the unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe and define the family; • trace family relationships; and • know the roles of family members.
1PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition The family is a group of persons united by ties of marriage, blood, and or adoption.
The ties or relationships are characterized by common residence, economic cooperation and most importantly share the same culture.
The concept of the family is global, though with variations in its pattern and structure among different peoples of the world.
The family is the basic social unit of the societys.
Stable families produce stable societies and vice versa.
Thus, the importance of a strong and healthy family structure cannot be over emphasized.
The members of a family are interdependent.
They live together for their common good.
Due to cooperative existence, they live together in peace and harmony and with other families around.
3.1 Types of Family There are four types of family in Nigeria.
These are (i) nuclear (ii) monogamous family (iii) polygamous family (iii) extended family.
Then family is made up of a man, his wife and their children (born or adopted).
It is the most universal type of family.
It is sometimes referred to as the monogamous or biological family.
The Polygamous family, on the other hand is made up of the man, the family’s recognized head, and his wives (two or more) with their children.
This is a common type of family here in Nigeria.
The third type of family is referred to as the extended family, also very common in Nigeria.
Here we have the nuclear or polygamous family, plus aunties, uncles, cousins, grand parents, daughters-in-law, grandchildren, nephews, nieces etc.
Extended family consists of many nuclear/monogamous and polygamous families.
Any considerable link by birth qualifies a person to be part of the extended family.
However, another type of family called polyandry consists of two or more men (husbands) a wife and children.
This is not practised in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Think about the three types of family found in Nigeria.
What are the merits and demerits of each family system?
ii.
What type of family do you belong to?
2PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.2 Family Tree The family tree is a diagram describing and naming family relationships.
It is also known as family configuration.
This is defined as “the particular members of a family and their interrelationships”.e.g.
Husband A B Wife Head (Husband) Wife Wife Child Child Child Child Diagram A configures monogamous family relationship while B configures polygamous relationship at the nuclear level.
After reading through this sub-section, you should be able to trace your own family tree and make a sketch of it.
Let us start the family configuration with the Husband and the wife.
Together they form a COUPLE.
They have two children, one male (their SON) and one female (their DAUGHTER).
Both the son and daughter are related as BROTHER and SISTER respectively, or just SIBLINGS.
The above configuration is the simple nuclear family.
Let us see further descriptions of family inter relationships below:- Uncle: The brother of one’s father or mother Aunt: The sister of one’s father or mother Nephew: The son of one’s brother or sister Niece: The daughter of one’s brother or sister.
Cousin: Child of one’s uncle or aunt Brother-in-law: Brother of one’s husband or wife.
Husband of one’s sister Sister-in-law: Sister of one’s wife or husband.
Wife of one’s brother.
Mother-in-law: Mother of one’s wife or one’s husband.
Father-in-law: Father of one’s wife or one’s husband.
In-laws: (In the Nigerian context): Any member of one’s spouse nuclear or extended family.
Spouse: The one to whom a person is married.
Grand parents: The parents of one’s parents.
Great Grand parents: The grand parents of one’s parents.
3PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Grand Children: The children of one’s child.
Great grandchildren: The children one’s grandchildren.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Trace your own family tree and draw a sketch of it 3.4 Roles of the Family Members Every member of the family has got some responsibilities to perform in the family.
For the smooth running of the home, there should be cooperation among family members in the performance of duties so as to make the family a good and happy one.
We shall now look at the different members of the family alongside their specific roles.
(a) The Father (husband) The father is the head of the family in all culture in Nigeria .As the head of the family, he has authority over all the family’s affairs and decisions.
He is responsible for providing food, shelter, protection and clothing for the whole family.
He is also responsible for maintaining discipline in the family, as he guides, counsels and directs family affairs.
He cooperates with the mother in training the children and other family members.
The responsibility of providing proper education for the children rests on the father.
Above all, he must be a role model for the family by being a good citizen, morally upright, a hardworking and a reliable person.
Economically, he is perceived as the bread winner of the family, hence he must have a strong financial base.
(b)The Mother (wife) The mother, though under the authority of the husband is the overseer of the home.
As the homemaker, she plans, cooks and serves meals for the family members.
She keeps the house clean and in order.
She is responsible for the bearing and rearing of children (this is a biological and cultural role).
She makes sure that the family is well clothed.
Many mothers contribute to the household expenses by assuming financial responsibilities, in order to relieve the husband.
In Nigeria of today, the mother assume the statue of household/family head whenever the father died or move out of the community.
The mother should also be a role model by setting good examples and maintaining a good value system for family living.
4PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (c) The Children Generally, children run errands for their parents and do the work in the home.
As they grow up, they take up the domestic work such as cooking, washing, mending, tidying up and gardening.
In a traditional or rural Nigeria family, there is division of roles along gender line among the children.
Use male children grow-up to learn on-farm responsibilities while the female ones learn the domestics chore responsibilities Children should love respect and obey their parents and other adults in the society.
Run errand for the elders including their parents.
Childhood is the period for learning the family values, standards, norms, and religious beliefs.
(d)The extended family members It is necessary to highlight the roles of family members who are not part of the nuclear family, but who live with the family.
Such members should take up responsibilities according to their age, sex, ability, and health conditions.
For instance, cousins, nephews, and nieces should join the children in carrying out domestic chores and running errands for the parents.
The grannies should help in rearing the children.
They enrich the family with their vast knowledge and experiences.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have introduced you to the concept of family and family life.
This knowledge is fundamental in a study of family living; it will help the family to live a healthy and happy life.
5.0 SUMMARY The family is the basic social unit of the society.
Stable families produce stable societies, which in turn result in a stable nation.
The family as a unit carries out many important functions in a society such as continuity of society through procreation/economic development and governance population maintenance, security and integration, it also helps to socialize its members in the social values and traditions through child rearing and upbringing.
Looking at the present day Nigerian society, can you observe the influence of the family on the physical, mental, and moral development of Nigeria?
Highlight your observational points and discuss each point with any of the followings personalities studies, teacher and/or guardian and counselor to justify your observation.
5PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and describe the three types of families 2.
Mention four specific functions of a.
The father b.
The Mother c. The children.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E. and Eluwa, M. (1991).
Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: African-FEP Publishers.
Bamidele, R. (1986).
Home Economics for Junior Secondary Schools (Book 1).
Ibadan: Abi print Publishers.
6PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 2 THE FAMILY CYCLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Stages of Family Life Cycle 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit made it clear that the family is the basic social unit of the society.
Each family passes through a definite life cycle as individuals making up the family pass through different stages of life cycle.
This is what is referred to as the “family life cycle” .Why do we need to study the family life cycle?
Each stage of the life cycle has its own functions, problems and demands, which must be recognized if effective family living is to be achieved.
In other words, we need to study the family life cycle so as to be able to live together in harmony as a family.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, we shall expose you to the different stages of the family life cycle.
At the end of this unit, you as the student should be able to: • list the three stages of the family life cycle; and • discuss the characteristics of each stage (the functions, problem and demands).
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Three Stages of Family Life Cycle There are three stages in the family life cycle.
These are • The beginning family stage • The expanding family stage • The contracting family stage The beginning family stage 7PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING The family life cycle starts with a man and a woman who got married and start a new family.
The beginning family stage thus starts from marriage and ends with the arrival of the first child.
What are the characteristics o f this stage?
First, it is a period of adjustment and establishment of the marital relationship.
This is the time for the couple to learn to know, accept and understand each other.
The pattern of matrimonial living is also, to a large extent, set at this time.
Secondly, it is a time to start saving and accumulating goods for the future and time to prepare for the new baby (first child) of the family.
The house is furnished, electronics are bought, and in preparation for the expected baby when baby things are purchased.
Thirdly, the time, energy and financial demands on the homemaker are minimal, as she has to take care of just herself and her husband.
The major problem envisaged during this stage of family life is that of management and or adjustment to new habit discovered.
Eventually, hopefully, after a few disagreements, the couple will settle down to peaceful family living after making needed adjustments.
The expanding family stage The extant stage is the expanding family stage.
After a time, the woman becomes the mother of a child, and the man becomes a father.
Thus, this stage covers a long period from the time whether first child was born to the time when the last child leaves home for higher education or vocational or commercial training.
The expanding stage as the name suggests is made up of several sub-stages, which we shall consider in detail.
(a) Child bearing and pre-school period Once the child is born, the husband and wife must now play the role of parents.
The feeding, clothing, caring the child are the responsibilities of the father and the mother (for him or her).
At the age of two, the child is put in a nursery class where he learns to live with people other than his family.
During this period, financial demands increase.
Parents learn to take on new responsibilities and also, need to make adjustments in the sharing of their time, relationship and resources with the children arrival of children no doubt disrupts the honeymoon atmosphere of the beginning family stage.
(b) The primary school period 8PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING The children enter primary school at the age of five or six to engage in formal education.
During this period, financial, time and energy demands in the husband and wife so much increase to the extent that it bears heavily upon the couple’s relationship.
They therefore need to adjust in several ways to establish a peaceful and happy home.
In the midst of this, new babies may arrive, adding to the already escalating demands.
At this stage, the parents must join hands to train and bring up the children, laying a foundation for a responsible and upright life later on.
(c) The secondary school period From about the age of ten or eleven, the first child enters secondary school.
At this stage, the children pass through the age of adolescence, when they experience many body changes, as well as emotional and behavioral changes.
Parents need to understand this, and communicate effectively with their children on the implications of the changes experienced by the children for harmony and love in the home.
(d) University or College Period After secondary school, the child goes on to the University or a school of higher learning.
Alternatively, he learns a trade.
The parents have the task of looking after the large family, paying school fees, feeding the family and maintaining the house, and meeting all the various needs of the children including transportation, entertainment, and upkeep/pocket allowances.
Families who have several children in the higher institutions (at the same time) may find it necessary to draw on their savings to finance the education of their children.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 The family life cycle is continuous.
Explain this The contracting family stage As children complete their courses in the university or higher school, they usually go to make a home of their own.
They may move to another town.
Thus this stage begins when the first child leaves home as a young adult, up till when the last child leaves for a life of his or her own.
This is the stage when the number of family members gradually decreases.
Financial demands are relieved to a large extent, and the parents are left with an “empty nest”.
Empty nest describes a situation when all the children have gone away and the parents left as they started.
The parents 9PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING retire from active job service and start to lead a quieter life.
Parents are also begin to take on new roles as grand parents.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Identify a contracting family in your locality.
Visit this family, interview the old couple and try to find out at least five problems of this stage of family life.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, the problems associated with each stage of the family life cycle are diverse and complex.
The first step to solving them is a thorough understanding of each stage and its characteristics.
These are the issues that this unit has attempted to bring to light.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have explained the meaning of the family life cycle.
By now, you should be able to justify its study as part of this course on family living.
Finally, you must have become familiar with the challenges of each stage of the family life cycle.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the demands of the beginning family, and the challenges of the expanding and contracting stages of the family life cycle?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E. and Eluwa, M. (1991) Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: African-FEP Publishers CESAC (1980).
Home Economics for Secondary Schools-Home Management Lagos: Macmillan Publishers.
10PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 3 CONCEPT OF MARRIAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Marriage Systems 3.2 Planning of Marriage 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is an insight into all the various components of marriage.
The purpose of pre-marital stage and factors affecting the choice of marriage partners are outlined.
A brief discussion of types of marriage and plans for marriage is given.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • state the purpose of pre-marital stage; • highlight factors that affect the choice of marriage partners; • list the types of marriage; and • itemize the various plans needed for marriage.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Marriage Systems a.
The concept of pre-marital stage Premarital stage is the period that intending couples move together in order to know each other to the extent of deciding to go ahead with marriage plans.
This is called courtship period.
What the intending couples are expected to do or act during the period depends on the culture and family background.
The duration of pre-marital period varies for many homes.
For some, marriage is the result of a long period of pre-marital relationship while it is just a ‘spell’ for others.
However, it is expected that intending couples should use this period to 11PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (i) study each other’s attributes: reactions to circumstances; tastes, dos and don’ts (ii) decide if they would be able to cope with each other; (iii) establish their love for each other; (iv) establish a good relationship; and (v) study and learn more about each other’s family background;.
The aforementioned expectations, notwithstanding, the pre-marital period may be full of deceits more especially when the intending couples have very little time for the period.
The deceits, notwithstanding, the pre-marital stage is strongly advocated for a healthy family relationship, in view of the fact that couples who omit this stage often, among others i. experience a big strain in their homes because their behaviours to each other seem totally strange; ii.
experience disappointment and poor coordination; iii find it difficult to make achievement and advancement in life In view of the foregoing, it is advisable that certain factors should be considered in choosing a marriage partner: 1.
Love This is the foundation of any happy home.
The two partners must have an unconditional love for each other.
Love helps to have a lasting marriage.
Love for each other may be a situation of love at first sight or may come gradually.
2.
Physical appreciation The intending couples must have a physical attraction for each other.
The physical features of the man must be attractive to the woman, and vice versa.
This is very important since they are expected to have an intimate relationship together in marriage.
However, it should be borne in mind that physical features may be deceptive as they may be faded away due to injury, illness and situation, hence this should not be the main factor in choosing a marriage partner.
The idea, in their future spouses, may not after all be wise.
12PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.
Compatibility It is very important that partners find each other compatible in such things like religion, education, social interest, culture, outlook to life, health status, likes and dislikes etc.
Intending couples should know that they can not be exactly the same in all aspects of life and therefore, there is need for adjustment and compromise on the part of the two people.
However, due to the fact that marriage is a lifetime commitment, which could make or mar an individual progress in life, the adjustment should be at a tolerable level.
Otherwise, the two parties are expected to call it quit.
4.
Economic security It is very important that the partners have the wherewithal to cater for their homes.
It is a fact that a home that lacks the economic empowerment to provide the basic needs of life would (a) not be happy (including the children); (b) be hindered in carrying out the functions of the home effectively and efficiently; and (c) eventually collapse Due to the economic situation of the country gainful employment by the man is often regarded in most Nigerian cultures, as a pre-requisite to economic security and successful marriage.
5.
Parental consent This factor, although may not be important in western cultures, is very important in all the Nigerian cultures.
It is strongly believed that parent’s approval is pre-requisite to a happy home.
Parents’ consent is especially sought, by the man’s parent before the bride could be SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain in your own words, the relevance of pre-marital stage to a successful marriage.
b.
Types of Marriage Marriage is a union between a man and a woman of different family backgrounds in which the partners share many things in common and which may lead to procreation.
13PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Marriage plays very important roles in all human societies.
Hence, each society has evolved principles and procedures to be followed in contracting marriages.
The various forms of marriage in Nigeria are outlined below.
Since the details of each system vary from one culture to another, only the basic features of each system given.
1.
Traditional marriage This is often carried out in the home of the bride.
In attendance are usually family relatives of the husband and wife, friends and well- wishers.
At time, a religious leader attends it.
Traditional marriage varies from one ethnic group to another in terms of content duration and items required for the ceremony.
However, it is usual for the man’s family to pay dowry and present gifts while the bride’s family entertains.
Civilization has also contributed to many changes in traditional marriage.
Often traditional marriage permits polygamy, although it is not a general rule.
Traditional marriage is less bending on the two parties.
The fundamental factor on which other factors identified above are based under traditional marriage is parental consent and family approval.
2.
Non-traditional (a)Islamic marriage This is conducted in the mosque under the leadership of the religion head.
Here, the couples are reminded about the laws guiding marriage in the Quran.
Islamic marriage permits the man to marry up to four wives, provided he has the wherewithal.
Bridal price is not accepted in Islamic marriage but a specified and cherish gift from the bridegroom to his wife is accepted... (b) Church marriage According to the marriage ordinance of 1914, church or Christian marriage means a marriage that is organized by the law of the place where it is contracted as the voluntary union for life of one man and one woman to the exclusion all others.
This type of marriage is contracted in the church where the couples are joined together by the priest.
Biblical injunctions relating to marriage 14PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING are read to the couples.
More often than not, either party is not allowed to re-marry except one of them dies.
Couples exchange marriage vows and obtain certificates of marriage from the church already authorized by the State to conduct such marriages.
(c) Court marriage This is a contracted marriage in court under the auspices of registrar.
Prior to the day of marriage, a 21-day notice is filed by the registrar, on behalf of the couples.
At the expiration of the notice, if there is no objection, a day is fixed by the court for the couple to present themselves for the marriage ceremony.
Relatives, friends and well-wishers gather, along with the couples, to witness and rejoice together.
It is a monogamous form of marriage since neither the man nor woman is expected to re-marry unless another legal consent is sought for a divorce or either of the party dies.
Otherwise, the offending partner is guilty of court contempt and may be legally sued by the offended party for bigamy.
Court marriage could be contracted by any member of any religion like moslems, christians, pagans, atheists etc.
(d) Marriage with special licence This is contracted before a court registrar after the payment of a certain amount of money.
It is conducted for couples who are in a rush to marry.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State the merits and demerits of the court marriage.
3.2 Planning for marriage As earlier pointed out, at the pre-marital stage, the couples are always seen together, discussing, studying each other’s moods and thinking carefully about how well they can get on.
This interaction may eventually reach a climax when they discover that they find it painful to leave each other.
15PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING A kind of emptiness is created inside each person when they are away from each other.
At this point, they begin to think of getting married.
In planning for marriage, certain issues need to be addressed by the couple.
Such issues include: 1 The form of marriage to have Different forms of marriage are discussed later.
The elaborateness of the form of marriage so chosen by the couples is influenced by parents’ preference, religion dictate family background, income, educational status and family exposure.
The form of marriage selected by the couples, notwithstanding, a typical marriage is preceded by the engagement period.
The engagement period is designed to test and prove the compatibility of the couple before they are finally pronounced as husband and wife.
Engagement helps the couples in so many ways such as: (a) appropriating the partners as a ‘pair’ both in their own eyes and those of the two families; (b)giving the partners the opportunity to work, play and act as a pair; (c) learning to communicate their love, thoughts, moods and emotions better then before; (d)developing confidence in each other since their love is expected to deepen and broaden during this period; (e) exploring each other’s experiences and personalities; (f) planning, in a more concrete way, for the marriage.
Some of the important decisions expected to be taken during the engagement period include: (a)Where To Live Marriage means that the couple would start a new family.
Hence it is expected that the couple would leave their parents to settle in their own house.
The couples therefore find themselves deciding on which neighbourhood to settle and the type of amenities that the house should have.
Their decision in this regard is greatly influenced by proximity to their place of work, proximity to markets, proximity to other family members and friends, place of worship etc.
It is often, advisable that couple should secure a house that meets their present and future needs and standards.
16PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (b)Financial plans Money management is very crucial to the success of the home.
It is important that couples should discuss the various ways of obtaining and spending money.
It is necessary that they know each other’s income and establish mutual trust in each other.
Couple should agree on the amount of money to save, the amount to spend on relatives, clothing, food, rent, housekeeping etc.
This position is a confraternal one among modern couples because it laden with cultural belief system that varies from place to place.
(c) Family planning Couples should decide on the number of children to have, along with the spacing of the children.
This is very important so as to adequately provide for the children and also make the wife to be healthy.
Unplanned and frequent pregnancies often create a big strain on family relationship.
The following points should be considered as status of the couple i the financial status of the couple in planning their family.
ii the health of the couple; iii the age of the couple iv the responsibilities SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i How would you advice a couple who are planning for marriage.
ii Organise a discussion group with two or more couples on how each of the four statuses of couple can influence planning for the size of the family.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is very important that couples are advised to pass through the pre- marital stage and that they should be open-minded to each other.
A successful marriage would require that the partners make concrete plans that confirm with their belief and individual goals.
5.0 SUMMARY You have just been exposed to the various sub-units of a marriage viz pre-marital stage, types of marriage and plans for marriage.
These should help you to appreciate the complexity of marriage and that marriage is for mature minds.
17PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 i.
Discuss the factors that affect the choice of marriage partners.
ii.
State the characteristics of the each type of marriage that you know.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How do the present socio economic problems affect the pre-marital stage of marriage in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E and Eluwa, M. (1991): Home Management for schools and Colleges.
Ibadan: Africana-Fep Publishers Limited.
18PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 4 CRISES IN THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Crises in the Family 3.2 Family inter-relationship 3.3 Economic recession/policy 3.4 Social adjustment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The family is the building block of any society.
It comprises individuals that have different emotions, goals and attitudes.
No family always have it smooth all the time.
Occasions arise at different times when things may not go as the parents or children wish.
Such situations need to be handled carefully so as to maintain peace and harmony in the home.
In this unit we look at some common challenges facing the family and how to take care of them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • identify crises or problems that could occur in a family.
• suggest ways of handling such problems in order to foster harmony, love and trust in the family.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Family crises All families have their crises period when things do not happen as expected.
This period should be seen as a challenge, which must be circumvented or succumbed by the family.
The crises area in a family vary in form, duration and stages.
The common ones especially in Nigerian context are categorized below: 19PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.2 Family inter-relationship (a) Incoming of a New Baby Occasions may arise when a new baby may bring pressure on the family members, finance and time especially when the couple are not prepared for it.
There are occasions when couples prepare for one baby but they come in multiples.
This could be handled by planning all pregnancies and preparing all family members for the arrival of the baby.
There must be adjustment in the finances of the family and willingness of all members to take additional responsibilities.
(b) Personality clashes Clashes in personality and individual rights arise as a result of differences in abilities, goals, developmental stages and profiles of family members.
In solving this problem, all persons should be recognized as individuals whose views must be respected and considered.
Establishment of effective communication should be considered in the family.
More importantly everybody must take part in the decision making process of the family.
Indeed mutual respect for one another’s rights and opinions reduce or even eradicate personality clash.
The parent’s role as moderator is very important in this respect.
(c) Family standards and rules When differing rules and standards especially contrary ones are set by father and mother, crises occur.
As a result, children would take undue advantage of the situation since the parents are not united.
It is therefore, important that a family identifies values, sets goals and establishes standards and rules that are acceptable to all family members.
Family rules should not be too stiff or rigid and loose or compliance to all family members.
(d) Death or loss of a family member Loss of a family member especially the breadwinner through death or kidnap may shatter the hope/goal of the family.
This automatically brings adjustment to all part of family lives and beginning of a new life.
This situation needs patience, steadfastness, prayer and good will of people to pursue the family goal.
(e) Divorce Divorce breaks the home, thus causing psychological depression to family members, especially the children.
Divorce is the root of many 20PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING vices in the society.
It is important for all parents to always be watchful to keep the home intact and never to give room for over assumption.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 How can family inter-relationship bring crises in the home?
3.3 Economic Recession/Policy (a)Unexpected loss of job This is a big ‘blow’ on the family, especially when the breadwinner is affected.
A reappraisal of family goals may be needed when this occurs.
(b)Economic policy Government policies in form of tax policy, pension policy, health policy, welfare policy, energy policy etc.
may cause a drastic reduction in disposal income of a family.
This also calls for reappraisal of family finances and goals.
(c) Inflation/scarcity Frequent and scarcity of basic needs of the family may create a strain on purse of the family.
It may means a deprivation of some items in order to satisfy the basic needs.
A good example is the incessant increase and scarcity of cooking fuel, which is a basic need of every family.
3.4 Social adjustments (a)School period crises Crises in this area may take different forms.
It may be that the children attain the school age at the same time and the parents are unable to meet up with the financial demand.
Denial of a child in order to satisfy the other may cause a strain on family relation.
It may also be that the children are influenced negatively by peer groups in the school such that they need to be withdrawn to another school.
Adequate training of children and giving birth to the number of children one could afford may help in solving this problem.
Family planning and fulfillment of all responsibilities particularly by parents is mostly needed to prevent such crises.
21PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (b)Burglary Thieves may steal some family belongings which may be difficult to replace.
As much as possible, families should insure their valuable properties.
(c) Accidents Accidents like fire, road, and industrial accidents can cause incapacitation or hospitalization of family members.
They can lead to serious losses such as loss of houses, property and lives.
They can prevent the achievement of family goals.
Family should also insure their properties and life (d)Societal value Expectations from the extended family members in terms of financial assistance, gratification for past help rendered to parents especially in raising up either the father or mother, living with a distant relation e.t.c may cause crises in the home.
Also, the standards the society expects the family to attain in terms of accommodation, building a house, type of clothe to put on type of vehicle to procure e.t.c.
could lead to crises.
In solving this, parents should adopt the principle of “cut your coat according to size of cloth”.
And this should be impressed on the children.
(e) Grown-up children Nowadays, children who have passed through the tertiary institutions still depend on their parents because they are unable to get jobs.
This is a big problem in the society because these children may be additional burden on the family and then the children may not be easy to control.
(f) Different belief system There are occasions when husband and wife shares different religion belief system.
The children find it difficult to know which religion to follow until they becomes of age.
And most often, there are misunderstanding on the mode and language of praying in the family.
Family should eschew religion differences and worship in the same way for the children to be properly oriented.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain two social factors that cause family crises 22PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 4.0 CONCLUSION There are diverse kinds of crises facing an average Nigerian homes.
These crises are caused by a number of factors which often times interact with one another.
The larger the family the more complex the interacting system.
5.0 SUMMARY Family crises are inevitable in the home and vary from one family to another.
Overall, they are caused by family inter-relationship, economic and social factors.
Both the parents and children are important agents in resolving family crises.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 i.
Discuss the factors causing family crises in Nigeria.
ii.
How would you advice a family going through crises caused by social factor?
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 How would you counsel a would-be couple in handling future family crises?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E. and Eluwa, M. (1991): Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Ibadan: African-Fep Publishers Ltd. CESAC (1980): Home Management for Nigerian Secondary Schools: Home Management Lagos: Macmillan Nigeria Publishers.
Onojuju, J.N., Ashiru, G. A., Egbuchulam, B. C. and Ojukwu, C.N.
(1980): Home Management for Senior Secondary Schools.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers Limited.
23PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING MODULE 2 FEEDING THE FAMILY Unit 1 Basic concepts in food and nutrition Unit 2 Planning meals for the family Unit 3 Kitchen equipment UNIT 1 BASIC CONCEPT IN FOOD AND NUTRITION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of terms 3.2 Nutrients in Food 3.3 Food Groups 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the major concerns of a homemaker is how to properly nourish the family.
Indeed, a well-nourished family is a health one.
It is therefore necessary in a course such as this to devote some time to the science and art of nourishing the family members.
This unit is a first step in this direction, as it provides an introduction to the basic concepts which will help you to understand food and nutrition.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of your study of this unit, you should be able to • Define some basic terms relating to nutrition.
• List the nutrient in food, their functions and major sources • Classify foods into groups 24PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of terms in food and nutrition.
Food is made up of certain chemical substances that work together and interact with body chemicals (enzymes) to serve the needs of the body.
Let us now define selected terms used in the study of nutrition.
1.
Food Food is any substance which when eaten, digested and absorbed, keeps us alive and healthy.
Anything items consumed and does not contribute to healthy living and body growth is not food.
2.
Nutrients These are the chemical components in food that performs the function of food nurture the (i.e.
it nurtures the body and facilitates body growth) It follows therefore that no edible substance can be called ‘food’ unless it contains at least one type of nutrient.
3.
Digestion This is the process of changing food into simpler forms which can be absorbed and used by the body.
4.
Enzymes These are substances in the body which speed up or hasten the breaking down of food.
5.
Cell This is the smallest functional and structural unit of a living organism, plant or animal.
6.
Metabolism This refers to the chemical changes in living cells, by which energy is provided for the vital process and activities and new material is taken in to build and repair.
25PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 7.
Nutrition This is the study of food and the way our bodies use the food.
It can also be defined as the science of nourishing the body properly.
We have defined some nutrition-related terms.
Let us now focus on the nutrients, the building blocks of food.
3.2 Nutrient in Foods The food we eat nourishes us, enabling us to live, to grow, to keep healthy and well, and get energy for each day’s activities.
The nourishing substances in food are called nutrients.
It is important for you to understand the functions, sources and deficiency diseases of these nutrients, so that you can plan suitable meals to meet the individual needs of each family member.
All foods contain one or more nutrients in varying amounts.
There are six major classes of nutrients.
These are protein, carbohydrates fats, vitamins, minerals and water.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the six classes of nutrients in food?
What are the food sources of calcium, fats proteins and water?
3.3 Food Groups There are several thousand types of food eaten all over the world.
However, each of these foods can be placed into one group or the other.
Such groups possess similar characteristics.
Several kinds of food groups exist, varying from the simple three-group system to the fourteen-group system, depending on the country in which it was formulated.
The Three-Group System This system uses the smallest number of groups possible.
Foods are classified into three groups, namely:- (1) Body-building foods (protein rich foods) (2) Protective foods (food rich in vitamin and minerals).
(3) Fuel foods (food contributing energy).
However, this grouping has its disadvantages.
The first problem is that by dividing foods simplistically into three categories, it is possible to 26PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING misplace foods.
Groundnuts are often classified as a protein food, but groundnuts are rich in both protein and fat (energy).
Secondly, many people find it difficult to follow the plan, because they cannot afford to buy the foods, and they do not plan meals that way.
The Four-Group System (United States) 1 Milk and milk products 2 Meat, fish, poultry and eggs 3 Fruits and vegetables 4 Bread, flour, cereals.
Five-Food Group (United States) (i) Milk, meat, fish, poultry eggs and meat substitutes.
(ii) Vegetables and fruits (iii) Bread and other cereal foods (iv) Butter and wholesome fats (v) Simple sugars Six-Food Group System (United Kingdom) (i) Lean meat, fish and poultry, eggs (ii) Skimmed milk, cottage cheese, and low fat yogurt (iii) Fruits and vegetables (iv) Whole-meal cereals, stead, pasta, rice, breakfast cereals (v) Butter and margarine (vi) Oil, lard, cream, sugar, chocolates and oil The Fourteen-Group System Built For African Food Groups (Tropical) Food groups based on foods available within the African environment are aimed at facilitating the selection of foods that meet individual’s nutritional needs in African countries.
There is no standard food grouping system for Nigeria.
The various classification found in the literature has been combined on the basis of the lecturer’s discretion.
Hence, in this course, a combination of the various grouping systems is here presented: Group 1 Cereal and grain products Group2 Starchy roots and tubers Group3 Grain legumes and legume products Group4 Nut and seeds Group5 Vegetable and vegetable products 27PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Group6 Fruits Group7 Sugars and syrups Group8 Meats, poultry and insects Group9 Eggs Group 10 Fish and shell fish Group11 Milk and milt products Group12 Oils and fats Group13 Beverages Group14 Miscellaneous We need to study the nutritional qualities of these food groups: The basic nutritional characteristics of foods in the 14-food group system considered above are presented here.
Detailed information concerning the composition of individual foods is assembled in convenient form in the food composition Tables and can therefore be obtained from there.
.
Group 1 Cereal and Grain Products Cereal grains are the backbone of the human food supply, be it in their original form, or in the form of flour and bread of noodles.
The grains, listed in order of their worldwide quantitative importance are rice, wheat, corn, sorghum, rye, barley, millet and oats.
They contain from 7-14% protein and about 75% carbohydrate.
The proteins are of low biologic value.
However, when supplemented simultaneously with consumed proteins of better quality, they are capable of supplying the human protein requirement.
They also provide minerals and vitamins (micronutrients), which are held mostly in the outer layers of the kernel or in the germ.
Most of which the micronutrients are lost in the process of milling or processing.
Enrichment of flour from milled grains restores some of the lost vitamins and minerals.
Parboiling of rice before milling also helps to preserve some micronutrients.
Group 2 Starchy Roots and Tubers Root and tuber crops such as cassava, yam, cocoyam, and sweet potato rank next in importance to cereal grains in providing the major part of the daily energy needs of the people.
Starchy fruits like bananas and plantains are also important.
Together, this group contains 20-80% of carbohydrate but protein, fat, vitamins and minerals are generally found in much smaller quantities.
Plantains and bananas, however, contain iron in large amounts.
28PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Group 3 Grain Legumes and Legume Products Dry legume seeds, such as beans, peas and lentils, contain approximately twice as much protein as cereals and almost as much carbohydrate.
Soybeans are outstanding because of their very high protein content and biological quality of this protein.
The digestibility of legume proteins is somewhat less than that of animal proteins.
On the average, about 90% utilized is still a highly respectable figure.
Legumes are good sources of thiamin, and moderate amounts of riboflavin and niacin.
Group 4 Nuts and Seeds As a rule, most edible nuts contain less carbohydrate than legumes and are rich in protein but very rich in fat.
The proteins of nuts have a biological value similar to that of legumes (except soybeans).
They contain fair to generous amounts of thiamine, riboflavin and niacin as well as iron and phosphorous.
Group 5 Vegetables and Vegetables Products Vegetables, especially green leafy ones provide an abundance of roughage, which is an important component of a normal diet.
Their protein is generally of high quality, though not abundant in quality.
The value of vegetables lies prominently in their vitamin and mineral content such as vitamin A, Iron calcium, riboflavin, folic acid and vitamin C. Group 6 Fruits They are valuable because of the water, vitamins and minerals that they contain as well as for their bulkiness and laxative properties.
Vitamin C, vitamin A and riboflavin are found in fruits.
Group 7 Sugar and Syrups In the quantities usually consumed, sugars, syrups, honey and most jams contribute calories to the diet and very few other nutrients.
As in the case of many fats, excessive consumption of sugars is disadvantages in as much as it leads to a smaller consumption of nutritionally more desirable foods.
Group 8 Meats, Poultry and Insects Except for pork, which is characterized by a higher fat content, and by a high level of thiamine, the nutritive value of most edible meats is similar.
Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, goat and game provide high biological 29PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING quanlity.
The proteins of meats are surpassed in quality only by those provided by eggs.
Poultry meat from chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese and game birds make approximately similar nutritive contributions to the diet.
In some part of Africa, insects, notably termites contribute significantly to the diet.
Group 9 Eggs The average hen’s egg contains roughly 13% protein and 12% fat.
Egg proteins are of the highest quality, being about 98% absorbed by the body after digestion.
The fat of the egg is finely emulsified and easily assimilated.
The egg yolk contains most of the vitamins, minerals and fat, while the egg white contains most of the protein.
Group 10 Fish and Shell Fish From the standpoint of nutrition, fish does not differ markedly from other meats on the whole.
It contains more water and less fat, but the desirable quality of its proteins is similar to that of other animals.
Shellfish and other seafood’s such as crabs, lobsters and crayfish fall into the same category.
Group 11 Milk and Milk Products Milk is distinguished by the high quality of its protein and its high content of calcium and phosphorus.
It is also a good source of riboflavin and vitamin A.
It supplies large quantity of lactose and readily digested milk fat.
The fact that it contains most essential nutrients makes it indispensable to the infant and highly desirable to the growing children and the pregnant and lactating women.
Group 12 Oils and Fats Oils and fats are primary sources of energy and to a varying degree, of the essential fatty acids and fat soluble vitamins.
The fish oils contain vitamins A and D. With the exception of the fish oils, most of the animal fats serve largely to increase the energy value, and satiety value of the diet.
Group 13 Beverages Beverages are foods that are distinguished by two principal characteristics from other foods.
First, they are liquids or are consumed in the liquid state, but the relative lack of actual food value differentiates them from others like milk products.
Secondly, the are either consumed for their thirst-quenching properties or for their stimulating effects.
The 30PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING essential component of any beverage is the water it contains.
Alcoholic beverages are readily oxidized in the body to yield calories.
Beverages from fruits or from cocoa contribute some nutrients while coffee contains varying amounts of niacin, depending on the degree of roasting which the coffee beans have undergone.
Group 14 Miscellaneous Salt or sodium chloride is not merely a condiment.
It is a dietary necessity since natural foods do not supply enough chloride and sodium to meet the body’s requirement under all condition.
Excessive consumption of salt is however, unadvisable because of its link with cardiovascular and renal disease.
Spices like curry, thyme and ginger do not contribute significantly to the diet, but improve the appetite.
4.0 CONCLUSION Nutrients are the chemical building blocks of food.
It follows therefore that no substance can be called a food unless it contains one or more nutrients.
Different kinds of food contain different types of nutrients in varying amounts.
As such, eating a variety of foods will ensure that an individual or family members get enough of the nutrients to maintain healthy living.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have provided a foundation for the student to be able to plan an adequate diet for the family.
This we have done by introducing you to basic concepts in food and nutrition.
By now, you should be able to define food and nutrients.
The functions and food sources of each of the nutrients should be clear to you.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Describe any five members of the fourteen food group system, and give examples of food in each group.
Why do we need to categorize foods into groups?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alabi, J.
A., Adeola, A.A. and Samuel, F.O.
(2003).
Principles of Meal Management.
Oyo: Odumatt Press and Publishers.
Fredrick, J.S.
and McWilliams, M. (1977).
Living Nutrition.
U.S.A.: John Wiley & Sons.
31PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 2 PLANNING MEALS FOR THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of an Adequate Diet 3.2 Meeting the Nutritional Needs of Different Individuals in the Family 3.3 Class Activity 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The previous unit (unit 6) has helped you to appreciate the framework within which meals can be planned for the family.
In this unit, you will be taught how to design an adequate diet for the family, based on the basic principles you learnt before.
Also in this unit, you are expected to learn about the different nutritional needs of the different individuals in the family.
After going through this study unit, what should be your achievement?
See the specific objectives of the unit below: - 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, the student should be able to:  define (correctly) what an adequate diet is.
 discuss the nutrients requirements of individuals in the family.
 plan menus to meet the individual nutritional needs.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CONCEPT OF AN ADEQUATE DIET Obtaining and consuming a nutritious diet depends on the amount and variety of food locally available and accessible to the family.
Many kinds and combination of food can make up a well-balanced diet.
Since no natural food, by itself, has all the nutrients needed for full growth and good health, one has to obtain the necessary nutrients from various food 32PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING sources.
In a nutshell, people should eat a wide variety (from the different food groups) and spread the consumption over the day.
Another important principle to consider when planning an adequate diet is that all persons, throughout the family life cycle have need for about the same nutrients, but in varying amounts.
The nutrients need (requirements) of individuals in the family or within a given population differ greatly.
This is because different people are in different stages of life.
The life cycle begins in the womb (pregnancy) and continues to birth, infancy, childhood, adolescence, adult hood and old age.
This applies to both males and females, though as from adolescence the differences between males and females begin to emerge.
Apart from age and sex, nutritional needs are also influenced by activity levels or occupation, state of health and climatic conditions.
Combining the two principles in the foregoing paragraphs, the concept of an adequate diet (formerly referred to as a balanced diet) can be easily understood.
An adequate diet is any good and varied supply of food, which satisfies an individual’s nutritional needs.
Where a good and varied supply of food is available and affordable, everyone should be able to select and eat the foods that meet their nutritional needs.
An understanding of the different nutrient needs of different groups of people is necessary for effective planning and preparation of such a diet.
The home economist must be able to choose wisely from a variety of foods that are not too costly or difficult to access.
3.2 Meeting the Nutritional Needs of Different Groups Pregnant and Breastfeeding mothers Women need to eat enough before, during and after pregnancy to deal with the extra strain that pregnancy puts on the body.
Babies need to be well nourished both before and after they are born.
When a woman is pregnant or breastfeeding, she must meet the baby’s nutritional need as well as her own.
If the mother’s diet does not satisfy the needs of her baby, the baby will draw on, and reduce the mother’s own stores of nutrients.
This puts the mother at increased risk of illness and can affect the baby’s development.
Pregnant and breastfeeding women should therefore be aware of the importance of obtaining additional foods to meet both their and the growing baby’s nutrientional needs: 33PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING i Carbohydrates and fats supply the extra energy needed ii Protein, vitamins and minerals (especially iron, iodine, calcium, folic acid and vitamins A, C and K) are particularly important for building the baby’s muscles, organs and tissues, bones and teeth and for the formation of haemoglobin and blood.
These needs can generally be met by eating a wide variety of foods including plenty of fresh fruits and orange, coloured and dark green leafy vegetables.
Fruit and vegetables are also a good source of fibre which helps prevent constipation that is common during pregnancy.
Pregnancy women should be encouraged to have regular medical checks to ensure that they are keeping themselves and the developing baby well nourished.
If the mother is not getting enough of a particular nutrient, relevant dietary supplement should be given.
In some cases, vitamins and minerals supplement might also be recommend, but these should be taken only as advised by a physician.
During pregnancy, the requirement for iron is particularly high and supplements are often needed.
Folic acid is another common supplement as is iodine in certain areas.
Breastfeeding mothers need a varied, nutritious diet too.
They should have adequate supplies of energy and protein.
Lots of fluids, such as fruit juices and soups are also important.
Infants Infancy covers the period from birth to one year.
Breast milk is the natural food for babies.
Breast milk has the added advantage of boosting the baby’s milk resistance to disease.
It is safe, inexpensive and provides all the nutrients most babies need for the first six months of life.
Breastfeeding can continue up to two years.
While breast milk is the basic food of the baby, milk alone is not enough to meet the increased nutritional needs as the baby grows older.
By six months, babies should be introduced to other foods to supplement the energy, protein, vitamins and minerals provided by breast milk.
This will also accustom the baby to varieties in food flavours and textures.
Foods for babies require special preparation to make sure that they are soft, clean and easy to digest.
To meet the entire baby’s nutritional needs, it will be necessary to add foods high in energy and other nutrients (oil, fruit, vegetables, legumes and animal products) to the family’s staple food.
Once the baby is accustomed to liquid and soft 34PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING foods, and as the teeth appear, semi-solid and then solid foods can gradually be introduced to the diet.
Preparing safe and nutritious supplementary foods can take a lot of time and effort.
Many mothers and fathers, especially young and first time parents, need practical advice and assistance to help them provide their babies with the foods they need.
Young Children (2-5 Years) • Young children are often the most at risk of being malnourished.
They have very high energy and nutrient needs for their body size in comparison to adults.
Proper care and feeding is essential for their growth, development and activity.
• Children can eat many of the same foods as their parents.
They should be encouraged to take variety of energy and protein-rich foods and fruit and vegetables for growth and body maintenance.
• Children cannot eat the same amount of food in one meal as adults.
They also expend a lot of energy throughout the day.
They should sustain energy requirements by eating small meals and snacks spread over the day.
• Children need to maintain their diet of energy-rich and body- building foods throughout their growing yeas until they reach adulthood.
They should be encouraged to exercise and stay active so that the high-energy intake does not result in obesity.
• Sick children must be encouraged to eat and drink, even if they have little appetite.
They should be offered softer textured foods and the foods they like best.
Lots of fluids-milk, fruit juice, soups and clean water-are especially important when a child has diarrhea.
• Children recovering from any type of fever and sickness must be given plenty of energy and nutrient-rich foods to eat.
• Eating habits are established early stage of life, so it’s important to teach at an early age how to get the best from food.
Adolescents Adolescents grow rapidly and so have very high energy and nutrient needs.
They need adequate intakes of vitamins and minerals, especially 35PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING iron, calcium, vitamins A, C and D. In addition, adequate amount of energy and protein are needed to sustain growth and development.
Special attention should be given to adolescent girls who need to be well nourished both for their immediate development and the future stresses of childbearing.
Anemia and calcium deficiency are common problems in adolescents.
Foods rich in calcium and iron should be encouraged even as supplements.
Adulthood An adult has reached maturity, and is grown in size and strength.
The adult requires adequate nutrition for the maintenance of body processes and the everyday activities of life.
An adult’s diet should be balanced and suitable for his work, health and age.
For example, sedentary workers require less energy from their food than manual worker.
The state of health (invalid or convalescent) also requires that such an adult should be well nourished, so as to aid the healing process.
The Elderly There is no set age at which a person is elderly.
The ageing process is significantly influenced by culture, individual activity levels and general health status.
As people begin to feel the effects of old age, illness and less of taste and thirst sensation can reduce appetite; loss of teeth can make chewing difficult; a variety of stomach and intestinal disorder can lead to digestive problems; disabilities and infirmities, coupled with poverty, loneliness and depression can make acquiring and preparing food difficult.
All elderly people should therefore pay attention to their nutritional needs.
Many aged people will need special help to do this.
Even though most people need less energy as they get older, the elderly need adequate protein, carbohydrates, fat, vitamins, minerals and dietary fibre.
Women should have an adequate calcium intake throughout life to reduce bone loss.
Foods for the elderly should include a wide variety of grains fruits, vegetables, legumes, meats and dairy products.
Consumption of high- energy foods may be particularly important if appetite fails and overall food intake is limited.
Maintaining adequate fluid intake is also important.
For those who find it harder to eat and digest foods, special preparation might be needed to make these foods more appealing and easier to digest.
36PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING For example: Boiling steaming or baking food may be preferable to frying.
Fatty meat should be avoided in favour of lean meat and poultry.
More food should be eaten at the start of the day while food intake at the end of the day should be limited to a light supper.
3.3 Class Activity 1 Using foods that are readily available in the locality, plan and prepare a one-day menu for (a) a pregnant woman (b) an elderly man (c) a male farmer who is 36 years old (d)young child who is 2 years old (e) an adolescent girl Relate the menus with each individual’s nutritional needs.
2.
Plan and prepare a menu for the lunch of a female student who is 22 years old.
Modify this menu to suit the needs of a lactating woman of the same age.
3.
A variety of menus for a day are presented to you.
Study each menu carefully.
(a) Which nutrient is found in the greatest amount?
(b)Which nutrients are present in small quantities, or, not at all?
(c) Considering the menu as it is, for whom would you recommend such a menu?
Why?
Note that to provide answers to the question three above, you need to consult with Table of food composition.
4.0 CONCLUSION Planning should precede preparation, cooking and serving of nourishing family meals.
The homemaker (woman of the house) must be able to determine the amount and type of food to be eaten by members of a family so as to satisfy nutritional needs relative to their age, sex and levels of activity 37PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has been able to point out the need for a homemaker to be dynamic in caring for the members of the family in terms of providing varieties of food that are nutritionally adequate for each family member.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State and explain the peculiar features of children (2-5yr) that are essential in providing adequate diet for them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E. and Eluwa, M. (1991): Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Ibadan: African-Fep Publishers Ltd. 38PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 3 KITCHEN EQUIPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cooking and Cooling Equipment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are indeed limitless number of kitchen equipment.
However, due to space and for the purpose of this course, just one labour-saving device that is valuable in cooking food and two devices that help in preserving food shall be discussed.
Only the important features of this equipment are highlighted.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that you would, at the end of this unit, be able to: • state the precautions and uses of pressure cookers, refrigerators and freezers.
• highlight the factors that affect the choice of these equipment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cooking and Cooling Equipment Pressure Cooker Pressure cooker had been in use since 1682.
It was invented in 1679 by a Frenchman, Denys Papin.
Modern cookers have been improved over the early ones, but the basic principle remains the same.
As the pressure in cooking pot is increased, there would be rise in temperature.
This speeds up the cooking, saving the fuel, nutritive value and colour.
Domestic pressure cookers may be either casserole (this has a small handle on both cover) or and one slightly larger than that needed for daily use.
It is just as economical in fuel and time to cook a small amount of food in large cooker as in a small one.
The cover of the cooker should be well secured so as to make it possible to lift as the 39PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING pressure inside the pan build up.
All cookers have safety devices, which prevent the pressure to rise above the maximum.
The safety device are usually in the form of a rubber plug which melts at 1400c when the pan boils dry or if the automatics air vent becomes blocked by grease, food or dirt.
A few cookers are fitted with pressure gauges.
They can be in the majority of cookers and this control usually incorporates a working device such as a whistle which operates when the desired pressure has been used.
Some cookers are supplied with dividers or wire racks so that several different food can be cooked at the same time.
It is proper and advisable to always be conversant with the manufacture’s manual before using any pressure cooker.
The following cares should be applied to pressure cooker (a) Wash the cooker very carefully after use (b)Check and wash the vent.
(c) Ensure that the gasket or availing ring is free of grease and food particles.
(d)Dry the cooker thoroughly (e) Do not store it with the closed as this will make it become moist easily.
Factors to be considered in procuring a cooker (a) The size in relation to the family’s needs and space in the kitchen.
(b)The cost in relation to the budget and usage of the cooker.
(c) Features that are required e.g.
automatic timing, self-cleaning even lining.
(d)Type of fuel required and facilities available in the home for it.
(e) Good design features e.g.
for easy cleaning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the factors that influence the choice of a pressure?
3.2 Refrigerator Refrigerators are important because (a) The temperatures in the refrigerators reduce microbial spoilage.
(b)It discourages food contamination.
(c) It cuts down food wastage; (d) Shopping is simplified as perishables foods do not have to be purchased at frequent intervals; 40PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (e) Dishes can be prepared in advance and stored.
This simplifies meal planning and entertaining.
(f) Many foods taste better for being chilled.
Cooling is brought about by the evaporation of a liquid (the refrigerant), which flows through the tubes forming the evaporator.
As it takes up the heat from the inside of the refrigerator, the refrigerant vapourises and is turned back into a liquid to start the cycle all over again.
The least cool part of the refrigerator is the interior of the door which is usually fitted with racks for the storage of milk, butter, eggs etc the coldest section is the frozen food compartment formed by the refrigerant tubes and the evaporator at the top of the refrigerator.
In most refrigerators, this section (the frozen food compartment) is marked with one, two or three stars to indicate the temperature and the length of time frozen foods will have these star marks on the wrapping.
*One star indicates that the temperature in the frozen food compartment of this model is approximately 60C; frozen food can be stored for up to one (1) week... ** Two star temperature is approximately 120C and storage time is up to four week.
*** Three Star Temperature is approximately 180C and storage time up to three months.
Compartments which are not star marked may only be suitable for making ice cubes.
They usually operate at above 60C.
Frozen food should not be stored for more than one or two days.
It is sensible to choose the largest model one can afford that will fit into the kitchen.
Experience has shown that once a refrigerator is bought, the maximum use is always made of it.
If electricity supply is regular.
The following ideas should be noted when using a refrigerator (a) Manufacturer’s instructions should be followed strictly (b) Always cool food to room temperature before placing it in refrigerator.
This reduces the running coats and cuts down the amount of ice forming on the evaporator.
(c) Foods meant for the refrigerator should be covered so as to prevent drying out or crossing flavour with other foods.
(d)Foods should only be stored for the recommended time.
The following order of food arrangement could be followed if directions are not given with the refrigeration.
41PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (a) Frozen food compartment – ice cube trays, storage of frozen food and ice cream.
(b) 1st and 2nd shelves – uncooked meats, poultry, offal, sausages, fish (c) 3rd shelf – cooked meat, pies, cheese, gravy (d) 4th shelf – Bacon, milk, dishes, cold sweets (e) Bottom drawer – salad, green vegetables, fruit (f) Door racks – butter, eggs and milk Avoid storing strong smelling fruits such as melons, strawberries and pineapples.
Bananas should not be stored as they will turn black.
Defrosting of the refrigerator is needed so as to remove moisture drawn from the air in the cabinet which freezes on the surface of the evaporator.
Once the frozen moisture has collected to the thickness of about a centimeter, it needs to be removed or else the refrigerator will work less efficiently.
While many refrigerators must be defrosted manually, many are now defrosted semi or fully automatically.
Some steps involved in manual defrosting are (a) Turn control dial to “off” or “defrost” (b)Remove all the food from the refrigerator.
Wrap frozen food in thick layers of newspaper and put it in a cool place.
(c) Scrap off ice with a brush or a wooden spatula to collect as much ice as possible before it thaws and dispose of it into the sink.
(d) A bowl of warm water in the refrigerator will speed up the defrosting process.
The melting ice will collect as water in the drip tray, which can be removed and empted.
(e) Wipe out the refrigerator (f) Re-set the controls and replace the food.
cleaning is done along side with the defrosting The following factors influence the choice of a refrigerator i.
Size and capacity required ii.
Storage arrangements inside the refrigerator iii.
Space available in the kitchen iv.
Star rating for frozen food compartment v. Workmanship on the refrigerator and its finish vi.
Additional feature e.g.
automatics defrosting and digital temperature vii.
Amount of money available.
42PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the roles of refrigerators in the home?
3.3 Freezers Foods are frozen at a temperature below 20C.
Fruits and vegetables can purchase in bulk when they are in season and frozen.
Meat and poultry and ready frozen foods can be ought in bulk and also frozen.
Shopping time, cooking time can be reduced with freezing.
The larger the freezers, the less the cost per cubic capacity.
Rules for freezing include (a) Read the instruction manual (b)Freeze only food in perfect condition as possible after gathering and preparing.
(c) Wrap in moisture and vapour materials.
(d) Never put hot foods into the freezer.
Cool them to room temperature.
(e) Set the controls at the coldest setting several hours before freezing food; (f) Do not store food for longer than the recommended.
(g)Thaw and use as recommended.
Foods that do not freeze successfully include salad vegetables with a high water constant, fruit such as bananas, melon and pears mayonnaise, bacon and onions.
Almost the same steps for defrosting refrigerators are applicable to freezer.
However, if it is necessary to remove grease or smell, add a teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda to each litre of water to wash the freezer.
For strong smells use two teaspoons of vinegar to each litre of water to wash and rinse with clean water.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What rules affect freezing?
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has helped you to know more about three main labour devices that are inevitable in the family.
43PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 5.0 SUMMARY The importance and care of pressure cookers, refrigerators, and freezers have been highlighted.
This should help you to appreciate the role of kitchen equipment to a happy living in the family.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 State and discuss the role of refrigerator in the home.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Trace the dangers involved in the use of a pressure cooker.
In view of these dangers, should it be used in the home?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Carpenter, E.E.
(1977): Home Management & House Care London: Heinemann Educational Books.
44PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING MODULE 3 FAMILY CARING Unit 1 Clothing the family Unit 2 Home Laundry Unit 3 Housing the family UNIT 1 CLOTHING THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Importance of Clothing 3.2 Wardrobe planning 3.3 Storage of clothing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have so far learnt about marriage and family issues.
We also looked at the art of nourishing the family.
The unit examines another basic need of family “clothing the family” The homemaker has another important duty, which is to ensure that family members are properly clothed and that family clothing is properly managed through good planning, intelligent selection, and care.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, we hope the student would have learnt: 1. why clothing is important to family living 2. how to plan a wardrobe 3. how to properly store clothing items.
45PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Clothing Clothing is any article we place on the body in order to protect, beautify or adorn it.
Clothing includes dresses, shoes, jewelry, hair-do and make up.
Indeed good clothing gives self-confidence and impresses other people favourably.
Clothing also tells about your status and roles in the society.
Clothing can impair or enhance health.
Dirty clothes can harbour germs, and restrictive or tight clothing can and does interfere with free movement of air and blood circulation.
These points underscore the need for the proper provision and maintenance of clothing items for the family.
3.2 Wardrobe planning Wardrobe planning is the process of planning all accessories (shoes, bags, briefcases, ties, scarves, belts hats, caps, berets, cosmetics, jewelries and undergarments) for the day-to-day activities of an individual or entire family.
Wardrobe planning takes cognizance of the age, sex, taste, job, recreation and social life of an individual as well as fashion trend before it can be said to be functional and satisfactory.
Wardrobe planning requires knowledge of (i) a good choice of fabrics for different occasions (ii) designs and styles for different figure types (iii) proper storage of clothing There are certain factors that one needs to consider when planning the wardrobe for the family.
These are discussed as follows: - 1.
Money available: - The amount of money and quantity of clothing that a family can afford to buy.
It also determines family’s choice between ready-made and self-made dresses.
2.
The specific purpose of the clothes: - The family should wear the right clothes for the right occasion.
Therefore, in planning a wardrobe, you have to consider the occasion for which the dresses will be worn.
Different clothing is school clothes, clothing for work and, clothing for household work.
Others include night gowns or sleeping garments, clothing for sports and 46PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING picnics, clothes for religious worship, clothes for parties and social gatherings and underwear or undergarments 3.
Another point to consider when planning a wardrobe is colour.
You should choose clothes whose colours both fit with other clothes in the wardrobe and suit your personal complexion.
You should choose colours and styles that will flatter your figure type and de-emphasize your figure faults.
4.
Weather conditions: In planning family clothing, the homemaker has to make provision for clothes to be worn during rainy and dry seasons.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Make a list of all your activities that require special clothing and which special clothes do you have now?
ii.
Cut out pictures of clothes from magazines and newspapers and then make a fashion album with the cuttings.
3.3 Steps in wardrobe planning Now that you know the principles underlying wardrobe planning, the next thing is to actually plan a wardrobe.
This section itemizes the different steps to take in planning a wardrobe.
1.
The first thing is to consider the purpose for which you wish to buy the clothing item.
Do you require it for work?, a party?, or an interview?.
2.
Next, take an interventory of what you already have, so that you do not duplicate items.
You may also find out that you have a garment that can be remodeled, or combined with new accessories and used for the occasion.
3.
Make a list of all that you need, based on order of priority.
4.
Plan a colour scheme for your needs.
You may select a colour such as blue or brown and build around it.
5.
Consider your figure type and complexion and choose befitting fabrics, styles and colours.
6.
Plan your purchases based on money available in your purse.
7.
Compare prices in different shops before buying.
8.
Check the clothing item properly before paying for it.
47PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.4 Storing clothing items in the home In order to protect and maintain family clothing, you need adequate space and furniture for storing clothes.
Everybody needs a wardrobe, box, and hanging spaces with hangers.
Proper care and storage of clothes also protects them from pests such as moths, cockroaches, rats and silver fish.
Hanging your clothes in the wardrobe also prevents them from getting creased or rumpled so that they can retain their original shape.
How do you store other clothing accessories like shoes, bags, hats and jewelry?
Shoes: Clean shoes immediately after uses.
Arrange on a shoe rack or shelf that is well aired.
Bags: Clean and dry your bags and hang them neatly on nails.
Otherwise, arrange them in the wardrobe.
Hats and head ties: Brush and store hats in polythene or paper bags, on the wardrobe shelf or around a hat stand.
Air and neatly fold head ties after every use.
Jewelry: Clean according to maker’s instructions, or according to kind of metal or material.
Pack in a jewel box or drawer.
4.0 CONCLUSION Clothing the family is an important function of a caring homemaker.
The care and storage of family clothing and its accessories need to be well mastered so as to justify the money invested on it.
5.0 SUMMARY The importance of clothing and steps involved in wardrobe planning have been highlighted in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the points to bear in mind when choosing clothes for the wardrobes?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E. and Eluwa, M. (1991): Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Ibadan: African-Fep Publishers Ltd. 48PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 2 HOME LAUNDRY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Laundry 3.2 The laundry process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutors marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Clothing and other household textiles will give long services if they are properly cared for.
The aim of laundering is to retain the original characteristics of the fabrics, and this can be achieved by applying the correct method of washing and ironing or finishing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to: • discuss the importance of laundry in the home • discuss each of the steps involved in the laundry process.
• launder family clothes, following systematically the different steps in the laundry process.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Laundry Laundering is important for the following reasons: (a) Dirty clothes and household linen can harbour germs which may lead to ill health and disease.
(b)Dirty clothes and sweat-stained clothes ooze with bad smells which repels other people from a person wearing such.
(c) Dirty clothes do not promote a good image of the wearer.
(d) Dirt can damage fabrics when it forms a chemical combination/compound with the fabric.
This can weaken the fabric if neglected.
49PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING From the foregoing points, we can see that laundering is an important aspect of family living as it helps clothes to look better and last longer.
Materials needed for laundry include water, cleansing agents like detergents, soaps and bleaches which aid the removal of dirt, fabric rinses like blue, starch, vinegar and fabric softness and disinfectants.
We shall now go on to learn the process of laundry.
3.2 The laundry process Laundering of clothes involves a number of steps which make up the laundry process.
It is very important to understand all the steps so as to be able to plan a proper routine for carrying out the family wash.
The laundry process is made up of the following steps: 1.
Gathering of dirty articles This activity takes place on a daily basis, particularly in a family with babies and school age children.
Each family should have a laundry basket or laundry bag so that dirty clothings do not litter the house.
2.
Sorting out the washing The article should be sorted out according to their kind/ purpose.
This is necessary because those of the same nature should receive similar treatment.
Let us consider some general guidelines for the sorting of clothes.
(a) Sort out articles that require repairs such as replacement of lost buttons, worn out zippers, hooks and eyes, buckles, etc some clothes may require darning or patching.
(b) Separate articles into white and coloured.
Separate each group into smaller piles of fibre types that is cotton, linen, wool, polyester etc.
(c) Wash babies clothes separately (d) Inspect pockets and remove all objects.
3.
Mending Before the actual washing, all clothings that require repair must be mended.
In addition, any special stains on the articles must be removed before washing.
50PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 4.
Soaking or Steeping Heavily soiled or greasy clothes should be soaked overnight, possibly in hot water.
White cotton and linen articles can be soaked for thirty minutes in a solution of bleach before washing.
However, do not soak articles that are not colour fart.
5.
Washing After steeping, the dirt is removed from the cloth by agitating the fabrics through washing.
Cotton and linen can withstand friction; hence they are washed by rubbing vigorously with the hands.
In some cases, strong fibre articles can be scrubbed with a brush.
On the other hand, delicate materials such as wool, silk and nylon are gently kneaded and squeezed.
Washing can also be done with a washing machine which washes the clothes, rinses and spin dries.
During the process of washing (either by hand or by machine) the fibre of the clothes are flexed and the soil or dirt is gradually removed and held in suspension by the detergent solution so that it cannot re-settle on the article.
Always wash the cleanest articles before the dirtiest.
6.
Rinsing As soon as washing is satisfactorily done, the water need for washing should be discarded and rinsing should be carried out.
Rinsing is the process by which lather is washed off the articles, thus leaving the laundered articles clean and soapless.
7.
Optional treatments (bluing, starching, fabric softening) After rinsing, the article can be blued, stiffened or softened as desired.
Fabric softening is useful because they help to restore the original softness to all types of fabric.
8 Drying White cotton and linen fabrics, and those with fast colours, can stand strong outdoor drying in the sunlight.
The sun helps to bleach the cotton and linen.
Coloured cottons with loose dyes should be dried out of the sun, in the shade or they will fade.
Guidelines for Drying Clothes There are some guidelines for drying of clothes which all family members must know and follow.
51PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (i) All knitted articles such as sweaters, jerseys and mufflers should be laid on a flat surface to dry as they can pull out of shape if hanged.
(ii) In general, other articles should be hanged the way they are worn.
Let them be suspended by their strongest parts.
(iii) Use clean pegs to hold articles, and avoid using rusty metal lines to spread the clothes.
9.
Finishing After washing, and drying clothes need to be finished so that they can regain their original smooth feel and appearance.
The most common procedure of finishing is by ironing or pressing.
Pressing involves pressing a hot iron down where needed, lifting it and then pressing it again without moving the iron about on the fabric.
Steam iron can be used for pressing.
All woolen articles, knitted garments and crepes require pressing.
For ironing, the iron is moved to and fro on the material.
Effective ironing requires moisture heat and pressure for effective finishing.
10.
Airing After ironing, it is important to air the articles near a window or in the sun (if colour fast) to allow the steam left between the fibres to evaporate.
If it is left in the cloth, it could result in mildew attack.
11.
Storage The clothes should be folded or hung up and placed in the wardrobe for safe keeping away from dirt.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Practice laundering your clothes during the weekend.
Use correct procedure from sorting to storage.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, proper laundry of household clothings is an important aspect of family living.
It is important to have a firm grasp of the practice of home laundry processes.
5.0 SUMMARY You have studied why it is important to properly launder household articles.
You have also been taught how to handle the family wash. 52PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Compare what you have learnt with your present method of laundering clothes.
Are there any differences?
What steps do you need to take to improve on your method of washing clothes?
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 What are the general guidelines for sorting dirty articles before laundering?
2 What is “finishing” in the laundry process?
Why is it necessary?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS CESAC (1980).
Home Management Pupils text.
Lagos.
Macmillan Nigeria Publishers Awosika, B. I.
(2003).
Wardrobe Planning and Maintenance.
Ondo: Pat Ade Publishers.
53PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 3 HOUSING THE FAMILY CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Definition of house and home 3.2 Types of houses 3.3 Choosing a home 3.4 Housing and health 4.0Conclusion 5.0Summary 6.0Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Decent housing or adequate shelter is one of the basic needs of every individual, the family and the community in general.
It is also one of the best indicators of a person’s living and status in a society.
Housing has an important impact on the health, welfare and productivity of an individual.
In this unit, we shall examine some issues pertaining to housing for the family.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • differentiate between the terms house and home • mention the different types of houses • explain the points to consider in designing a family house.
• understand the links between housing and health 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of house and home The three basic needs of human beings are food, housing or shelter and clothing.
The house can be defined as a building, which provides shelter, privacy, and protection from weather.
It gives its occupants physical protection and emotional security.
The house provides the space we need to keep our belongings, and also to receive our visitors.
54PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING On the other hand, it is the people living inside the house that make the building a home.
A home provides a warm atmosphere for meeting the basic needs necessary for achieving a complete and meaningful life.
3.2 Types of houses There are different houses available to the family.
Choosing a suitable house is an important family decision, but before choosing, one needs to know the different types of houses available.
There are different types of houses in Nigeria.
These are either traditional or modern.
The traditional ones are usually found in the rural areas or in the traditional inner core of urban areas.
Usually, traditional houses are made of different kind of materials such as 1.
Mud 2.
Mud bricks 3.
Bamboo 4.
Thatch/woven grasses 5.
Wood/tree trunks Some of these houses are circular in shape, square or rectangular depending on where it is located in the country.
For example, mud houses are commonly found in the southwestern parts of Nigeria while thatch houses are common in some rural areas (villages) in the north.
Modern houses came about as a result of colonization, when the white people came into Nigeria.
They started building modern houses like those found in Europe and America.
The building materials are usually made of 1. concrete blocks 2. corrugated iron sheets, cement tiles, ardex roofing sheets, asbestos sheeting, long span roofing sheets etc 3. paint 4. concrete tiles or other floor finish like terrazzo 5. louvres, sliding doors and windows, wooden doors or metal doors, Modern houses are also in different forms and sizes.
They can be bungalows, or storey buildings, which can be flats or a duplex.
We shall now look at the different kinds of houses as highlighted above 55PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Traditional houses (a) Mud houses: Mud refers to wet, soft earth or soil commonly used as building material in some parts of Nigeria.
In some areas, it is just used for the walls and in others it is also used for roofing.
How is mud made?
First, you dig out pure earth, which does not contain any fine sand.
The next stage is to wet it with water and pound it with the feet until it becomes plastic in texture.
The plastic soft mud can then be made into heaps and covered with banana leaves for about a week.
Finally, the mud is pounded with the feet (the second time) and made into big balls, which are then used for building the mud house.
However, mud houses are suited most for savanna areas, which are not too wet or easily flooded.
That is why such houses are common around the middle belt and northern parts of Nigeria such as Benue, Kaduna and Sokoto.
During the hot whether, mud homes are very cool.
(b) Mud Brick houses: Sometimes, the mud can be moulded into bricks and dried in the sun.
Firing them in a kiln further hardens the dry bricks.
These finished bricks are then used for building walls of houses.
(c) Bamboo or other tree trunks: In areas which are flooded or riverine, people cut down bamboo stems, trunks of palm trees and reeds to build their houses.
The houses are actually built on stilts (poles) standing in the water.
The houses are then roofed with thatch (dry grass).
These kinds of houses are common in Ondo, Lagos, Delta, Bayelsa and Rivers States.
Modern Houses (a) Bungalow: A bungalow is a one-floor complete house, which is self- contained.
This means that everything you need in terms of rooms, kitchen, toilet and others are available within the building.
(b) Block of flats: is a house that is made up of a number of complete housing units each of which is self-contained and can be occupied by a family.
Flats can be bungalows or storey building having more than one floor.
(c) Duplex: A duplex is a house that has just two floors and built to serve only one family.
A house unit is also one that is occupied by just one family.
What are the facilities of a modern house?
56PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Modern houses usually have the following rooms: kitchen, store, sitting room, dining rooms, bedrooms, toilet and bathroom, laundry, terraces or verandas.
3.3 Choosing a House Certain factors must be put into consideration when choosing a house to live in: 1.
Family size: The size of a family determines the size of house to be rented or built.
This is because a large family will require more space than a smaller family.
2.
Economic factors: The choice of a building or housing is determined by the economic status of a family.
Low-income earners may not be able to afford expensive houses such as flats, duplexes or bungalows, as the high income earners.
3.
Location of the house: The availability and accessibility of social amenities can determine where a house is sited.
The house should be located in an area that is easily accessible to the family members’ places of work, the children’s school, market and medical services.
Other nearby facilities to consider in house location involves water, electricity, good roads, recreational facilities, and postal services.
4.
House structure and design: The taste of a person will determine the kind of home he/she will like to live in.
While some people would like to live in a flat, some other person may wish to live in duplexes.
5.
Climate and weather conditions: The weather of the area in which the house is located must be considered.
If the area is rainy to provide adequate shelter and protection from the rain.
6.
Religious and socio-cultural beliefs: The type of social life a family enjoys influences the type of house they choose.
Also the status of the family members in the society will influences where they live.
Other factors include 7.
Climate and weather conditions 8.
The population density of the area 9.
Religious and cultural beliefs 10.The nature of the family 57PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Points to consider in designing a family house The house is a building where people live or a place where a family dwells together.
A house protects the people from sun, wind, rain and pests but the home offers a lasting comfort for the dwellers.
There is much concern in the setting up of a home than building a house, and all efforts must be made to ensure that the needs of all family members are adequately met.
Guides to building a house When a family decides to build a house that suits its needs, then the convenience, comfort, and safety of the family and its members must be considered.
The following guidelines could be helpful.
1.
A suitable site must be chosen.
Topography and drainage systems in the area must be considered.
Where possible heavily polluted areas should be avoided.
2.
The design of the house should meet the needs of the family, e.g.
the number and sizes of rooms should be adequate for the size or intended size of the family.
3.
The design should provide for adequate ventilation and lighting.
4.
The materials for the construction of the house, such as materials of walls, roofing, ceiling, flooring and finishing should be suitable for the environment.
5.
Durable and suitable fixtures, e.g.
sinks, bath-tub, toilet, units etc should be chosen.
6.
Colour scheme for the house should be harmonized.
For instance, paints for doors, windows, and walls should be harmonized.
7.
The grounds around the house should be well planned.
There should be adequate provision for the drive, hedges, f lowers and vegetables garden where possible.
8.
The shape of the house should be determined by individual tastes.
Houses can be dome-shaped, boat shaped, rectangular etc.
9.
Back and front doors should be easily accessible from the backyard and the front of the house.
10.Adequate provision of doors should be made to ensure that (i) the bathroom and lavatory are easily accessible without occupants going through other rooms (ii) all the bedrooms can be reached from landing or hall without going through other rooms 58PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.4 HOUSING AND HEALTH Housing is of central importance to health of people.
In order words, the house in which you live determines, to a large extent, your health and well being.
Over and above its primary purpose to provide shelter against the elements of weather, and a focus for family life, the home environment should afford protection against the hazards to health arising from the physical and social environment.
The principles of healthy housing are hereby listed as follows: 1.
Protection against communicable diseases: A healthy house should have amenities that will help to protect the house occupants against diseases such as diarrhoea, cholera, malaria, worms, measles, tuberculosis etc such amenities includes:  safe water supply  sanitary excreta disposal  disposal of solid wastes  drainage of surface water  personal and domestic hygiene  safe food preparation area  structural safe guards like treated mosquito nets 2.
Protection against injuries, poisonings and chronic diseases: There are some aspects of the house which if carefully attended to will help to prevent injuries, poisonings and chronic diseases.
These aspects include indoor pollution from cooking fuels, chemical safety, and providing good structural features like stairs case as well as good finishings like non-slip floor coverings.
3.
Reducing psychological and social stress: - A house will definitely support the psychological and mental well being of its occupants.
i adequate living space, privacy and comfort; ii personal and family security; iii access to recreation and community amenities; and iv protection against noise.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has dealt with an important aspect of family life – housing and setting up of the home.
Housing has an important impact on the health, welfare and productivity of an individual and family as a whole.
59PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 5.0SUMMARY A suitable house fulfils a man’s desire to be able to provide shelter for himself and his family.
A man’s house is an evidence of his achievement and normally gives him a feeling of accomplishment and psychological satisfaction and security.
This makes him attaches great importance to housing which invariably which influence the type of house he will choose and the percentage of family income that goes into housing.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 i.
Discuss any five factors that one should consider when choosing a house ii.
Describe any three types of houses found in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Why is housing important to health?
2.
Explain the difference between house and home.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E and Eluwa, M. (1991).
Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: African-pep publishers.
World Health Organization (1997).
Health and Environment in Sustainable Development.
Geneva.
60PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING MODULE 4 FAMILY HEALTH ISSUES Unit 1 First Aid in the Home Unit 2 Basic guidelines of healthy living Unit 3 Energy and Money Management in the home UNIT 1 FIRST AID IN THE HOME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 First Aid practices in the home 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you would be exposed to the meaning and components of first aid and first aid treatments that you could apply to very few accidents in the home.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, it is expected that you would be able to: • explain what first aid is all about.
• describe how to give first aid to some common accidents in the home.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of First Aid First aid is the immediate care or help given to a person who sustained injury from accident or took ill or has been involved in an emergency that needs assistance.
It requires self-help and home care if medical assistance is not available or is delayed.
It includes well-selected words of encouragement, evidence of willingness to help and promotion of confidence by demonstration competence.
61PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.1 Reasons for First Aid First aid is needed so as to (i) prevent and care for accidental injury or sudden illness.
(ii) care for persons caught in a natural disaster or other catastrophe.
(iii) equip individuals to appropriately deal with both the victim and the injury.
(iv) distinguish between what to do and what not to do .
Knowledge of first aid is important for a home maker because more often than not it helps in differentiating between: (i) life and death (ii) temporary and permanent disability (iii) rapid recovery and long hospitalisation.
3.2 First aid box While you may not be praying for accidents to occur in the home, it a basic fact that it is unavoidable.
A first aid box is therefore a basic necessity in the home.
It should be clearly placed in a conspicuous and easily accessible place in the home.
It should however be out of the reach of the children.
Items that could be put in the box include: (i) scissors (ii) a roll of cotton wool (iii) absorbent gauze (iv) bandages of various types (v) plasters (vi) solutions for cleaning wounds e.g.
antiseptic, iodine, gentian violet etc (vii) razor blade (viii) clinical thermometer (ix) vaseline and (x) safety pins etc 3.3 First aid administration for some accidents Bites Bites by animal or human beings resulting in open wounds need to be quickly taken care of, so as to prevent infection.
Human bites that break the skin may become seriously infected because the mouth is heavily contaminated with bacteria.
Animal bites, on the other hand carry a great risk of infection because many of them transmit rabies and tetanus.
62PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING For human bites, cleanse the wound thoroughly with cool clean water to which antiseptic like dettol has been added.
Cover it and seek for medical attention.
If the cut is large, do not wash but cover it with a bandage and call a doctor.
The following should however be noted in the case of an animal bite (i) a bite of the face or the neck should receive immediate medical attention; (ii) in the meantime, before the physician takes charge, thoroughly wash the wound with soap and disinfected water, flush the bitten area with the water and apply a dressing; and (iii) ensure that the victim avoids movement of the affected part until he has been treated by a physician.
Bleeding Heavy bleeding may result in shock and loss of consciousness with outright death if bleeding is not arrested in time.
In attending to a victim, do not have direct contact with the victim’s blood and also do the following: (i) apply direct pressure by hand over a dressing so as to control the severe bleeding.
Place the palm of the hand on the dressing directly over the entire area of the open wound on any part of the body.
A thick pad of clean cloth held between the hand and the wound helps to control the bleeding by absorbing the blood and allowing it to clot.
(ii) unless there is evidence of fracture, a severe open wound of the hand, neck, arm or leg should be elevated, that is, the injured part of the body should be raised above the level of the victim’s heart; and (iii) then allow the victim to lie down quietly, and send for a doctor.
Convulsion A convulsion is an attack of unconsciousness, usually of violent onset.
In an infant or small child, a convulsion may occur at the onset of an acute infectious disease, particularly during a period of high fever or sever gastrointestinal illness.
Convulsions that develop later in the course of measles, mumps and other childhood diseases are more serious and might reflect complications of the central nervous system.
63PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING Do the following to the victim of convulsion: (i) Prevent victim from hurting himself (ii) Give artificial respiration, if indicated (iii) Do not place a blunt object between the victim’s teeth (iv) Do not restrain him (v) Do not pour any liquid into his mouth (vi) Do not place a child in a tub of water If repeated convulsions occur, call for medical help immediately or take the victim to a hospital.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has helped you to understand what constitute a first aid and the reason why you should know about the ways of administering first aid.
Specifically, you have been able to know some basic steps involved in treating common household emergencies like bites and convulsions.
5.0 SUMMARY The meaning, need and steps involved in the initial assistance for victims of bites and convulsions have been treated in this unit.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Look around your neighbourhood, and state the common household emergencies.
How can you reduce the occurrence of some of these emergencies?
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1 State five reasons why a homemaker should know about first aid?
2 How would you administer first aid to a child who has convulsed?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS American Red Cross (1973).
Standard First Aid and Personal Safety.
New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc. Anyakoha, E and Eluwa, M. (1991).
Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: African-pep publishers .
64PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 2 BASIC GUIDELINES OF HEALTHY LIVING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Guidelines for a Healthy Living 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The issue of health is of paramount importance in the home since all other goals in the family would only be achieved when all the family members are healthy.
A lot of family resources would be saved if extra efforts are made to ensure that every member of the family stay healthy.
It is therefore very pertinent to know the principles that are needed to stay healthy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to state (i) the basic guidelines relating to personal cleanliness; (ii) the guidelines relating to cleanliness during eating; and (iii) relevant points relating to public cleanliness 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cleanliness in the Home The following points are important in keeping a person healthy: (i) always wash your hands when you wake up in the morning, after having a bowel movement and before eating.
(ii) bathe often, especially after working hard or sweating.
(iii) brush your teeth at least twice a day and especially after eating sweets 65PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING (iv) do not let goats or similar animals come into the house or places where children play (v) do not let dogs lick children or climb on beds (vi) if children or animals have a bowel movement near the house, clean it up at once.
(vii) hang or spread bedsheets and blankets in the sun often.
If there are bedbugs or scabies, pour boiling after on the cots and wash the bedsheets and blankets on the same day.
(viii) de-louse the whole family often.
(ix) do not spit on the floor.
(x) clean house often by sweeping and washing the floors, walls and all other parts of the house.
3.2 Cleanliness in Eating and Drinking: The following are guides to safe eating and drinking in the home.
(i) ideally, all water that does not come from a pure water system should be boiled or put in the sun before drinking; (ii) do not allow flies or other insects crawl on food; (iii) always wash fruits and vegetables thoroughly with clean water before eating; (iv) only eat meats that are well cooked; (v) do not eat stale food or food that smells bad; and (vi) avoid eating food with people that have contagious diseases like flu, colds, tuberculosis and chicken/small pox.
3.3 Environmental Cleanliness The guidelines to environmental cleanliness are (i) keep wells and public water hole clean (ii) do not allow animals go near where people get drinking water; a fence may be needed to keep the animals away from the water source; (iii) do not defecate or throw garbage near the water hole; and (iv) burn all garbage that can be burnt.
Garbage that cannot be burnt should be buried in a special pit far away from houses and sources of drinking water.
66PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 4.0 CONCLUSION The issue of health in the family is influenced by many factors obtainable within and outside the home.
A good homemaker must exercise great vigilance in keeping away these negative factors.
The right attitude necessary for good health must be inculcated into every member of the family.
5.0 SUMMARY You have just learnt the basic guidelines that are needed to keep healthy family.
These guidelines have revealed that the issue of keeping healthy in the family life is the work of every member of the family.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Highlight some sharp practices in your neighbourhood that may predispose the inhabitants to ill-health.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1 Highlight and explain five basic guidelines needed in keeping an individual healthy in the family.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Werner, D. (1995).
Where there is no doctor.
London: Macmillan Education Ltd. Bill Forse (1999).
Where there is no Vet.
Macmillan Press London and Oxford ISBN: 0-333-58899 67PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING UNIT 3 ENERGY AND MONEY MANAGEMENT IN THE HOME.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is energy Management 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the home, the major decisions in energy utilization are when and how to perform bodily work to avoid discomfort and fatigue, as well as minimums energy expenditure.
Family members to decide how spend the energy resources when they decide how to spend their time.
Therefore, energy is often interwoven with time planning.
Controlling the use of energy involves applying the principles of work simplification in carrying out household activities.
These principles help to conserve energy and eliminate fatigue.
In addition, family members also need to understand the principles of money management.
Money is an important material resource, which is used to buy most of the things needed in the family.
The amount of satisfaction derived from money depends on how it is managed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to be able to • define energy management • apply the principles of work simplification to household tasks • enumerate the principles of money management in the home.
68PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What Is Energy Management?
Energy management is the process of planning and controlling the use of energy in order to preserve and managed more tasks that can be accomplished in a shorter time without much fatigue.
Reasons for energy management are 1. to conserve energy; 2. eliminates fatigue; 3. it minimizes the amount of time spent on a given tasks; 4. it helps to increase the workers’ interest in a given task; and 5. it encourages work to be carried out in the best possible way and aids in the elimination of unnecessary movements.
3.2 Work Simplification Work simplification is the process of reducing the amount of time and energy required to complete a given piece of work or to accomplish more work with a given amount of time and energy.
Advantages of Work Simplification are 1. to reduce the amount of time required for a given job.
2. minimizes the number of movements and improve the type of motions on a specific task.
3. reduces the overall frustration of tiredness 4. provide the homemaker free time, rest and leisure.
5. helps to develop ability in the use of right method to do a job.
Principles or guidelines for work simplification 1.
Good pasture to prevent the use of energy in any activity.
2.
Use both hands at work 3.
Plan tasks so as to alternate sitting down with standing.
4.
Wear suitable cloth and shoe for working.
5.
Combine related task e.g.
preparation of soup and stew using the same cooker.
6.
Store used items at place of first use.
7.
Place items for easy accessibility 8.
Use labour saving equipment or devices such as blender, electric kettle etc.
9.
Examine the task to know where to save time and energy.
10.Different raw materials that save time can be used to complete a task e.g.
ground egusi, conference foods (dressed chicken).
69PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 11.Include rest period to reduce tiredness 12.The work environment should be comfortable and airy.
13.Use correct working heights for tables and chairs.
14.Daily cleaning of the environment should be encouraged.
Application of work simplification to specific household tasks Laundry Work 1.
Choose fabrics that are easy to wash and require little or no ironing.
2.
Assemble all you need for the work before washing.
3.
Follow the correct laundry procedure 4.
Use washing machine if available.
5.
Use the correct method for washing specific fabrics.
6.
Iron while damp and air properly before storage.
Child Care 1.
Identify the need of the child and make provisions for each of them.
2.
Clean the child’s room always 3.
Store baby’s feeding material properly 4.
Feed the baby at regular intervals 5.
Wash baby’s feeding bottle after each meal and store 6.
Store baby’s clothes separately.
7.
Assemble the material needed by the baby before bathing 8.
Store baby’s toy properly 9.
Immunize the baby at recommended periods.
10.Keep medicine away from the baby.
Entertainment 1.
Plan and decide on the number of guests and what to serve.
2.
Send invitation in advance 3.
Choose simple dishes that are easy to prepare in advance.
4.
Set the table in advance.
5.
Clean the cutlery, glasses, dishes and napkin 6.
Get ready to receive your guest 7.
Keep the guest busy by giving album or engage in conversation.
Meal Preparation 1.
Check store to know the food available and those not available.
2.
Purchase non-perishable foods in bulk and store.
3.
Make preliminary preparations e.g.
pour large quantities of pepper, boil and store in the refrigerator.
4.
Assemble all ingredients and utensils before starting to cook.
5.
Use appropriate utensils, wash and set the table.
70PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 6.
After meal clear the table, wash and drain dishes.
7.
Store utensils and food stuff 8.
Maintain good cleanliness habit.
Sewing or Mending of Clothing Articles 1.
Have a complete set of sewing tools 2.
Maintain a good sewing center in the house with correct height of chair and table.
3.
Ensure that sewing machine is in order by proper maintenance.
4.
Provide good light for the sewing center 5.
Choose less busy day for your sewing 6.
Maintain good sewing posture.
7.
Use correct thread and needle 8.
Do not clear the table until the last person has finished eating.
9.
Clean and store dishes and utensils properly.
3.4 Money Management Money is an important material resource, which used to buy most of the things we need.
The amount of satisfaction we get from our money depends on how we manage it.
Principles of Money Management a) Ensure that your expenditure is within the limits of your income.
b) Identify the needs or goals to be achieved with the money available such as feeding, clothing and house rent.
c) Establish priorities among goals, that is, determine which goals are most important and need to be attained early.
d) Estimate the cost of each goal through market survey.
e) Determine the income available to the family.
f) Make a budget on how to use the available income for achieving the goals.
Make allowances for emergencies such as accidents.
g) Control all money management activities.
h) Keep good records about any money spent.
i) Evaluate regularly to know how well your money management activities are progressing.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, energy and money are precious resources that are available to different families in varying quantities.
However, the extent to which the family manages these resources will determine how effective and successful the family will be.
71PRD 110 PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIVING 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to the importance of handling family resources well (energy and money) in order to achieve effective family living.
It has also explained the principles guiding management, and it has applied these to specific household tasks.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why is it important to manage family resources?
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1 Enumerate the Principles or guidelines for work simplification 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anyakoha, E and Eluwa, M. (1991).
Home Management for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: African-pep publishers.
Bamidele, R. (1986).
Home Economics for Junior Secondary Schools (Book 1).
Ibadan: Abi print Publishers.
72
