NonePRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS COURSE GUIDE PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM METHODS Course Developer Dr. (Mrs) A. Olayemi Course Writer Dr. (Mrs) A. Olayemi Course Editor Dr. U. M. Okonkwo School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. U. M. Okonkwo School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Dr. U.S.A. Osuji School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-218-5 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria iiiPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Content Introduction………………………………………….
1 Course Aims …………………………………………….. 1 Course Objectives …………………………………………….. 1 - 2 Working Through This Course …………………………….
2 Course Materials …………………………………………….. 2 Study Units …………………………………………………… 2 – 4 Assessment ……………………………………….. 4 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) ………………………….
4 Final Examination and Grading ………………………… 4 Course Marking Scheme ……………………………… 4 How to Get The Most From This Course …….
5 – 6 Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………….. 7 Summary ……………………………………… 7 – 8 INTRODUCTION PRD 104 – Primary English Curriculum Methods teach will you about how to plan the curriculum for teaching the English Language Skills.
You will learn of the methods of teaching the various language skills and the activities for doing this.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to acquaint you with the basics of English methods both at the senior primary and post-primary school classes but with more emphasis on techniques to be used in the later.
It also aims at encouraging you to become an agent of change in a subject that has become a source of embarrassment due to the level of failures in its public examinations.
Course Objectives By the end of this course, you should be able to (1) translate into meaningful teaching/learning experiences the teaching techniques discussed for (a) listening skills ivPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (b) speaking skills (c) reading skills (d) writing skills (2) discuss and give illustrations on the inter-relatedness of the language skills, (3) confidently present your learners for public examinations; (4) make English serve other subjects while other subjects serve English language.
(5) run an English Department if called upon to do so.
(6) confidently read and teach by example.
(7) discuss the problems an L learner would encounter at the 2 (a) phonological (b) grammatical (c) reading; and (d) writing level.
(8) not only be able to teach English as a second language but should be able to prepare students at teachers colleges to do so too.
WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE The course English Methods is a wide one and much is expected of you even outside this course material.
You will need to do a lot of library search and to avail yourself of the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions.
There your facilitator would open your eyes to more techniques and you would also be able to compare notes and thoughts with your peers.
You may even see some of the techniques practicalised in mini-teaching sessions.
The Course Materials National Open University of Nigeria will provide you with the following: The Course Guide Study Units – 2 credit Unit materials vPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Also at the end of each unit are lists of books – References and For Further Reading.
While you may not procure or read all of them; they are essential supplements to the course materials.
Remember also that you must submit answers to the TMAs as and at when due.
Study Units Below are the study units of this course: Module 1: Unit 1: The Curriculum Cycle Unit 2: Language Teaching Methods Unit 3: Aural – Oral Skills’ Training 1 – Listening Unit 4: Aural – Oral Skills Training 2 – Speaking Module 2: Unit 1: Vocabulary Teaching Unit 2: Teaching of Reading Comprehension Unit 3: Teaching Intensive Reading Skills Unit 4: The Extensive Reading Skills Module 3 Unit 1: Teaching Grammatical Structures Unit 2: Teaching Writing Unit 3: Teaching Guided Composition Unit 4: Teaching Summary Writing Unit 5: Procedures for Teaching and Marking the Essay Module 4 Unit 1: English Language Evaluation Unit 2: Preparing for Public Examinations Unit 3: Organizing an English Department The first unit discusses the link between linguistics, psychology and the nature of you to three main methods while encouraging flexibility.
Units 2 discusses the status of English in Nigeria and emphasizes that there are bound to be interference at the phonological and structural levels because L is used too early for too much.
2 Unit 3 starts the treatment of the first of the four basic language skills.
Listening as the aural skills are essential if speaking is to be successful.
viPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS You are also given techniques for developing these skills in your learners.
Unit 4 deals with the second of the aural-oral skills and points out in greater detail the interference problem.
Teaching them out through pattern practice in short session is advocated.
All these, units 1-4 constitute Module 1 In module 2 there are another set of four units.
Unit 1 emphasizes the importance of and how to develop and broaden the vocabulary base of your learners.
Unit 2 is the first of three units on reaching comprehension – a very crucial skill in the learner’s life.
In these three units focus has been on the varied approaches to reading intensively and extensively.
You are advised to find out more about SQ3R and it usefulness in teaching reaching comprehension.
Module 3 is made up of five units with the first unit discussing the teaching of grammatical structures an area of problem for L learners.
2 Writing its importance, its stages and approaches are the focus of units 2 and 3.
In unit 4, summary writing is extensively dealt with.
Procedures for teaching and marking essay – a thing many a teacher run away from are discussed in Unit 5 of this Module.
Module 4 is made up of only three units.
The evaluation of English is the subject of unit 1; how to prepare your learners for public examinations is the focus for Unit 2 while how you can organize and sustain an English Department is what you are shown in Unit 3.
ASSESSMENTS There are two types of assessments.
The Tutor Marked Assessment (TMA) and the end of course examination.
Within each unit are self assessment exercises which are aimed at helping you check your assimilation as you proceed.
Ensure that you attempt each of the exercises before finding out the expected answer from the lecture.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMNT This is your continuous assessment and accounts for 30% of your total score.
You are expected to answer at least four TMA’s, three of which must be answered and submitted before you sit for the end of course examination.
Your facilitator will give you the TMA’s and you must submit to your centre your responses.
viiPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS END OF COURSE EXAMINATION With this examination written successfully you have completed your course in English Methods and one believes you would apply your knowledge (new or up graded) in your classes.
The end of course examination would earn you 70% which would be added to your TMA score (30%).
The time for this exam would be communicated to you.
Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 4 Four assignment, best three marks of the four account at 10% each = 30% of course marks.
End of course examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course materials.
How to get the most from this Course 1) In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or recommended books.
You are provided exercises, to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
2) Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do, by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the viiiPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
3) The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your references or from a Reading section.
4) The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or visit the study centre nearest to you.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
5) Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
6) Organise a Study Schedule- Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available at the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
7) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
8) Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
9) Assemble the study materials.
You will need your references and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
10) As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
11) Visit your study centre whenever you need up to date information.
12) Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), visit your study centre for your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment ixPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
13) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
14) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
15) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
TUTOR and TUTORIALS Your tutor or facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You mail your tutor-marked assignment to your tutor before the schedule date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator by telephone, e – mail and discuss problems if you need assistance.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your facilitator if: 3.0 You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
4.0 You have difficulty with the self-test or exercises.
5.0 You have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
xPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your course facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain much benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in active discussion.
SUMMARY This course is designed to give to you some teaching skills that would help you improve your teaching techniques and thus produce students who pass and use English language proficiently and effectively.
Even you would be contented because you can answer questions of the following types: - the role of English in Nigeria.
- the relationship between acquiring L and learning L 1 2 - reading problems - problematic areas of L learner at the spoken level 2 - how to run an English Department - running the class render.
I wish you success in this interesting course as you transfer what you learn here to some of your other courses and you transfer knowledge form those other courses e.g.
General Methods, Psycholinguistic, Sociolinguistics and the like to help you perform at the optimum in teaching English.
In particular, I hope you would appreciate the unique role and opportunity you have to make a difference in the learner’s acquisition of this subject – English Language.
We, therefore, sincerely wish you the best and that you enjoy the course.
You are blessed.
xiPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Course Code PRD 104 Course Title Primary English Curriculum Methods Course Developer Dr. (Mrs) A. Olayemi Course Writer Dr. (Mrs) A. Olayemi Course Editor Dr. U. M. Okonkwo School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. U. M. Okonkwo School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Co-ordinator Dr. U.S.A. Osuji School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xiiPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: 978-058-218-5 All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria xiiiPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Table of Content Page Module 1 Unit 1 The Curriculum Cycle 1 – 10 Unit 2 Language Teaching Methods 11 – 16 Unit 3 Aural – Oral Training 1 – Listening 17 – 23 Unit 4 Aural – Oral Training 2 – Speaking 24 – 31 Module 2 Unit 1 Vocabulary Teaching 32 – 38 Unit 2 Teaching of Reading Comprehension 39 – 46 Unit 3 Teaching Intensive Reading Skills 47 – 61 Unit 4 The Extensive Reading Skills 62 – 70 Module 3 Unit 1 Teaching Grammatical Structures 71 – 79 Unit 2 Teaching Writing 80 – 85 Unit 3 Teaching Guided Composition 86 – 94 Unit 4 Teaching Summary Writing 95 – 103 Unit 5 Procedure for Teaching and Marking Essay 104 – 110 Module 4 Unit 1 English Language Evaluation 111 – 119 Unit 2 Preparing for Public Examinations 120 – 126 Unit 3 Organising an English Department 127 – 134 xivPRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS MODULE 1 Unit 1: The Curriculum Cycle Unit 2: Language Teaching Methods Unit 3: Aural – Oral Skills’ Training 1 – Listening Unit 4: Aural – Oral Skills Training 2 – Speaking UNIT 1 THE CURRICULUM CYCLE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 What is Curriculum?
3.2 Curriculum Component 3.2.1 The Learners 3.2.2 What is Needs Analysis?
3.2.3 Learning Objectives 3.2.4 Content 3.2.5 Learning Experience 3.2.6 Methods and Strategies 3.2.7 Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This course PRD 104 is called Primary English Curriculum and Methods.
The two key words in this course title are curriculum and methods and these essentially signal what the course is about.
To set the stage for your understanding of this course, we will begin by discussing what these two key words are.
Unit 1 will focus on issues of curriculum while Unit 2 will focus on methods.
Curriculum Issues Curriculum issues are the major concerns of anyone teaching at every level of education, whether at the primary, secondary or tertiary levels.
These issues cover the following: 1PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS i. who to teach; ii.
what to teach; iii.
how to teach; iv.
how to evaluate learning.
These are the determinants of any curriculum development process.
As a prospective teacher of English Language, you must acquire the knowledge and skills needed to meaningfully make decisions about the above issues.
This unit will tell you about these curriculum determinants and how they are interrelated to form the curriculum cycle.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this Unit, you should be able to; i. define curriculum; ii.
name and describe each curriculum determinant/component; iii.
draw and label a diagram depicting a curriculum cycle; iv.
describe the interrelatedness of the curriculum determinants; v. state some goals of learning English in the Primary School; vi.
state some objectives of learning English in the Primary School.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Curriculum?
Curriculum is a guide or manual that tells the teacher about the nature and characteristics of the learners to teach, the content to teach, the methods and strategies to use to teach and assess learners.
A well developed curriculum will specify the knowledge, skills, insights and attitudes that learners will be expected to acquire (i.e.
learning objectives/outcomes), the in-class and out of class learning activities that will aid learners to learn (i.e.
learning experiences) as well as the teacher’s activities.
A good example of a curriculum manual is the National Curriculum For Primary Schools: English Language Years 1 – 6 developed by the Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC), 2004, revised ed.
It is important that you get copies of this manual to enable you benefit from this course, PRD 104: Primary English Curriculum and Methods.
The key components in a Curriculum development process are as shown in Figure X below, titled: The Curriculum Development Cycle.
2PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS The Curriculum Development Cycle EVALUATION Learners’ Needs Objectives / E Outcomes V A L U A T I O N Contents Methods / Strategies Learning Experiencess E E V V A A L L U U A A TI O IT O N N Exercise 1 (a) Study Figure X above and name the components.
(b) How many are the components.
Answers (a) Learners’ needs, objectives/outcomes, contents, learning experiences, methods/strategies and evaluation.
(b) Six 3.2 Curriculum Components The Curriculum development process typically entails the six components shown in figure X.
In this section of this Unit, you are 4PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS going to learn the function of each of these components in developing a curriculum.
3.2.1 The Learners The ultimate beneficiaries of any curriculum are the learners.
A curriculum serves a useful purpose to the extent that there are learners to benefit from it.
The learners therefore constitute an important factor in planning a curriculum.
All other components in the curriculum development process will be determined based on the nature and characteristics of the learners.
Learners’ characteristics or instance will include their age, academic and personal needs and interests.
Other important issues concerning the learners are their educational level e.g.
their previous language learning experiences, what they know and can do with the language, what more they need to know and do in the language, their learning styles, their interest in school in general and in learning English language in particular.
To obtain information about the learners on the above issues will entail what in curriculum process is referred to as Needs Analysis (Taba, 1962).
3.2.2 What is Needs Analysis?
Needs analysis in curriculum development is a procedure for identifying the knowledge, skills, abilities and attitudes that a particular group of learners e.g.
Primary School pupils, need to acquire for a given period of time in a given subject, for example, English or Mathematics etc.
Through the process of needs analysis, the knowledge, skills, abilities and attitudes that learners are to acquire are arranged in order of importance or priority.
This means that there are learning needs that a given group of learners or an individual learner must acquire immediately or before other learning needs.
The process of needs analysis could be applied in our daily lives.
For instance, before you decided to enroll in your programme at the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN), you had other options of things to do with your time and money.
You must have done some analysis of the various options before you settled for going for further studies and choosing the NOUN as the university to go to.
Needs analysis therefore is an important process not just in matters of teaching and learning but in our personal lives.
It enables us to identify what we must do so as to identify what means to use to attain what we wish to do.
Identification of learners’ needs in curriculum planning will require that you use some or all of the following measures: - oral interviews, - written questionnaires, 5PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS - observations, and - tests.
Through these various measures, you can find out from the pupils/students you are planning the curriculum for their learning needs in the areas of reading, writing, speaking and comprehending English.
You may from these measures discover that these pupils have problems with spelling, use of preposition etc.
After identifying the learning needs of pupils you are developing the curriculum for, you will proceed to formulate your objectives for teaching.
3.2.3 Learning Objectives Another component of the curriculum development process is learning objectives is learning objectives also called learning outcomes.
Learning objectives are statements of intended results of instruction.
Recall that after the introduction at the beginning of this Unit is section labelled, 2.0 Objectives.
The purpose of the section is to tell you the outcomes or results you will expect after studying this unit.
Learning objectives are derived from the general goals or aims of instruction.
A general goal of this course, PRD 104, for instance is that at the end of the course, you should be able to plan and develop an English language teaching curriculum.
On the other hand, a learning objective for this course could be that at the end of this course, you should be able to identify and select appropriate methods to teach primary 6 pupils composition writing or reading comprehension.
For learning objectives to be meaningful they must be stated or written in performance or behavioural terms using active words.
For more details on writing objectives, consult the National Curriculum Guide for Primary English, Vols.
1 – 6.
Exercise 2 What is the difference between these two statements?
1.
At the end of this unit, you should know the components of a curriculum development process.
2.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to name the components of a curriculum development process.
6PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Answer The difference is that the word “know” used in the first statement is general and does not specifically tell you exactly the nature of what you will know.
On the other hand, the word “name” in the second statement is specific in what exactly you should be able to do.
Can you see the difference between these two statements?
I believe you can.
One is stated in general terms as a goal while the other is stated in performance or behavioural terms.
When objectives are stated in performance terms, the teacher is properly guided on what to teach, how to teach and how to evaluate.
3.2.4 Content Content is another component of the curriculum development process.
Content consists of all what you are going to teach.
In English language teaching for instance, content will consist of grammar, vocabulary, comprehension and summary passages with accompanying questions, topics for composition writing.
Note that the content to teach must be relevant to the learners’ needs identified.
The content must also be relevant to the realization of the stated objectives.
In selecting the content, the curriculum planner must ensure that the following criteria are met: 1.
Relevance – content must be relevant to the learners’ needs and the objectives stated.
2.
Comprehensiveness – content must be comprehensive enough to enable the learners attain all the stated objectives.
3.
Teachability – content must be teachable.
In addition to the above criteria, the content should be well organized to make learning easy and meaningful.
Organization requires that the content be graded and sequenced in such a way that learning proceeds from simple content to difficult and complex content.
For instance, language content to be learnt in Primary 3 will be less difficult and complex than that of Primary 4.
3.2.5 Learning Experiences Learning experiences constitute another component of the curriculum development process.
Learning experiences are those activities that learners are engaged in in the process of learning.
Like the content, 7PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS learning experiences must be relevant to the attainment of the stated objectives.
3.2.6 Methods and Strategies In the field of education, methods refer to the modes of teaching or testing a subject matter.
A method of teaching is usually based on an approach derived from a given philosophy, point of view or theory.
In Unit 2 of this course, you are going to learn about the two main language methods and their approaches.
Strategies A strategy is a way or manner of approaching and solving a problem or task.
You will learn some useful strategies for teaching English in the primary school in Unit 2 of this course.
3.2.7 Evaluation Look at figure X again.
You will see that the word evaluation is at different points of the curriculum development cycle.
What this means is that for each of the components, some form of evaluation is done.
What is evaluation?
Evaluation in curriculum is the process of making decision about the worth of something, its quality and quantity.
In deciding for example, the goals and objectives to formulate, or the methods to use to teach evaluation process enables you to make the right choice.
Evaluation therefore acts as a regulator for choosing what to include in the curriculum.
8PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS A SAMPLE OF CURRICULUM FORMAT TEACHING PERFORMANCE ACTIVITIES AND EVALUATION TOPIC OBJECTIVE CONTENTS TEACHER PUPILS LEARNING GUIDE MATERIALS REVIEW OF TERM TWO WORK 29.
At the end of the Basic reading 1 Demonstrates Pupils should 1 Letters of Pupils to: Reading: unit pupils should skills: the correct be able to do alphabet 1 put into be able to acquire sitting the following in practice Basic basic reading 1 Eye position, eye under the different what was reading habits: e.g.
movement movement teacher’s sizes taught; skills and and book guidance: already 1 Sitting position perception positioning 2 Brightly 2 imitate the acquired 1 Sitting coloured teacher or from the 2 Eye movement 2 Visual 2 Direct pupils correctly objects an action.
mother discrimination to hold their tongue 3 Positioning of of objects books in the 2 make 3 Picture the book 3 Accurate correct correct eye books observation position and movement 4 Holding the move their reading material eyes from 3 hold their correctly.
one end of books the book to correctly the other without 4 perform moving their their heads.
actions individually and in groups.
30.
Speech: At the end of the 1 Sorting out 1 Sort out 1 Sort out Real Pupils to unit pupils should objects in sets of objects in objects.
participate in: Sorting out be able to: terms of objects groups Letters of of objects / shape, according through alphabet in 1 oral drill; matching of 1 Sort out objects colours and to shapes, teacher’s the same Objects according to types, e.g.
colours guidance: sizes.
2 oral colours, rulers, and types.
(Group A – Brightly dialogue.
shapes, and dusters, box, sort out coloured types e.g.
pencil, pen 2 Let pupils shapes, B objects; pencils (red and plate rotate the – sort out Picture pencils, blue (in different items for colours, C objects, pencils, yellow colours) and further – sort out etc.
pencils), and objects practice.
types and shapes like like blocks, sizes); square, round round, bottle, 3 Let pupils and blocks square sort out objects in groups.
Source: National Curriculum for Primary English Year i 9PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION Every teacher is a curriculum designer and implementer.
Understanding the curriculum development process and the components that make it up will equip you in your job as a teacher.
Even when you are using a ready made curriculum guide, a knowledge of the curriculum development process puts you in a position to critically evaluate such a guide when using it.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt what curriculum means and the components that make up the curriculum process.
You learnt that these components are interrelated because one component must be relevantly linked to the others.
In the next unit, you will learn more about methods especially about methods for teaching English language.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
(a) Distinguish between goals and objectives.
(b) State two goals of learning English and two objectives of learning English in the primary school.
2.
(a) Draw and label a cycle depicting the curriculum development process.
(b) Describe the interrelatedness of the various components in the curriculum process.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS National Curriculum for Primary Schools English Language.
Years 1 – 6.
Published by NERDC, 2004.
Tanner, D. and L. N. Tanner (1980).
Curriculum Development Theory into Practice.
2nd ed.
NY: Macmillan Publishing Co. Rivers, W. (1985).
Teaching Foreign Language Skills.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
10PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 2 LANGUAGE TEACHING METHODS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Language Teaching Methods 3.1.1 The Audio-lingual method 3.1.2 Communicative teaching methods 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Unit 1 you learnt that methods were modes of teaching.
You also learnt that a given method is based on an approach derived from a given philosophy or theory.
In this unit, you are going to learn more about language teaching methods, their theoretical bases, approaches and strategies for teaching a language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this Unit, you should be able to: i.
Name and describe the two main language teaching methods; ii.
Describe the theoretical bases of the two language teaching methods; iii.
Describe the approaches of these language teaching methods; iv.
Compare and contrast these two language teaching methods; v. Make a judicious choice of which method to choose to attain specific learning objectives.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Language Teaching Methods There are two main language teaching methods.
These are the audio – lingual and communicative language teaching methods.
11PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.1.1 The Audio – lingual Method The Audio – lingual method dominated language teaching in the 60’s and early 70’s.
The method was based on the theory of behaviourism propounded by a Psychologist named Skinner.
According to Skinner, human beings learnt by habit formation through the process called Stimulus – Response – Reinforcement.
The Audiolinguists borrowed Skinner’s theory and adopted it as a language teaching approach.
Their method of teaching consisted of selecting aspects of the language e.g.
vocabulary, grammatical structures, phrases and presenting these in form of dialogues or pattern drills to the learners.
Presentation of these was first orally and later through writing and reading.
The learners listen and repeat after the teacher the dialogues and pattern drills several times.
The essence is to get the learners to commit these to memory and whenever called to reproduce these, they will be expected to do so without making mistakes.
Whenever the learner says the dialogues or pattern drills well, he is rewarded or reinforced by the teacher by some form of approval e.g.
praises.
This is an evidence that learning has occurred or that a habit has been formed.
Mistakes or errors are not tolerated by this method of teaching.
They are corrected immediately they occur.
The content of learning is artificially made up or contrived.
The main purpose is to teach learners to master the basic vocabulary and grammar of the language.
It is believed that once a learner masters these he can use the language in various situations requiring the use of the learnt vocabulary or grammatical structures.
The method is teacher- centred because the teacher controls what the pupils learn and does not give them the opportunity for self expression.
This method of teaching language has been criticized for a number of reasons.
One of these criticisms is that merely knowing the vocabulary and grammar of the language does not equip one well to use the language.
This is because the use of language entails other things such as the user knowing the functions of language, the importance of the different roles of participants in a given language situation.
The critics of this method consider it very limited as a means of teaching meaningful language acquisition.
But this limitation notwithstanding, the Audiolingual method has some usefulness in the teaching of discrete forms of language i.e.
vocabulary and grammar.
There are times the teacher may need to teach these aspects of language in a bid to help his pupils know correct grammar usage.
This is why in spite of the criticism leveled against this method it still thrives in language classrooms.
Numerous examples of dialogues 12PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS and pattern drills are found in language textbooks.
For some examples of these, turn to Unis 1, 2, 3 of Module 3 of this course.
Exercise 1 1.
Select an English textbook used in the primary school: (a) Give the name of the author and publisher.
(b) Take from it: (i) a pattern drill teaching specific grammatical structures or vocabulary.
(ii) a sample dialogue teaching a particular feature of English language.
3.1.2 Communicative Teaching Methods The behaviourist theory of language learning and teaching was rejected by another group of theorists, notably Chomsky (1`966) and Lenneberg (1957) who argued that language learning or any learning for that matter is not a question of learning by imitation or memorization of selected language structures or vocabulary.
These theorists argued that human beings were endowed with an innate capacity to learn a language.
This innate ability explains why a child can learn his first or even his second language just by interacting with people in his environment.
This innate ability enables an individual as he matures to acquire unconsciously the psychological, cultural and social rules which regulate the use of language in his community and as he does this he unconsciously acquires the vocabulary and grammar of the language.
This theory of language learning gave rise to the communicative approach to language teaching.
The teaching method of this approach is one that selects the language content to teach based on learners’ neds of using the language in actual and real situations.
Activities and tasks that will stimulate the students to use the language are devised.
Learners are encouraged to speak, read and write the language whether they make mistakes or not.
The communicative approach is therefore learner- centred.
It encourages the use of real texts e.g.
from newspaper, magazines, novels, radio and television broadcast to teach.
In place of repetition of artificial pattern drills and dialogues, learners are encouraged to participate in role plays, dramas as well as write meaningful compositions on familiar topics.
In this approach the teacher acts more as a facilitator of learning by providing enabling learning environment.
Language learning is seen as a means to an end, 13PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS namely to communicate with others orally or in written forms.
Language is learnt for many other purposes e.g.
sourcing and giving information.
For examples of activities using the communicative method of teaching see Module 1, Unit 3, Module 2, Units 2, 3, 4 and Module 3, Units 4 and 5.
Exercise 2 1.
Compare the audiolingual and communicative language teaching methods.
2.
Which of these would you recommend for a primary school teacher?
Support your answer with two reasons.
4.0 CONCLUSION Language teaching and learning cannot be meaningful if they are not based on some theoretical framework and approaches.
These bases ensure that the language is not taught or learned haphazardly.
Whatever approach and method to be used by the teacher should be based on the ones that will enable the teacher to attain the stated objectives.
On the other hand, you may as a teacher find that both methods could be used by you sometimes to achieve your purposes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt about two main methods of language teaching, the audiolingual method and the communicative teaching method.
You learnt the theoretical bases of these methods.
You learnt also the types of learning activities that each method would encourage the teacher to use.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe learning activities that audiolingual method and communicative teaching will use in language teaching.
Two activities for each method.
2.
Study the curriculum plan below which method of teaching is being suggested for teaching the content so as to attain the stated objectives?
Give at least two reasons for the method you chose.
3.
Can you really teach English in the primary school without making use of both methods?
Support your answer with two reasons.
14PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS YEAR THREE CURRICULUM PLAN TEACHING PERFORMAN ACTIVITIES AND EVALUATION TOPIC CE CONTENTS TEACHER PUPILS LEARNING GUIDE OBJECTIVE MATERIALS REVIEW OF TERM TWO WORK 13.
Speech Pupils should The sounds /f/ 1 Demonstrate 1 Produce 1 Objects Pupils to be able to: and /v/ as in; and sound of practice Pronunciation fan, can, ferry, pronounce the two 2 Pictures reading.
Practice 1 produce very, fail, veil, the words consonants of the correct figure in all correctly in following objects sounds ‘I’ vigour film, isolation and teacher’s ‘F’ and ‘V’ vim, folly, in sentences model.
3 Flash in word volley, fat, context for cards and vast e.g.
pupils to 2 Repeat sentence imitate.
the words 4 Sentence contexts; i Turn on after the strips or switch 2 Write words teacher.
2 distinguish on the fan.
and 5 Flannel between It is too sentences on 3 Read the board.
the two hot.
the chalk- sentences consonant board for written by sounds, ii The van pupils to the teacher the ‘I’ and can carry read.
on the ‘V’ (in the all the chalkboard word and books 3 Give more sentence examples for 4 Make contexts) iii The ferry practice.
similar is crossing sentences the lagoon of their own iv Are you very hungry?
v You must not fail to buy the veil.
vi He worked with all his vigour to sort out the figures.
vii.
Do you want to see the film?
viii.
Use some vim to clean the bath.
15PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS National Curriculum for Primary Schools English Language.
Years 1 – 6.
Published by NERDC, 2004.
Rivers, W. (1985).
Teaching Foreign Language Skills.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
16PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 3 TEACHING THE AURAL –ORAL SKILLS 1 – LISTENING Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Listening: What is it?
3.2 Goals of a Listening Programme 3.2.1 Extensive Listening 3.2.2 Intensive Listening 3.3 Suggested Activities in Training Listening 3.4 Listening Comprehension Strategies 3.5 Factors affecting Listening Comprehension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 7.0 Reference/ For further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Listening, one of the four basic language skills, is an invaluable study skill that your learners must develop in order to make a success of their studies.
Even out of school, the skill is a necessity.
Often, one hears but because one is not concentrating, one is not able to understand.
Has it ever happened to you that things are said where you are but you did not respond appropriately because you missed out?
You only heard but did not listen.
Actually until about the beginning of the twentieth century listening and speaking were not taught in schools.
It was Grieve’s 1964 radical review of English Language syllabus in West Africa that gave listening and speaking the pride of place In this lecture, the focus will be on listening while speaking will be focused upon in the next lecture.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to (a) define and state the importance of listening in education, (b) name the listening skills; (c) discuss how to teach, and assess at least two listening skills; (d) discuss factors affecting listening comprehension and (e) suggest how your learners can improve their listening skill.
17PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Listening: What is it?
Listening is taken for granted because everyone uses the ears from birth.
Hearing is therefore taken as being synonymous with listening.
A new concern for development of specific skills seems to stem from new teaching devices and from a new look at the world in which the learner operates.
In Nigeria, tape recorders listening stations, language laboratories are not very common but for many students, the radio, television and classroom audio devices, lectures delivered orally are familiar forms of communication.
You are aware that in spite of this, pupils still need to have their listening abilities developed.
Listening is more significant than hearing.
It is your responsibility to develop a programme to increase proficiency in listening.
Listening simply analyzed falls under four headings; namely understanding a speaker’s accent or pronunciation, understanding his grammar, recognizing his vocabulary and being able to grasp the meaning of what he says.
Listening is “the ability to understand without difficulty spoken English which satisfies the requirements of national and international intelligibility” (Oderinde 1979).
Achieving the stated four headings which also constitute the aim of teaching listening depends on your ability to do everything all at once.
You are also expected to train your learners in natural listening practices that are not directed towards any particular aspect of listening skill but all of them at once.
Exercise 1 Is listening of any importance in education?
3.2 Goals of a Listening Programme Two basic goals are discernible.
They are: (a) to help learners acquire skills necessary for enjoyable, thoughtful and profitable listening experiences and (b) to develop attitudes that encourage continued self-improvement in the skills even beyond school.
Listening is therefore an important academic skill.
It is a primary language tool in your learners’ life.
18PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS In order to achieve these goals, you need to identify teachable listening skills and to specify the understandings and attitudes the school will promote.
Decide at what school level each of the identified teachable skills will be introduced, emphasized and reinforced.
Some school textbooks have done this for you but where this is not the case, you must develop a programme that will aid comprehension.
If your learners are interested in what they hear, they will actively try to make sense out of it.
There is, therefore, what will be called detailed listening practice – this is linked to what the learners do in all classes and at home.
There is also room for freer listening practices in which the hearer is concerned primarily with following a story or finding out from a message or record being listened to.
The first type of listening will be called extensive listening while the second is intensive listening.
3.2.1 Extensive Listening In extensive listening the purpose is to give the learners plenty of opportunities to develop and exercise the listening skills in as natural ways as possible.
The tests here need not be detailed, the learner listen because he enjoys the listening passage and is interested in the information in it.
Materials to be used here should be varied.
You may use recoded stories, texts taken from books or magazines, recording from radios and televisions are useful sources of spontaneous conversation.
Listening materials aimed at giving practice in making sense of unscripted language can also be specifically made if competent users of English Language are available to make the recordings.
Remember that variety has to do with both topics and different kinds of language; accents and dialects, different styles of talking and so on.
The language content may also be controlled due to how advanced your learners are.
You do not slavishly have to follow the set syllabus of a teaching course.
Passages should contain both familiar words and phrases as well as new words and phrases which your learners have to make sense of.
When conducting extensive listening class, you can follow this procedure: Introduce your learners to the reading passage.
A picture, a demonstration etc may be used.
Some key words are to be taught for understanding.
This step is aimed at putting the learners in the right frame of mind, it is not detailed and long.
19PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.1.2 Intensive Listening This can be divided into two types: (1) exercise to train a detailed comprehensive meaning and (2) exercises which get your learners to listen to particular features of language such as vocabulary, grammar and or pronunciation.
Exercises of these two kinds must be integrated by you into the rest of the learners’ work for a good success.
Exercise 2 From the discussions thus far what would you say are listening skills to be developed in your learners?
Some of the specific listening skills you might consider are: (1) perceiving and remembering enough detail to form an accurate impression.
(2) suspending final judgment until sufficient evidence is available (3) listening in a way that makes others comfortable.
(4) relating details heard to one’s own experience including reading.
(5) listening sometimes primarily to a speaker’s idea and only secondarily to the way he expressed them .
(6) listening to and comprehend in spoken English in academic situations e.g.
(lectures, talks, seminars and tutorials) and in general.
(7) working out the intentions of the speaker; (8) developing a sense of critical analysis and evaluation of what is spoken to differentiate between facts and opinions, discriminate, predict etc.
(9) adapt to different styles of English and/or accents; speech rates by speakers from different backgrounds: Standard English, American English, English as spoken by Hausa Yoruba and Ibo speakers and English spoken by an African not a Nigerian.
(10) Take useful notes.
In order to achieve success, some attitudes are worthy of consideration’ such as: - the desire to derive meaning from what one hears; - the desire to add to what one hears with added information from one’s own experience to what one hears; - the envious questioning of what one hears and respect for the ideas of others.
20PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Note that improvements in listening support improvements in other language skills e.g.
ability to generalize accurately information heard may lead to accurate generalization of what is read.
An improvement in the skill of remembering details of what is heard tends to make it easier to include accurate, vivid details in a learners’ written work.
3.3 Suggested Activities in Training Listening In this section you will be taught some techniques or methods of training listening.
You must ensure that practice in listening is purposeful.
Ensure that your learners are listening for something at all times.
Some learners may talk while others listen.
Debates can be organised; different kinds of noises; learners and other people may engage in a variety of activities that other learners listen to make meaning out of.
Your learners need increased skill in listening actively.
Provide plenty of opportunities for meaningful discussions in the classrooms.
Consider the use of group discussions, classroom demonstrations, illustrated talks, and oral reading, puppet shows, plays, television or radio productions or even lectures or listening to career talks.
All these will train your students to sharpen their skill of listening.
You will be helping you learners, develop listening skills if you allow them discuss and list what they consider the characteristics of good listeners in a class discussion as distinct from a successive view of a television show or a discussion at home.
You must have additional devices to use to improve listening.
Exercise 3 What other materials can you use to improve listening?
Other materials to aid listening comprehension are the overhead projector, film and filmship projector, record player, tape recorder, television set and radio.
3.4 Listening Comprehension Strategies Listening comprehension essentially is understanding spoken words.
Here passages are read by you the teacher and your pupils listen.
Build up the skill gradually start with short simple passages and graduate passages to more difficult ones.
After a short passage ask the pupils questions.
At the advanced level, your learners may listen to radio programmes.
21PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS There must be variety in both material and voice.
Materials range from everyday conversation to advertisements and news broadcasts.
The voice must vary from educated to near native speakers to native speakers.
Poetry reading is a useful exercise.
You can organize debates.
Dictation exercises also can be used.
Structure your questions to reflect the content of what is listened to.
Tape recorders are vital in teaching listening comprehension, if not available read to the learners.
Make natural voices a part to the learners’ experience.
3.5 Factors affecting Listening Comprehension In order to listen effectively, an active thinking process is necessary.
In order to think along with the speaker, train your learners to note what has just been said, anticipate what a speaker would say and relate what is said before with what is being said now.
In a diagram this looks like this.
A B Said before Saying What to be (Past) (Now) said (Present) (Future) Your learners should be able to draw a relationship as they look back from now while focusing on the future at the same time.
This exercise can become a problem if the thinking process is hampered by some factors.
Some of these factors are mentioned below: (a) Concentration – this is perhaps the most important factor.
If a learner does not pay attention, his comprehension level will be low.
(b) Sentence Patterns – this is a problem if the student is not familiar with the sentence pattern and key ideas have not been explained.
(c) Vocabulary – if many of the lexical items are unfamiliar the comprehension rate will diminish.
(d) Interruptions – if the speech is jerky, full of false starts, filled with idiosyncraces, incomplete sentences and ideas, and is generally incoherent (organization is faulty), there will be a fall in the comprehension rate.
(e) Other factors are the listeners’ interest, fatigue, motivation, health and attitude.
22PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION Listening, you have been told, is a primary language tool in everybody’s life.
More time is expended in listening than in the other three language skills.
You must therefore develop this all time important skill in your learners.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been shown that listening is not hearing, it is an important academic and life-time skill; that its primary aim is making meaning out of what is heard.
You have also been shown how to increase your learners’ listening rate through graded materials.
Also factors that after listening comprehension were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR –MARKED ASSIGNMENT (a) What is the impact of the Grieve report on the status of oral English in West Africa and Nigeria in particular?
(b) Discuss the usefulness of tape recorder, record player, radio and the television in the teaching of listening skills in our schools.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Grieve D.W. (1964) Report of an Enquiry into English Language Examining African University Press Lagos.
Bright J.A.
& G.P.
McGregor (1970) Teaching English as a Second Language London Long.
Howatt Anthony & Julian Dakin (1974) Language Laboratory Materials in Allen J.P.B.
& S.Pit (order Techniques in Applied Linguistics Vol 3 Oxford University Press.
Kinder Robert Farrar (1972) Learning to Listen in Morris Joyce ed.
The First R Yesterday today tomorrow a selection of papers from conference of the United Kingdom Reading Association Ward Lock Educational.
Oderinde A.A. (1979) Teaching to Listen and Speak: The Development and Status of Speech in English Language Teaching in Ubahakwe Ebo ed.
The Teaching of English Studies: reading for colleges and Universities Ibadan Univ.
Press.
23PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 4 TEACHING THE AURAL ORAL- SKILLS 2 – SPEAKING Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Language Skills 3.2 Aural – Oral Skills 3.2.1 Speaking Skills 3.2.2 Procedures for Training Speaking Skills 3.3 Lesson Procedures 3.4 Stress and Rhythm 3.5 Teaching Intonation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 For further Reading 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 1.0 INTRODUCTION Human beings spend about 70 percent of their active hours communicating verbally-listening, speaking, reading and writing in that order.
Your learners, like all other human beings, spend about 10 or more hours a day, every day, performing verbal communication behaviours.
Language is the major means used by human in expressing ideas, thoughts and feelings.
A well developed language has four basic skills, namely: listening, speaking, reading and writing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to (a) state the four basic language skills; (b) discuss the inter-relatedness of the skills (c) state the importance of teaching the oral language skills (d) teach, at least, one area of the oral skills.
24PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Language Skills English, is a second language (L ) in Nigeria and this has implications 2 for you – the teacher of the subject.
Being an L and a global language 2 implies that its four basic skills are to be mastered for national and international usage.
Exercise 1 Enumerate the various ways you use a language.
Take a look at this diagram.
Did you in answering exercise 3.1 mention Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing?
If you did, then you are right Listening Speaking UNDERSTANDING Writing Reading Four Language Skills and their Inter-relatedness Using English language in Nigeria means using it in these mentioned four areas for purposes of understanding.
The arrows, you must note shows the inter-relatedness of the skills and all aiming at understanding.
Communication whether verbal or otherwise would be said to have taken place, only and if only the message is understood.
What your students listen to influences the how and the what of what they speak; so also does what they read influence the what and the how of their listening.
This is the essence of the arrows.
Also your learners must be trained to understand that they should use English as close as possible to native usage.
For instance, they should aim to speak in everyday situations with reasonable fluency and correctness and with pronunciation acceptable to international speakers of the language; they should read in the L easily without resorting to translation; and 2 communicate in writing anything they can say.
Mastery of these skills must be accompanied by familiarity with the culture of L .
2 You may ask what is the importance of all that you have studied thus far to the teaching of the oral-aural skills?
The essence is to situate what follows so that you know the skill to start with in your classes.
25PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Exercise 2 What are oral-aural skills?
3.2 Oral – Aural Skills Oral has to do with speaking while aural deals with listening.
These two skills are usually considered to be the first to be learnt or acquired by an individual whether in the case of mother tongue or L .
It is believed by 2 language methodologists that listening skill precedes speaking skills.
In the last unit, you learnt how to teach listening skill.
We shall teach you how to teach speaking skills in this unit.
3.2.1 Speaking Skills Your learners’ success in communicating in this medium (spoken) depends on their ability to: (a) understand English intelligibly (listeners make meaning of what they say); (b) comprehend fully the exact meaning of what they hear (listen to).
Thus one’s ability to listen and comprehend will aid him to develop effective speaking skill.
Communication will be said to have broken down if the sounds of English are not properly and appropriately produced (enunciated); when the stress and intonation patterns are not appropriately used and when speech is stilted and therefore bores the listeners.
To aid your pupils develop the ability to speak, you will be expected to train them in the following sub-skills – sound, stress and rhythm, intonation.
Sounds, stress and rhythm always combine in any given utterance to produce intelligible and unstilted speech.
It is not possible to cover all the problems of the several languages in use in Nigeria but in what follows, you will be shown some examples in the areas of Sound, Stress and Intonation.
3.2.2 Procedures for Training Speaking Skills The English orthography is different from English sounds – the speech is different.
There are twenty six alphabets which are combined to form words but in speech there are twelve vowels eight diphthong sounds and 24 consonant sounds.
There are three vowel combinations.
26PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS You must learn these sounds yourself and procure a good dictionary as a guide Allen’s “Living English” though an old book is useful too.
English is an L in Nigeria and there are bound to be mother tongue 2 interferences in the production of the sounds of L by your learners.
2 Identify these teaching problematic sounds and teach them out.
Sounds likely to cause difficulties are found in Dunstant’s Twelve Nigerian Languages and most secondary school textbooks of English.
In teaching sounds, teach in short concentrated sessions of five to ten minutes at the beginning of every English lesson.
3.3 Lesson Procedures Step 1:Teach the production of the sound in isolation e.g.
/i/ , /i:כ : / /כ/ / / Step 2:Write words containing the sound contrast (minimal Pairs) in two columns on the board or on a chart.
Mark columns 1 and 2 e.g.
Column 1 Column 2 /i/ /i:/ lip leap bit beat fit feet lid lead Read down each column, read across.
Read out separate words.
Students are to indicate where the word comes from.
Read and they repeat after you.
Step 3 Repeat Step 2 while students individually indicate the column the word comes from.
Your ingenuity should be at work here.
Organize competition etc.
Learners are to repeat after you.
Step 4 Write pairs of sentences containing the words containing the sound contrast e.g.
1a.
The boy bit his mother b.
The boy beat his mother 2a.
You wanted to hit the nail.
b.
You wanted to heat the nail 3a.
Can you find the lid?
b.
Can you find the lead?
Read out each pair of sentences, students repeat after you.
Read out a chosen sentence for identification by your learners.
Step 5 Repeat step 4 with individual students.
27PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Repeat Steps 1-5 using other identified sounds e.g.
/§/ and /t§/; /dz/ /z/; / ^/ / כ / Exercise 3 What is speaking?
What factors are likely to cause stilted language when spoken?
Speaking is the ability to express oneself clearly in flexible conversational English that is nationally and internationally acceptable.
Stilted language will result from mis-pronounced sounds and misuse of stress and rhythm.
Intonation is a source of difficulty because Nigerian languages are tonal.
3.4 Stress and Rhythm English words do carry stress and this can vary according to the meaning of the sentence as a whole.
This means that your learners have to learn primary stress (on a word); emphatic stress or contrast stress.
You must give training in both word and sentence stress.
Give attention to the following: Word Stress – Sentence stress, Emphatic Stress and Contrast Stress; Intonation i.e.
the rising and falling tones, the falling rising tone used for statements and questions.
Lesson Procedure for Teaching Stress Many textbooks in schools today have a lot of materials on this oral skill (stress) and it is assessed in the final external examinations.
Practice and train stress in short sessions as with sounds.
Step 1: Practice the chosen item using a di DAH di di DAH di pattern di – unstressed, DAH - stressed Encourage the learners to clap on the DAHs only while the dis are said lightly with /i/ properly pronounced.
Learners are to work together and the pattern is practiced at normal speech speed.
e.g.
di DAH DAH di a packet ex port 28PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Step 2: Substitute appropriate phrases/words for the di DAHs.
Say each phrase/words several times, clap on the stressed syllable.
Students join in, keeping the pace.
e.g.
di DAH di di DAH di a pla te of foo d He went to the mar ket in front of the class room 3.5 Teaching Intonation The teaching of this skill must be done when you have trained extensively the skills of sound, stress and rhythm production.
In teaching intonation, start by exaggerating slightly and encourage your students to pick out the most important syllables and then imitate your production.
When they can do this easily tell them it is called the Nuclear Syllable or Emphatic stress and that the position can change.
It is this change that causes the focus of attention.
Train this skill using appropriate questions.
Here is an example.
1.
Ubong travelled by AIR to Abuja yesterday now which of questions numbered a-d produces the answer.
(a) Did Ubong travel by road to Abuja yesterday?
(b) Did Ubong travel by air to Lagos yesterday?
(c) Did Ubong travel by air to Abuja last month?
(d) Did Ukechi travel to Benin by road?
The correct answer is ‘a’ 2.
Bumni loves WHITE dresses A.
Does Bunmi love white dresses B.
Does Bumni hate white dresses?
C. Does Bumni love white roses?
D. Does Bunmi love black dresses?
The correct answer is A.
Train the learners how to pick out the most prominent syllable.
You will need many practices sentence types – rising or falling – rising nuclear tones.
Follow this up with practice in the form of dialogues.
29PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS What follows, after a lot of practices, is to get your learners recognize the differences then produce the three basic nuclear tones.
Step 1 – Identification using isolated words in contrastive pairs e.g.
mean mean!
hear hear?
seat seat!
or seat?
using the same procedure as for the teaching of sounds.
Remind your learners at all times of the meaning due to the tones and indicate change in attitudes too.
Step 2 - When they can recognize and produce the three tones, practice using sentences.
Dialogues are useful here.
e.g.
A.
Are the students ready to do the work now?
B.
It is n’t certain yet.
A.
But they promised/said they would.
B.
That was yesterday!
You may also decide to use questions which by their tone require a particular tone in the response.
4.0 CONCLUSION English in Nigeria is a second language and this has implications for teaching it.
All its skills aiming at understanding and intelligibility have to be mastered.
The oral aural skills are the first language skills to be learnt.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been shown the inter-relatedness of the four language skills, your teaching must show this inter-relatedness.
The oral aspects of the oral-aural skills were discussed and you have learnt how to conduct lessons (in short sessions) in the teaching of the sounds, stress and rhythm and intonation in English.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give one example each of two vowel and two consonant difficulties that are likely to arise in the teaching of English pronunciation to native 30PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS speakers in detail the teaching method you would use in helping the students to overcome ONE of these difficulties.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akano Ayo (2001) Achieving Excellency in Test of Orals-English.
Bab- Satin Comm.
Ltd. Berll, David K. (1960 The Process of Communication: An Introduction to Theory And Practice.
Renehart Press.
Allen S.W.
(1965) Living English Speech Long.
Dunstan E. Twelve Nigerian Languages Gurrey P. (1964) Teaching English as a Foreign Language.
Education.
Lang.
Book Society.
Pimsleur, P & Quinn Terence eds.
(1969) The Psychology of Second Language Learning Camb Univ.
Press.
Rivers, Wilga M. (1972) The Psychologist and the Foreign Language Teacher, Univ.
of Chicago Press.
Willians D.A.
Second Language: Learning and Teaching.
Lond.
Edward Arnold Ltd. 1974.
31PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS MODULE 2 Unit 1 Vocabulary Teaching Unit 2 Teaching of Reading Comprehension Unit 3 Teaching Intensive Reading Skills Unit 4 The Extensive Reading Skill UNIT 1 VOCABULARY TEACHING Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Defined 3.2 Choice of Words 3.2.1 Teaching the Word on Active List 3.2.1 Situational Method 3.3 Other Techniques of Vocabulary Development 3.4 Word - Formation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In English letters combine to form words.
Every user of any language English inclusive has two sets of vocabularies the active and the passive ones.
The active words are those the learners use all the time while the passive words are those used occasionally.
They are words which a learner recognizes but does not use frequently.
Neither of these lists is static.
In fact, a learner transfers words from his passive list to the active while replenishing the passive through reading and other word- formation techniques that will be discussed later in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to (a) teach vocabulary items using various techniques, and (b) relate the importance of a good command of lexis a reading and writing effectively in English.
32PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (c) find out through concerted efforts some vast body for lexis often not dealt with in your course books but are tested in the WAEC and NECO English Language Examinations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Lexis / Vocabulary: What is it?
Lexis or vocabulary are words.
Your learners use words in communicating.
The ways words are constructed and joined together are very important to the study of grammar and semantics.
Through the rules of word-formation, your learners will learn to recognize the grammatical class of a word e.g.
education is a noun because it ends in - ion.
Exercise 1 How would you get the words to teach your learners?
3.2 Choice of Words/Lexis It is true that your textbooks do have lexical items to be taught and most of these have been graduated given the 10 weeks per term of a lexis period per week.
You can broaden this list by taking a look at the words (and indeed structural items) that your learners are using in their other subjects in the school and even outside the school.
Such a list then forms the active list of your learners.
Remember that yours is a service – subject hence the need for the suggestion.
3.2.1 Teaching the items on the Active List A vocabulary lesson as well as a grammatical structure lesson goes through: Step 1 Presentation of the lexical items In presenting the items many are the techniques you can use.
Techniques such as: Use of context; Use of opposites or antonyms; Use of synonyms; and Use of pictures demonstrations, drawings illustrations can be used.
Others are use of real objects or relics; Use of contrived situations dramatized by you and or with some learners.
33PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS You may translate into the L .
This must be sparingly done, 1 however, Step 2 Explanation This involves you and the learners giving an explanation of what the word means.
They also use the word in sentences to bring out the meanings after you must have given examples.
Step 3 Practice Use situational drills in practising and learners use the language items in more sentences.
Revision – the item (s) must be revised frequently in subsequent drills and reading passages.
In addition teach your learners how to use the dictionary to find meaning, parts of speech and pronunciation.
Exercise 2 How else could you help your learners develop their vocabulary?
The active lexis lessons can only provide your learners with a fraction of the lexis they need.
They must be taught how to acquire more on their own.
Train them in the following skills.
(a) Deducing meaning of words from context, using the dictionary and storing and revising the items already learnt.
3.3 Other Techniques of Vocabulary Development A good dictionary is an essential companion.
Inculcate in your learners how to profitably use a dictionary while teaching them that no word has perfect synonyms and when a word has more meanings than one, they should choose the most appropriate.
Exercise in choosing the appropriate meaning must be practised.
Teach the meaning of brackets, italics and other symbols too.
The learners should be encouraged to possess a small loose-leaf notebook into which they enter any new word and the meaning and the sentences that illustrate it.
They revise these items constantly until they become active vocabularies.
You must also teach your learners how to deduce meaning using context or the environment of the word.
34PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Denotative and connotative meanings of words have to be taught to show the elusiveness between form and referent.
Many words have changed and are still changing meanings.
Here are just a few examples for you.
Word Former meaning Weakened meaning nice fastidious not objectionable aweful full of awe frightening presently now soon silly happy, holy foolish propaganda carry good news illustration of facts vulgar popular unrefined While some have weakened others have improved Word Former meaning Weakened meaning Knight Servant title of respect Fond foolish affection Enthusiasm fanaticism zealous Some have narrowed their meanings Word Old meaning Narrowed meaning disease no ease ill health meat any kind of food flesh meat starve die anyhow be without food Some have broadened in meaning Word Old meaning Broadened meaning manuscript handwritten includes typed document documents salary salt allowance regular wages butcher goat dealer any meat dealer The meaning of unfamiliar words may be worked out or guessed from the context in this the words before and or after the unfamiliar words are examined in the hope that they will throw some light on its meaning.
Take this example ‘No’, the school teacher said urgently “That’s a real rainstorm.
Get into the lorry quick”.
He pushed his wife forward and putting his arms round his two daughters, lifted them both into the lorry.
35PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Almost immediately, the entire horizon was brown and the panicky passengers scurried to their seats.
The lorry driver had cut his prayers short and was shouting to his mate to pull the trapueline over the passengers.
From Alkali The Virtuous Woman Scurried is an unfamiliar word whose meaning is to be deciphered.
Ask first what part of speech it belongs?
The – ied makes it a verb.
Look at passengers then “scurried” must mean moved briskly/fastly/hastily.
3.4 Word Formation Your learners’ vocabulary development can be enhanced through word- formation.
Prefixes, suffixes, affixations, conversion and compounding are roots to vocabulary development.
3.4.1 Prefixes Majority of prefixes though of Latin, Greek or French origin are useful Common prefixes are com, col, con, cor, as in communication, collect, conduct, coagulate.
Prefixes can be taught as negative markers e.g.
Prefixes Meaning Added to e.g.
Comments Un The opposite Adjectives; Unfair Very common not - ed or – ing Unwise participles Unexpected non not adjectives non-conformist derivable nouns; verbs non-drip contrast with un- in – same as for insane illogical preferred to in-jun il- adjectives, improper stressed im- un- irrelevant before a stressed ir-before/y syllable Dis - same as for adjectives disloyal un- verbs, abstract disobey, unstressed before nouns disflavuors a stressed syllable.
a ‘lacking in’ adjectives amoral borrowed an ‘lack of’ nouns asexual Do you desire to learn more of these and use them in training your learners?
Get yourself a copy of Quirck, R (eds) A Grammar of Contemporary English 3.3.2 Suffixes 36PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Suffixes unlike prefixes frequently alter the word class of the base, Common suffixes are – ster, eer, - let, -ness – y etc.
Sufixes Added to Meaning Example Comments -ster Nouns Person engaged in Gangster Rather -eer Personal nouns an occupational driver infrequent -er Noun-personal Varied meaning glover, and inanimate teenager learners nouns booklet piglet -let countable nouns Small, unimportant waitress lioness -ess animate nouns Female Some words contain ‘word parts’ i.e.
prefixes roots and suffixes which contribute to the meaning of the words.
Teach your learners how to eliminate the additions to arrive at the root word e.g.
consider the word illogical; alogical, youngster.
Prefix Root Suffix Il Logic Al a - Logic Al Young ster ‘il, a mean ‘not ‘logic means right reasoning al means relation to if you use this techniques, you would be laying a firm foundation for the learners’ built up of passive vocabulary and identification of stressed syllables.
Exercise 3 List some other prefixes and suffixes giving their meanings Some other prefixes are un – (to reverse) de – (reverse) dis – like un mis- wrongly, mal – bad, pseudo – false, arch – supreme, worst, out do better and sur – over/above.
Suffixes are – hood (status) – ship (as for hood) - dom – ocracy (both as for hood) – ite (naming) - ian belonging fo, - ism ) (doctrin) ment (state/action).
This list is not exhaustive 4.0 CONCLUSION 37PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Vocabulary development is essential both for you and your learners.
The graded vocabulary (active vocabulary) of your textbooks will not take your learners through their WAEC and efficient use of language in life.
Develop in them passive as well as active vocabulary therefore.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been told the difference between active and passive vocabulary.
You have also been shown techniques for teaching vocabulary and how to develop and broaden the vocabulary base of your learners.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (1) He complained bitterly that he was in no position to fend for a family.
They said he left for home the day he got the letter.
What technique would you employ in teaching the meaning of ‘fend’?
Describe the technique with illustration.
(2) How would you teach the following in a JSS One class?
(a) disagreement (b) disapprovement (c) avoidable (d) advantage 7.0 Reference/Further Readings Bright J.A.
& G.P.
McGregor (1970) Teaching English as a Second Language Long.
Horkey et al The Advanced Learners Dictionary of Current English OUP Lado (1964) Language Teaching: A Scientific Approach McGraw Hill .
Quirk, R et al (eds) (1969) A Grammar of Contemporary English.
Long Tiffen B. ed.
A Language in Common.
UNIT 2 THE TEACHING OF READING COMPREHENSION 38PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Reading?
3.2 Extensive and Intensive Reading 3.1.1 Reading Speed 3.3 Causes of Problems in Reading Comprehension 3.4 Ways of Ensuring Reading Skill Transfer 3.5 Reading Comprehension 3.5.1 Levels of Reading Comprehension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions (TMA) 7.0 For further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Reading is a specialized and complex skill involving a number of general and lesser skills.
The first of such is ability to recognize or give meaning to stylized shapes.
It is thus not surprising that Bright (1970) says it is the core of the syllabus.
Reading is probably the most important skill needed for success in studying.
Your learners will need to read lengthy assignments in different subjects with varying degrees of detail and difficulty.
Reading as an area of learning requires utmost and urgent attention because it affects not only reading for pleasure but reading for information in content areas of study.
The annual mass failure in WAEC and NECO examinations in English Language and the Chief Examiners’ Reports are attestations to the fact that most of the students are poor in the reading skills hence the need for you to develop reading skills.
Remember that in spite of separating this skill for treatment, the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing are intricately integrated.
Language is thus perceived as an interactive activity.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to (a) state the two broad categories of reading; (b) state at least five causes of breakdown in reading comprehension; (c) mention strategies to ensure reading skill transfer.
39PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 6.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Reading?
The term reading has various possible interpretations.
Some say it is reading aloud as against reading silently.
Reading aloud is itself mediated by meaning identification because it is the only way in which information about the appropriate intonation pattern, articulation etc is shown.
Reading aloud is primarily an oral matter and requires a familiar text, detailed explication, practice of specific pronunciation problems in the text and group practice technique.
Reading aloud is often restricted to teaching and learning situations.
Reading can also mean silent reading.
But the purposes of silent reading skill vary according to the use to which it is being put.
The uses to which silent reading is put are: (a) Surveying of material to be studied; (b) Skimming for an item from a mass of information, and (c) gaining superficial comprehension as is obtainable in reading for pleasure or preparing to read aloud others are (d) Studying in detail the content of a subject e.g.
History, Economics for purposes of examination; (e) studying the language in which the text is written – as is the case in literary criticism.
Note that your learners’ degree of comprehension or understanding increases as they progress from (a) to (e) and you must therefore teach and encourage all the understanding of (a) to (e).
They constitute what reading is.
Exercise 1 Define reading.
How would this knowledge impact on your teaching of reading skills?
An oversimplified definition of reading is getting meaning from print but the thinking or comprehension process involved are complex and can not be captured by a simple definition.
Factors that affect reading extend its definition as well as the work (responsibilities) of a teacher of reading like you.
The factors are your learners’ experiential background and language facility.
Comprehension could be to get literal meaning of text, or for interpretation of text or for utilization of text to solve problems or perform tasks, e.g.
doing assignments or doing examinations.
3.2 Extensive and Intensive Reading 40PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Extensive Reading: The purposes of reading enumerated earlier, namely, survey reading, skimming and superficial readings etc.
are grouped under extensive reading.
The aim of these is covering the greatest possible amount of the text in the shortest possible time.
A low degree of comprehension is adequate here.
Extensive Reading is used mainly to facilitate familiarity with a large body of reading materials.
These skills are used in reading newspapers, tables of content and even literature/literacy works.
Through extensive reading, speed reading is trained and vice versa Intensive Reading: Content study reading for exact surface meaning, for implied meaning and reading for relationship of thoughts require intensive reading skills.
Intensive Reading is concerned with the understanding of the features of language – (syntactical and lexical) which your learners will draw on in order to decode messages in print.
The focus is on recognition rather than production of language features.
To help your learners achieve this, train them in logical argument, arrangement pattern contained in your choice of texts, its emotional and social overtones and attitudes.
In a later unit, you would be shown how to train your pupils in each of these listed skills of Extensive and Intensive Reading Exercise 2 What is the role of reading speed in achieving understanding in reading?
Is there a relationship between reading speed and comprehension?
3.2.1 Reading Speed Materials are read at different speeds.
It is self-evident that the rate of reading of a material becomes lower if depth and detail comprehension is required.
Fries very many years ago said that reading too slowly is not an essential in all materials.
It is only when reading to study that your learners need a low reading speed.
Study however, involves other kinds of intellectual activities or skills and efficient study technique may call for different kinds of reading skills.
To develop high reading speed in your learners, you must be aware that there may be some problems calling for your attention.
Some of these problems may be physical such as eye movement which may be ‘jerky’ translated from French “saccade”.
Saccades normally proceed from left to right across the page instead of moving from one fixation/position to another to pick up information.
Another type of saccade is a regression 41PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS meaning that a saccade that goes in the opposite direction e.g.
from right to left.
The more the saccade the slower the speed.
Eye span – number of words or symbols the eye can take in at each fixation is another source of problem.
The greater the span the fewer the number of stops required and the faster the reading.
Psychological factors such as actual perception of the text; inability to grasp linguistic patterns in a text and sub-vocalizing – saying the words in the mind, and intellectual ability are all sources of problems.
The solution to all these is practice.
Understanding the nature of the reading skill is important but the essential thing thereafter is still regular practice.
Exercise 3 What can impede reading comprehension in learners of English as a second language?
3.3 Causes of Problems in Reading Comprehension In this section the focus will be turned on why your learners may have problems with reading comprehension.
The first cause of a breakdown is failure to recognize letters properly.
This is called letter recognition and is a problem of physical perception.
An example is when ‘b’ is seen as ‘p’ “ban” becomes “pan”; “but” becomes “put”.
Inability to recognize a particular lexical item is another source of breakdown due to faulty association e.g.
associating “concerted effort” with a concert or music.
Another cause is failure to recognize the grammatical relations which exist between lexical unit or even the failure to grasp the meaning of a particular grammatical item in a particular context.
An example is “slow men at work” when spoken it is clearer than when written.
Is slow an adjective or a verb giving instruction?
Only the context will determine which is appropriate.
A fourth cause of faulty comprehension is inability to grasp the authors attitude to his own writing.
In order to overcome this, some knowledge of a number of different styles of writing and sensitivity to linguistic cues to indicate the status of the passage – irony, humorous, deadly 42PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS serious or light-hearted is essential.
Your learners require some instructions on stylistic effects.
How to do this will be shown to you later.
The other cause of breakdown in comprehension that you need to be aware of is your learner’s inability to apply logical principles adequately.
Unjustified assumptions or reading more than is necessary into a text or may be properly deduced is done.
Sometimes sheer carelessness in thinking may be responsible for this problem.
Before looking in detail at the techniques to employ in correcting these problems, we will look at how to ensure there is a transfer of reading skill.
3.4 Ways of Ensuring Reading Skill Transfer The purpose of your comprehension classes are two fold: immediate and deferred.
Immediate so that your learners pass and pass well all examination requiring their use of the reading skills already mentioned.
Deferred because as we said earlier, reading is what we do for a lifetime; the skills are used out-of-study or at some period in the future.
You will discover later that there are many techniques of teaching reading comprehension but you must consciously ensure a relevance and applicability of what you teach to other subject areas in order to have a full realization of the aim of reading.
Use texts in the learner’s disciplines or other subject areas as well as texts from everyday life experiences.
It is often believed that only beginners need pre-reading activities but this is not true – what we will call presentation later on will be your pre- reading activities.
Ask questions, mime, dramatize, draw pictures, go through a brain storming session.
Your students can draw, label, draw up own questions, attempt a solution to a given problem or even make an outline.
These activities will awake in your learners the desire to find out the why, the when, the what and the value of the text as the pre-reading activities are thus mental-set devices that students will find useful throughout life.
This will also help them in summary writing.
3.5 Reading Comprehension In defining reading (3.1), it was said that factors which affect comprehension extend the definition of reading.
43PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Exercise 4 Name some factors that affect reading and thus extend its definition.
Two factors affect reading and these extend its meaning.
These factors are the readers’ experiential back ground and facility with language.
Certain activities would help in providing experiential background for reading skills’ development.
These are pictures, presentation of films, escortions, radio/television programmes and so on.
Use of models, reading related materials will also widen your learners’ experience base.
Facility with language can be enhanced by developing different meanings for same word e.g.
box.
I store my clothes in a box (contains) The boy boxed me on the nose (hit) The politician made promises on the soap box (stand) December 26th of every year is boxing day (gift day) Your learners will build up their vocabulary if you allow them play word games.
Synonyms, homonyms and antonyms can be supplied for words found in the reading text.
Your learners’ language facility will also be extended through a study of figurative language.
Idioms, figures of speech such as “as wise as Solomon”, ‘flew into a rage,’ “The woman is a peacock,” “war is peace,” “can eat a whole cow”, “bitter-sweet taste” can be given varied meanings using games.
One of the very important tools in dealing with the levels of comprehension earlier mentioned is questioning.
Exercise 5 Comprehension can occur at three levels, ……………, ……………… and …………… 3.5.1 Levels of Reading comprehension The three levels at which comprehension can occur are literal, interpretive and utilization (problem solving).
At the literal level, ask your learners the usual questions of What, How, and When.
For interpretive level of comprehension, the learners reflect on the reading passage and read between the lines to arrive at acceptable 44PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS answers.
The third level required them to use the data gathered.
They may be asked to draw, map out, model or develop another ending for a story read or turn a narrative writing into a dialogue.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, the emphasis has been that of laying the foundation for the teaching of reading comprehension and defining reading.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, reading comprehension has been defined as getting meaning out of symbols.
But this simple definition, you are told gets extended by the factors of your learner’s experiential background and facility with language.
You have also been told that reading skills can broadly be divided into Extensive and intensive ones and that many are the activities available to you for use in training these skills.
The SQ3R techniques, is useful when the specific skills are being developed in your learners.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (a) Name the three levels of comprehension.
(b) Discuss at least three possible causes of reading comprehension problems (c) What would you do to help your learners overcome one of the identified reading problems?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bright J.A.
& G.P.
McGraw (1970) Teaching English as a Second Language Long.
Callahan J.F.
& L.H.
Clark (1977) Teaching in the Elementary School: Planning for Competence Macmillan.
Grant N.J.N.
et al (1998) Senior English Project For Secondary Schools.
Books 1-3 Long.
Language Arts Methods, (1981) Institute of Education Univ.
of Ibadan Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria.)
Ltd. Laye V. (1979) Teaching to Read and Understand in Ubahakwe Ebo (ed) The Teaching of English Studies Ibadan Univ.
Press Mumby J.L.
et al (eds) 45PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Junior Post – Primary English Syllabus, (1972) Institute of Education, A.B.U, Zaria Tinuoye M.O.
(1991) Functional, Transfer of Reading Skills to Content Areas: Toward Functional Reading in Nigeria Universities in Oyetunde Timothy et al (eds) Literacy and Reading in Nigeria.
Vol 5.
Yorkey M. (1970) Study Skills in English Lond.
McGraw – Hill.
46PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 3 INTENSIVE READING SKILLS TRAINING Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Reading Comprehension 3.2 Reading Skills 3.2.1 Intensive and Extensive Reading 3.3 Techniques in Teaching Intensive Reading Skills 3.4 Oral Question and Answer Work: A practice 3.5 Reading for Implied Meaning and Relationship of Thoughts 3.5.1 Lesson Procedure 3.5.2 Questions to Train Relationship of Thoughts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 Reference /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Reading is the core of the syllabus and it is a very essential tool not only in education but in life.
Reading that you need to teach your students is not mere recognition of symbols on paper but the ability to decipher and utilize what has been comprehended.
You need to and must teach your learners to make inferential and evaluative meanings of what is read at all times.
This type of reading will, in addition to helping you and your learners convey facts, communicate feelings and emotions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) define comprehension; (b) list reading comprehension skills and (c) discuss the importance of questioning in training reading comprehension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Reading Comprehension?
Comprehend means “get meaning out of”, therefore reading comprehension means “getting meaning out of what is read”.
Any 47PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS reading that does not lead to an understanding cannot be said to be a success.
Note, however, that getting the said meaning involves a complex process which is highly dependant on both the teacher (you) and your learners.
But you may be asking what are the skills to develop and how do I teach these skills.
Let us look at the skills.
Exercise 1 (a) What does it mean to comprehend what has been read?
3.2 Reading Skills Reading is concerned with the development of certain abilities such as translation, interpretation and extrapolation.
When one interprets; one is giving the same information in another form e.g.
if a learner is able to say “The hand that rocks the cradle rules the world” so points at the important role of women in the society he has done an acceptable translation.
This ability is lacking in many learners today.
Interpretation calls for an understanding of major ideas, idiom, clichés etc.
and inter-relationships.
A learner who says “Those living in a glass house must not throw stones” literally means “Owners of houses built of glass must not throw stones” has not interpreted rightly.
Extrapolation is the ability to use, determine the use, consequences and effects of a piece of writing.
When your learner gives meaning to symbols effectively, he has comprehended.
When he transform meanings into visual representation of language, he has comprehended Let us now look at the specific reading comprehension skills that must be developed through training your learners.
These skills are (a) Reading for exact or surface meaning; (b) Reading for implied meaning; (c) Reading for relationship of thoughts; (d) Reading to get the gist of a story; (e) Reading for required information to do assignments, examinations and reports.
In addition you want to develop the habit of reading for pleasure – this though not a skill is an important aim.
48PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Exercise 2 Take a look at the textbook in use in any of Primary School Class; can you mention the types of reading skills included in the book?
3.2.1 Intensive Reading Intensive reading involves different objectives and different skills.
In intensive reading we examine the text very closely and carefully to get the full meaning.
We can do the following when we do intensive reading: 1.
Reading for exact meaning (factual, exact, surface meaning) deal with the plain sense of words and sentences, and enables the pupils to see exactly what the printed marks on the page mean.
2.
Reading for implied meaning deals with the implications behind words and sentences, and enables the pupil to draw conclusions form what he has read.
(inferential reading ) 3.
Reading for relationships of thought deals with the connections between sentences, and between paragraphs.
This helps greatly the process of summarizing.
These skills are necessary for reading all the school subjects where books are used to find out facts, draw conclusions, and relate information.
Your learners must be able to understand information in letters, reports, regulations, instruction and so on as well as anything that may probably be implied from contexts.
This is true of any efficient reader too.
These are the specific aims of the reading programme.
To achieve them you need conscious skill – training approaches.
You need to know when these skills may be instructed and the levels at which they any be taught.
3.3 Techniques in Teaching Intensive Reading Skills An intensive reading lesson will usually include the following: 1.
Introduction (a) of the story or passage (b) of new language items e.g.
vocabulary, grammatical structures, phrases, 2.
Reading (a) aloud, by the teacher (b) silently, by the pupils 3.
Oral question and answer work on the passage.
49PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 4.
Written work related to the passage.
5.
Follow up exercises.
What each of the above sub-headings involve is explained by setting out a plan for a lesson on how to read for exact meaning.
Lesson Plan Analysis of a lesson in Intensive Reading Steps: Description of Activity 1.
Introduction: Teacher talks about the passage or illustration (s) Teacher introduces any new language items in the first paragraph of the passage.
2.
Teacher reads aloud first part; pupils read silently 3.
Oral question and answer work of first paragraph; 4.
Teacher introduces any new language items in second paragraph 5.
Teacher reads aloud second paragraph; pupils read second paragraph silently 6.
Oral question and answer work on second paragraph 7.
Pupils write answers to questions written on chalkboard.
8.
Teacher introduces any new language items in third paragraph.
9.
Teacher reads aloud third paragraph, pupils read third paragraph silently 10.
Oral question and answer work on third paragraph.
Analysis of a lesson.
Step: Description of Activity Teacher (or good reader) reads through whole passage aloud.
Step 1: Talk to the class briefly about the story or the picture(s) so that they will find it easier following the story when it is read.
You can do this by asking and answering your own question, through a brief discussion, you language should not contain vocabulary or structures that the learners have not heard before, unless these items are to be taught in the lesson.
There may be two or three new items in the first (segment) and none in the second and third units in which case omit Steps 4 and 8 50PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Step 2: The teacher (or a student who is rally a good reader) should read, since a good reading can help the learners’ understanding.
Teacher should deal with only a few lines or a paragraph at a time.
The students then read silently, not aloud.
Step 3: This is where the main training takes place.
The main aim is to train the reading comprehension skill of reading for exact meaning.
The subsidiary aim is to give practice in the recognition and production (listen and speaking) of the words and structures contained in the passage.
Exercise 3 If you were teaching a class in primary school, how would you adapt steps 1-3 to suit your class?
Points to be considered in relation to these aims: (a) In most comprehension, lessons help learners by training them in skills necessary for understanding not by testing their comprehension.
Train before they are tested.
(b) Learners’ books must be opened when these skills being taught.
(c) Learners must be taught to examine the text in detail and note exactly what has been written to understand the plain sense of what is read.
(d) There must be many oral questions on what is actually stated.
(e) Try to involve many learners in answering the questions.
(f) Don’t immediately correct a learner who gives the wrong answer but make him look again at the text while you pass immediately on to other learners.
When you get the right answer, return to the one who got it wrong and ask him the question again.
He too may give you the correct answer.
(g) The questions should be easy and should follow the order of events in the text so that it is easier for pupils to follow in their books.
(h) Encourage short form answers from them – Do not insist on full sentences at all times.
(i) However, in order to give practice in the production (speaking) of the structures contained in the text some few questions should be designed to draw out full sentence answers.
(j) When the class is well practised in this skill, try to get them to ask one another questions.
Step 4 In the second unit of work, the teacher will introduce new language items.
51PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Step 5 Same as step 2 above, but with preference to the second unit of work.
Step 6 Same as step , but with reference to the 2nd unit of work.
Step 7 Written work.
This has two purposes.
1.
It changes the learners’ activity from reading to writing 2.
It gives them some written practice on words or structures that have been worked through orally and points to note about written work.
Do not give too much work for the time available.
Go round and help those who need attention check, answers as you go around.
Encourage those who finish early to go on to read the third and final unit (sections) silently.
Finally collect the students’ work for checking.
Step 8 As in third unit of work, introduce new language items.
Step 9 Some as step 2 but with reference to unit 3 of work.
Step 10 Same as step 3 but with reference to unit 3 of work Step 11 Reading right through the whole passage as a unit after it has been worked through in smaller units.
Exercise 4 Take a second look at steps 1-11, (1) Of what advantages(s) is/are teaching using these techniques (2) How can you adapt these techniques for a primary school level?
3.4 Oral Question and Answer Work: A Practice Below is a unit work for a reading lesson in the post-primary level.
The passage is taken from James Ngugi’s The River Between but has been simplified.
You will discover that other techniques of questioning.
True/false, multiple choice and even linking with writing have been used.
52PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS The Rain Drip!
Drip!
All along the edge of the corrugated-iron roof.
Drip!
Drip!
All in a line, large determined’ drops of rain fell on the ground as if they were competing.
They made little holes-little basins” Drip!
That far drop was transparent” and clear.
Down it fell into the small basin its sisters had patiently helped to make.
It struck the pool of water in the hole and muddy water jumped up forming a cone.
The grass outside, which for a long time had been scorched” and sickly, was now beginning to wake up refreshed.
The rain came down, so thick that you could hardly see a few yards away.
As Waiyaki stood at the door of his office, his leftt foot on the threshold and his hands held firmly against the side frames, he watched the slanting” raindrops, and though.
The mud-walled classroom building, made of poles and thatch, could be seen vaguely” through the misty rain, standing as it had done for about three years now.
This was all his school, his office, plus the building which was divided into four classrooms.
Waiyaki knew only too well what was happening inside.
The grass thatch was rotting and could not keep the rain out.
Pools of water must have already formed on the floor.
This was the price the children have to pay for being so keen on education.
Probably they were all close together in groups, shivering in a dry corner.
The luck ones had something to cover their heads with.
Inside the office, his fellow teachers, Kamau and Kinuthia, were arguing over something.
Both were sitting on the podo” table, as they usually did.
They came there because the office was also the staffroom.
Whenever they had a meeting, a talk, an argument, or sometimes a quarrel, they came here.
They talked about politics, religion, women, anything.
On the floor at the two corners nearest the door were two heaps of things of all kinds.
The office was also the storeroom.
The school equipment was stores there.
It was almost hopeless to try and keep things in proper order for any length of time.
The rain poured on.
Waiyaki watched, thinking about the school and the country of the sleeping lions.
Since all the land in the hills and ridges around Siriana had been taken by white settlers, the country of the sleeping lions was like any other part of Gikuyu country.
As his father had once told him, the arm of the white man was long.
Some people were already working on the lands taken by the white men, to get money for paying taxes.
‘It is bad.
It is bad,’ Kinuthia was saying.
‘I say the white man should go, go back to wherever he came from and leave us to till our land in peace.
The rest of his speech was then drowned by the noise of the falling rain.
53PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Kimuthia was normally calm.
But when he was arguing, his usually slow-moving eyes would change and dance with excitement.
Then he would speak, waving his arms in the air.
He was a short man with powerfully built shoulders and a determined little chain, and he had a way of making people agree with his ideas, more by the strength of his voice than by the clearness of his reasoning.
The political discussions held in the school office were a sign of what was happening all over the ridges.
There was indeed a growing need to do something.
This feelling had been strengthened by the most recent take-over of land near Siriana.
It had forced many people to move from places they had lived in for ages, while others had to live on the same land, working for their new masters.
Waiyaki’s heart warned towards Kinuthia.
But he could never feel the same warmth for Kamau.
Kamau was thin and tall.
Waiyaki never liked the way Kamau looked at him with his small, sunken eyes, their whites flecked with brown.
They gave him that look of cunning that Waiyaki hated.
Kamau was a neat man with his hair always close- cropped.
But there seemed to be something cold and cruel about his neatness.
Check the word and expression underlined in the passage are used there in the sense shown below: Determine: strongly decided basin: hollow in the earth to hold water.
transparent: possible to see through clearly.
patiently: calmly cone: a shape circular at one end and pointed at the other.
searched: dry and brown from the sun’s heat.
slanting: not upright and not flat …………., but in between vaguely: not clearly podo: a cheap soft wood flecked: spotted.
Close crapped: with his hair cut very short.
Activities based on the Text 1.
Give short answer to these questions as quickly as you can.
Do not make your answers into complete sentences when this is not necessary.
Example: What kind of roof was Waiyaki standing under?
Answer: A corrugated iron roof 54PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Questions on the passage (1) Which building was Waiyaki in as he watched the rain?
(2) Where in that building was Waiyaki standing?
(3) Where was his left hand resting?
(4) Why couldn’t he see the classroom block clearly?
(5) Why was the rain falling into the classroom?
(6) Where were the other two teachers sitting?
(7) What were they discussing?
(8) Who was taller, Kinuthia or Kamau?
(9) Who did Waiyaki like the better of the two?
(10) Which of the two wore his hair very short?
2.
Write Which of the following statements is true, and which is false?
Number 1 to 10 down a piece of rough paper and write T for true and F for false against each number.
(1) The rain was coming down thinly and gently.
(2) The office has a roof of grass thatch (3) Waiyaki could see the pools of water on the floor of some of the classrooms.
(4) A drought has recently ended.
(5) The children felt cold during the rain.
(6) Kinuthia and Kamau were holding a meeting (7) There were all sorts of things on the floor in each corner of the office.
(8) The rain made more noise in the office than in the classrooms.
(9) Kinuthia argued clearly.
(10) Kamau’s eyes were set deep in his head.
3.
Imagine and Write 8.
You are one of the pupils at Waiyaki’s school.
Say what happened and what you did and felt when the storm burst.
9.
Describe Waiyaki, as you think he looks.
10.
What difficulties were the people in and around Siriana meeting?
From Hindmarsh R. Reading for Response stage 2 Book 1 Cambridge Univ.
Press.
55PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.5 Reading for implied Meaning and Reading for Relationship of Thoughts.
In teaching these skills there are some important points to bear in mind about the questions and the lesson procedures.
Importance of the Questions: In reading for implied meaning, the reader has to see the implications behind words and sentences.
Ask questions in which the answer is not to be found literally in the passage, but where it can be gotten by interpreting the meaning of what is said in the passage.
Learners should not use their personal opinion in arriving at the answer.
The answer is not immediately apparent in one sense, it is hidden.
In Reading for Relationship of Thought, the reader has to connect information or ideas between sentences and between paragraphs.
So you ask questions in which the answer is the result of seeing the connection between different parts of the passage.
These parts may be close together or far apart.
3.5.1 Lesson Procedure for teaching: Reading for implied meaning and for relationship Learners must be given time to think about the questions, since the answers are not as obvious as with reading for exact meaning.
Learners should write the answers in their exercise books, individually, if the class size is small.
If the class size is large as we have in many primary schools, then group learners in small groups.
After each question has been answered in writing, it is then discussed.
This is to ensure that pupil all see how the answers are arrived at.
If your learners do not understand, it is necessary to lead them to the implied answer through series of questions.
In introducing either of these skills, the unit of work is often the whole passage rather than sections as is the case with reading for exact meaning.
In classes where more than one of these intensive reading skills may be taught in one lesson, questions involving these two skills may be asked as they occur in a unit of work for reading for exact meaning.
Alternately, such questions may be asked after the text has been treated for exact meaning.
See the passage on Rain.
Here is a short passage and some examples of questions which are suitable for training these skills It was Sunday; Ibrahim was going to visit his uncle.
On the way two boys stopped him “Give us that bag”, one of them ordered fiercely.
56PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Ibrahim was not afraid to fight, but there were two of them.
So he turned and ran.
The two boys ran after him.
Ibrahim saw his friend Ahmed and shouted ‘Help; Ahmed.
The next moment, the first boy caught Ibrahim and pulled away his bag, ‘Put that bag down”; ordered Ahmed, who was a very big boy.
“If you don’t, I will beat you!” The first boy looked quickly at the second.
The first boy wanted to fight but the second one had moved back a few feet.
The second then said to the first, “Put it down”.
Questions to train reading for implied meaning (with answers that we want the pupils to give) Question 1: Why did the boys run after Ibrahim?
Answer: Because they wanted his bag.
Questions 2: Who can run fastest Ahmed, the first boy, or the second boy?
How do you know?
Question 3: Why did the second boy move back a few feet?
Answer: Because he was afraid of Ahmed, who was a very big boy.
Question 4: The first boy did not put the bag down.
He threw it down.
Why did he throw it down?
Answer: Because he was angry.
He wanted to keep the bag.
Notes for the teacher on these questions: Question 1: This is a very simple question.
The answer is not actually stated but is implied.
We are told that the boys stopped Ibrahm and demanded for his bag.
From this it follows that, when Ibrahim did not hand it over but ran away, they chased him because they wanted his bag.
Question 2: Here the pupils have to draw the conclusion from two bits of evidence: Ibrahim started to run first, and the first boy then caught up with him.
We do not know whether the second boy can run faster than Ibrahim, but this question is not asked.
Question 3: The reason why the second boy moved back is not given but as he did so after Ahmed’s threat we know he was afraid, more particular since Ahmed was very big.
This answer has to be inferred.
Question 4: The text does not state why the boy threw down the bag.
But the gesture, following what has preceded this, 57PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS indicates the reason: that he was angry or annoyed because he was prepared to fight.
The first boy opened his mouth.
The second one shook his head.
The first one threw down the bag, they turned and ran away.
3.5.2 Questions to train reading of relationships of thoughts (with expected answers) Questions 1: Why did Ibrahim turn and run?
Answer: Because he could not win against two people Question 2: Why did the first boy open his month?
Answer: He opened his mouth to disagree (or argue) Question: Why did the second boy shake his head?
Answer: To tell the first boy not to argue Question 3: Who (was the leader), the first boy or second?
How do you know?
Answer: The second was the leader.
Because the first boy did not want to put down the bag but did so when the second one told him to Note on the questions: Question 1: This is a simple example of a question which requires the reader to see the connection, or follow the relationship of thought, parts of a sentence in order to reach the answer.
Here, the particular connection between Ibrahim not being afraid to fight, the fact that there were two opponents, and Ibrahim’s decision to run and run, is provided by the conjuction “but” and ‘so’.
Question 2: In one sentence we are told that the first boy wanted to fight, and we then see that the second did not.
In the next two sentences, the first boy opened his moth following the order from the second, ‘Put it down’.
This sequence of information indicates, that the first boy opened his mouth to argue.
Question 3: The answer to question 2 is confirmed by the next two sentences where the first boy obeyed the second and did not say anything after the second shook his head.
58PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION If you do a nice job in the primary classes; working in units i.e.
dividing the passages into smaller parts, involving the learners in the reading, answering and writing down of answers, then a solid foundation would have been laid for easy comprehension lessons in the secondary classes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this extra ordinarily long unit we have discussed the five reading skills; namely: (1) reading for exact meaning (2) reading for implied meaning (3) reading for relationship of thoughts (4) reading for required information and (5) reading for the gist of the text.
The first three skills constitute the intensive reading skills while he last two are extensive reading skills.
We also presented some sample lessons while dwelling on how to read for exact/surface meanings, reading for implied meaning and relationship of thoughts.
The techniques shown to you can be adapted to suit your classes.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT QUESTION Following is a passage suitable for a comprehension lesson in any Senior Secondary school class.
The Nature of Reading As used in this book, reading is the meaningful interpretation of verbal symbols.
It can apply also to the interpretation of mathematical symbols, musical notation, code, and other symbolic system, but we are not concerned with them.
Reading is an extension of oral communication and builds upon listening and speaking skills.
In its beginning stages, learning to read means learning that queer- looking marks that stands for speech.
The child ‘reads’ when he is able to say words which are represented by the printed marks.
The child may say the words aloud, or he may say them to himself, in either case, reading means saying the correct words.
If the child says the right words, they fall into a familiar sequence whose meaning is apparent to 59PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS him because of his previously acquired facility in comprehending speech.
If he says the wrong words, if he has to leave out too many words because he does not recognize them, or if his recognition is so slow and halting that the words are not heard as coming in meaningful sequences, the approximation to heard speech will not be good enough to convey the correct meaning.
The discovery that printed words ‘talk’ is the first step in learning to read.
That reading is a process involving meaning is self-evident, but it can hardly be overemphasized that meaningful response is the very heart of reading process.
‘It can and should embrace all types of thinking, evaluating, judging, imagining, reasoning and problem-solving’.
Not only are intellectual meanings involved; feelings of considerable intensity may be aroused and emotional attitudes may be profoundly altered through reading.
Skill in the recognition of words continues to develop as the child’s reading ability matures.
Recognition of common words becomes faster and more accurate.
New words are continually being added to the child’s store of sight words.
Gradually the child becomes able to recognize short, familiar phrases as perpetual and meaningful units.
Skill in attacking new words is also acquired gradually, so that the child no longer has to be told each new word.
The necessity for translating the printed symbols into their corresponding speech sounds recedes; reading becomes inaudible, lip and tongue movements cease and to many an expert reader the meaning seems eventually to leap from the printed page with scarcely any awareness of inner speech.
As the child gets beyond the beginning stages in reading and the task of recognizing words becomes more nearly automatic, he finds his reading material becoming more complicated.
Ideas are introduced which are outside the range of his experience and words are employed which he has never heard spoken.
Sentences become longer and their structure grows more complex.
Finding out what the books mean becomes harder because the language is more involved than the conversation to which the child is accustomed.
To keep up with his reading the child must increase his vocabulary, enlarge and refine his stores of concepts and ideas, and develop his mastery of more complex forms of expression.
(a) Choose the class to use it with and state why?
(b) State three types of activities you will employ in teaching this passage in your chose class.
(c) What type of follow up assignment would you give?
(d) Identify the type (s) of reading skills covered in the question after the passage.
60PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES AND FOR FURTHER READING Bright J.A.
& McGnegor G.P.
(1970) Teaching English as a Second Language Lond.
Long.
Johnson Terry D. (1973) Reading: Teaching and Learning ELBS and Mcmillian Education.
Joyce Morris ed.
(1972) The First Yesterday, today, tomorrow, a selection of papers from conference of the United Kingdom Reading Association Ward Lock Educational.
Laye V. (1979) Teaching to Read and Understand in Ubahakwe E. The Teaching of English Studies: readings for colleges and universities, Ibadan Univ.
Press.
61PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 4 TEACHING EXTENSIVE READING SKILLS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Extensive Reading Skills 3.2 The Individual Reading Scheme 3.2.1 How to Conduct the Private Reading Lesson 3.3 The Class Reader 3.4 Specific Skills Training 3.4.1 Reading for Gist 3.4.2 Reading for Required Information 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment (TMA) 7.0 References/For Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In units 1 and 2 of this module, much has been said about the importance of reading both in school and out-of-school.
You will recollect that it was said that skills of reading can broadly be divided into two: intensive and extensive.
In this unit you will be shown how to develop the skills for extensive reading.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this Unit, you should be able to: a) State specific extensive reading skills, b) State the aims of extensive reading c) Conduct a class for developing extensive reading skill either reading for gist or for required information and d) Discuss the conduct of an individual reading scheme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Extensive Reading Skills The skills of reading for gist and reading for required information are the extensive reading skills.
Underlying these two skills is the need to read rapidly.
Through reading fast, knowledge of English language is reinforced.
In addition, your learners who read fast gain some theories 62PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS that are for the general educational value both while in the school and out of it.
To achieve the aims of extensive reading, many techniques are available to you.
Before looking at some of these in detail, you must: a) encourage reading habit among your learners.
Your personality and choice of books would go along way in leading to success.
b) Emphasize speed in all their reading and not in the fast reading lessons only.
c) Encourage self-reliance in your learners; encourage them to indulge and develop their own tastes, their critical faculties by allowing them choices from your wide choice of books for the private reading scheme.
d) You must also recognize that the skills needed by your learners need training not just practising.
The extensive reading aspect of your curriculum consists of three areas of activities and they are closely related.
They are a) The Individual Reading Scheme; The Class Reader and the Specific Skills Training Exercise 1 Of what importance is the Individual Reading Scheme?
How can you get books for this Scheme?
3.2 The Individual Reading Scheme This is a very important part of the English syllabus which regrettably is not even available in most of our schools any more.
Its organization can take various forms.
You can decide to have a class library or use a school library, not a reading room.
A class library of about forty to fifty volumes kept in a cupboard.
A capable pupil is put in charge as the library attendant.
You must be asking: Who funds this project?
You can apply to the school, parents/Parents Teachers’ Association, public spirited philanthropists and use the good writings of your students over the years.
Students select and read their books during their free or open periods.
Encourage them to read a book a week.
This is possible if your selections are at their language level and of interest.
Train your learners in repairing and maintaining of the books.
Rotate the job of the class librarian possibly termly.
How do you choose the books?
Because the success of this scheme is dependent on how well the books are selected, you must take into 63PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS account the learners?
Varying language levels, their different interests, their ages and sex.
Remember what you learnt in Unit 1 Module 1 on Needs Analysis.
Ensure that books chosen by learners for reading do not contain many difficult words – four unfamiliar words per page may signal difficulty.
For the early classes aim at instilling the private reading habit through provision of books on the easy side generally.
As they progress, increase the level of difficulty.
3.2.1 How to conduct the Private Reading Lesson A learner selects the books of their choice which he reads on his own but he must report to you when he has finished reading it to give you an oral report.
Written reports are reserved for upper classes.
Keep a record of the amount read.
This will help in determining the relative popularity of the book.
Do not force any one to read any book.
If any of your learners is not reading or if they are not reading as much as you expect, check your stock.
Display as an encouragement the list of books in the library.
Provide the following information – Author, Title, genre (fiction/novel), stories, non-fiction biography, drama, poetry etc.
Encourage your learners to rate the books on a five point scale.
Scale Not Interesting at all 5 Not Interesting 4 It is interesting 3 It is quite interesting 2 It is very interesting 1 If your learners do not develop or derive pleasure from this scheme, it is a failure.
Sell the scheme to them especially in a society that is examination oriented.
3.3 The Class Reader The class reader is a set of books which the class privately reads.
The aim of this scheme is to allow pupils enjoy and meaningfully share and discuss their experiences.
It is also aimed at giving insights into the language you teach and the discussions you provoke.
3.3.1.
Selection and Conduct of Class Reader The aim of the class readers is to get your learners to improve the quality of their reading therefore books selected must be suitable and varied.
A class reader that is worthwhile is one that offers an experience that can be meaningfully and enjoyably be shared and discussed with others and give new insights into the language and life.
64PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS In conducting this lesson, learners read about four or five pages from home.
Ask questions compatible with enjoyment while what is read can be related to learners’ experiences if possible during class discussions that follow.
What sort of girl is Nana Ai in Virtuous Woman?
How would you feel if you were Laila in the last chapter of the book?
These ae examples You should also ask question on characters, actions and relate actions to characters.
Note that your questions should be few.
Your class reader lesson often called Literature in English should occupy one to one and half forty minute lesson per week.
Exercise 2 What specific skills must be developed in your learners so that they perform effectively in these two schemes?
It must be associated with interesting discussions and activities not academic study.
A class reader may be dramatized, mimed etc.
3.4 Specific Skills Training The two extensive reading skills – Reading for Gist and Reading for required information need to be trained under speed reading conditions.
You may want to check the market for available materials on speed reading.
You can make your own passages with simple questions to be answered.
Learners start by finding out their initial reading speed which you now encourage them to consciously improve upon.
A slow reader is at a serious disadvantage continually stress the importance of reading faster in all class reading activities, therefore.
Time pupils’ reading and their reading is converted to words per minute by dividing words in the passage by time taken to read it.
Keep a record of this progress.
You can train speedy recognition of words through matching and word pairs.
Word matching : Underline/Circle the Word that is the same.
1. enquire - inquire, require, enquire, esquire 2. route - root, rout, loot, rude, route Word pairs: show whether the members of the pair are the same or different.
65PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Shear sheer different Common commune different Common Common same Phrase recognition exercise can also be used.
This helps in wider eye sweep training.
The passage is structured into eye sweep units e.g.
I have often wondered what sort of man that disobedient boy would grow into In spite of what has been said about speed in reading, you must realize that the goal of reading is not speed but flexibility and selectivity.
Different texts require different speeds.
Exercise 3 Recall what the specific extensive reading skills are.
How would you train your learners in them?
3.4.1 Reading for Gist This is a skill adult’s use daily in various circumstances; newspaper reports, notices on notice boards, hand bills etc.
This skill is useful in summary writing and must therefore be taught.
The other extensive reading skills is Reading for Required Information, Reading for Gist.
The swift reading of a passage and the ability to pick out and remember the essentials is called gist.
Since most of the texts books in use in the schools do not provide for the training of this skill, you will need to compile a series of graded text and gist like questions.
These texts are kept in your custody.
These texts must not be familiar to your learners.
Old textbooks may be found to be useful.
You must remember that the language level of the passages should not be more difficult than that of the class reader.
Unfamiliar lexical items should have their meanings deducible from the text.
Your questions must test ONLY the learners’ assimilation of the gist.
Your question may range from multiple choice, open-ended to subject type/essay type ones.
The free response types are more practicable.
Here are some examples of Reading for Gist exercises.
The first one might be used fairly early on in first year of a post primary class.
66PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Example 1 “Paper is one of the most useful things ever invented by Man, Think of its many uses; without paper there would be no income-tax forms, no notices, no newspapers, no bill, and no driving licenses.
You may think that life would be better without these particular pieces of paper.
But think of some other things made of paper – magazines and money, bags for sweets and nuts, photographs and letters from loved ones who may be far away.
Yes it is clear that there are a great many uses for paper.
Without paper, life would be very difficult.’(98 words) QUESTIONS (1) In one word, what is this passage about?
(Paper) (2) The writer says that paper is very ____ what?
(Useful) Example 2 Exercises like this might be used in Primary 6 the metals known to man, magnesium is one of the strongest and most wonderful.
It is very light and, when properly combined with other metals, very strong.
Lightness and strength are valuable qualities in any substance but they are qualities most valuable of all in a metal”.
“A cubic foot of steel weights about 224.1 kilograms.
A cubic foot of aluminum which is one of the lightest of metals, weighs about 79.6 kilograms.
But a cubic foot of magnesium weighs only about 51 kilograms.
When combined with other metals, magnesium is very useful in the making of aeroplanes, which are to be both light and strong.” “Magnesium is found in many different places on the earth’s surface.
However, it is always found in combination with other substances.
Magnesium is also found in sea water.
It is a long and difficult task to separate magnesium from salt water, but in spite of this fact men have invented ways of doing it, and much of the present magnesium supply comes from the sea.” (174 words) QUESTIONS (i) In one word, what is this passage about?
(Magnesium) (ii) What are its two chief qualities?
(Lightness, strength) (iii) Where does much of it come from?
(The sea) (iv) It is vey useful in the making of aeroplanes.
For it to be used, what must be done with it?
(Combined with other metals) Taken from an old handout by J.L.
Munby 67PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Points to note There are two possible ways of handling this type of exercise: (a) The pupils may be timed individually.
When they finish reading, they record the time, and then turn over and answer the questions printed on the back, without referring again to the text.
This method makes allowance for a considerable variety in reading speed that may exist in a class, but involves the teacher in getting the question duplicated.
(b) The other method is to use the ‘group method’.
The teacher has to have prior knowledge of the main speed groups in the class.
Let us say that the class falls roughly into three groups – those who can read at 100 words per minute, those who can read 150, and those who can read 200.
The first passage contains about 100 words.
The slowest readers get a minute.
Fifteen seconds after they start, the middle group starts.
After another fifteen seconds the fastest group starts.
They all finish at the same time, and without much ado the teacher tells them all to put the passage away, and write down the answers to the questions, which are asked orally.
Using the first method, the student competes only with his past performance and not the rest of the class.
The second method introduces an element of competitiveness which the teacher may or may not like.
But it does enable the teacher to have exact control over the demands he is making of the class.
For example, the next reading for gist exercise might have the same time limits, but the passage chosen might have 110 words.
It should be noted that, unlike those in most books devoted to faster reading skills, the questions here are genuine gist-type questions.
The pupils should be normally asked to give short answers, though it may be a useful follow-up exercise to ask them to write the answers, in complete sentence, in one paragraph.
A follow-up discussion of the passage is of course vital if the exercise is going to train, rather than merely test.
In a discussion of the first passage, it should be elicited from the class that the lists merely exemplify the general point that paper is useful, and the jocular suggestion that some pieces of paper are pleasant than others is merely incidental.
Also, with the second example, the exact weights of the metals merely exemplify the relative lightness of magnesium.
68PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Finally, it should be noted that your learners find these exercises very enjoyable; their ability to read for gist under speed reading conditions would improve steadily, and the exercises would prove as useful training ground for summary skills.
3.4.2 Reading for Required Information This is the second of the Extensive Reading Skills.
Like ‘Reading for Gist’, it also tends to be neglected, but it is a skill that adults use every day of their lives, whether looking up a bus time-table, a telephone directory, or a recipe to find out the vital ingredient and what has to be done to it: has to be sliced or grated.
This skill is an essential study-aid, particularly in subjects other than English.
Reading for Required Information also entails speed as a necessary condition, but it requires a very different technique in training.
With this skill, you tell your learner in advance to find out some item of information.
Ask them to turn to the passage, and the race is on to see who can find out the information and write it down the soonest.
Great care has to be taken in choosing the passages and devising the questions.
As far as devising or choosing the passages is concerned, similar problems to those in ‘Reading for Gist’ are involved.
In devising the questions, you should take care to increase gradually, the demands made on the learners who might be asked to find out one fact from a passage, then two; later they might be asked to find several.
It is of value asking them to read a passage while remembering a number of items.
You can make the exercise gradually more challenging by choosing longer passages.
Many practical exercises involving the use of an index and alphabetical order can be devised – here the learners may have to find the relevant passage itself before finding the piece of information required.
Later on, they may be asked to find out more complex pieces of information, to compare a number of ideas in a given passage, in which deductive faculties may be involved.
Or they may be asked to find out all they can about certain aspects of a given subject e.g.
from a passage about Peter the Great they might be asked to find out all they can about his domestic reforms; or, from a passage about governance, they might be asked to find out the advantages and disadvantages of democracy.
It is clear from the above that a conscientious teacher could spend quite a disproportionate amount of time on devising exercises that might take only a few minutes in class.
There is an obvious need for a book training both these extensive Reading Skills.
In the meantime it is suggested that 69PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS ‘Reading for Required Information’ might be dealt with in every lesson in which ‘Reading for Gist’ is trained; and that the material for the former can be found in paragraphs which follow the passage chosen for the latter.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have been shown what extensive reading entails and the important thing is to remember to be flexible in whatever you do.
You have also been told that most of our recommended textbooks do not have materials that you can use.
You must therefore develop your own, the rewards for both you and your learners are immeasurable.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have been shown that extensive reading skills of Reading for Gist and Reading for Required Information are useful skills and are trained under fast reading programmes.
You have been told not to sacrifice flexibility and the aim of reading on the altar of fast reading.
Some sample passages and generated questions have also been provided for you.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT QUESTION (TMA) Select a suitable reading text from a newspaper for Primary 6 pupils.
Write five questions to test pupils’ comprehension of the passage.
In bracket, indicate the type of question you are asking e.g.
literal meaning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FOR FURTHER READING Davies, Alan & H.G.
Widdowson (1974) Reading and Writing in Allen J.P.B.a S.Pit Gorder Techniques in Applied Linguistics.
Language and Language Learning O.U.P.
Johnson Terry D. (1973) Reading: Teaching and Learning E.L.B.S.
McMillan Education.
Language Arts Methods, Heinemann Educational Books (Nig) Ltd. 1981.
Munby J.L., K. Becket et al (eds) (1972) Junior Post-Primary English Syllabus.
Ubahakwe, Ebo (ed) (1979) The Teaching of English Studies Series.
Ibadan University Press.
70PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS MODULE 3 Unit 1: Teaching Grammatical Structures Unit 2: Teaching Writing Unit 3: Teaching Guided Composition Unit 4: Teaching Summary Writing Unit 5: Procedures for Teaching and Marking the Essay UNIT 1 TEACHING GRAMMATICAL STRUCTURES Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Grammar 3.2 Role of Grammar in L Teaching 2 3.3 Approaches to the Teaching of Grammar 3.3.1 Situational Method 3.3.2 Pattern Practice 3.3.3 Grammatical Explanation 3.4 Different kinds of Pattern Drills 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Nigeria, English Language has an L status – a language necessary for 2 all official, social, commercial and educational activities.
It is a lingua franca.
The implication of this for your learners is that the grammar of English has to be mastered if they are to communicate both internally and internationally intelligibly.
What then is grammar?
Is it different from speech and listening the areas already discussed?
In this unit, the discussion will focus on what grammar is, its importance and how to conduct grammar classes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) define grammatical structures; (b) select methods to use in teaching grammar; (c) construct activities to be used in grammatical structure classes.
71PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Grammar When someone communicates, he does so by causing us to hear streams of sounds (speaking) or by using visual signs (writing).
In each of these, there are rules governing combinations that are acceptable to users of the language.
Grammar is the complex set of rules specifying combinations of words identified by sounds or spelling into larger units.
The most common lay meaning is the inclusion of both syntax and the inflections of morphology e.g.
the past tense of teach is taught (an inflection) while the interrogative form of “He wrote it” is ‘Did he write it?’ (syntax).
Think of many more examples.
Exercise 1 What is the role of grammar in teaching English?
Can the knowledge of rules help students in their attempt to acquire mastery of the language?
3.2 The Role of Grammar in L Teaching 2 The simple habit formation view of language may not be adequate for the theory of human language behaviour as it may not account for ability to understand sentences never heard before.
It is also not true that the totality of human language behaviour is premised on the operation of deep-level rules.
Some language behaviours – subject-verbs concord for example do not call for intellectual analysis.
Occasional words of explanation will clear such errors.
Drills can also be used.
But when after drills based on model sentences.
‘I have lived here for two years/six months” is contrasted with “l’ve lived here since 1994/last Many” your learners produce such sentences as x “l’ve lived here since two years” x then it is time to teach the underlying rule that Since is used for naming time, For is used for counting time It is therefore the role of grammar to create a problem – solving situation in which your learners must find the appropriate verbal response for solving the problem.
Your learners will learn by a kind of trial-and-error process to communicate rather than merely utter the speech patterns.
Through grammar lessons, your learners will internalize the rules.
72PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Grammar teaching provides the lower-order skills (manipulating elements that occur in fixed relationships) and higher order skills – level of expression of personal meanings.
The pattern practice approach is useful at the lower-order level but not when developing the higher-order skills.
Recall our lesson in unit 2 of Module 1.
In your classes, there must be a constant interplay of the two approaches of language learning by analogy and by analysis; of inductive and deductive processes.
Be an eclectic teacher.
Habit formation techniques work well at the early stage while the needs of the higher classes are qualitatively different.
Expose your learners to grammatical descriptions and terminologies which will help them obtain some degree of formal insight into the language structure.
3.3 Approaches to the Teaching of Grammar Over the years, discussion on approaches to the teaching of grammar have centred on three common strategies: situation method, audio lingual method and grammatical (generative) explanation method.
The situational method aims at ensuring that the language item you are teaching is meaningfully used in association with the people, objects and actions to which they refer.
Learners, are believed, would master the rules inductively.
Both the situational and audio-lingual methods are based on the behaviourist theory that language learning consists in establishing a set of habit.
The grammatical explanation method (cognitive code learning) involves with a conscious knowledge of rules.
This is premised on the belief that utilizing the students’ power of reasoning rather than relying only on pattern practice and memorization is useful in advanced learning.
The stand we will take in this lecture is that successful language teaching depends on your ability to develop a mixture of habit formation and analytic deductive procedures based on the nature of the learning task and the type of student involved.
Exercise 2 How can you employ situational method, pattern practice and grammatical explanation in your teaching of grammar?
A grammatical structural lesson goes through five steps: Step 1 - Presentation Step 2 - Very brief explanation Step 3 - Oral Practice 73PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Step 4 - Language Activity Step 5 - Written Practices Each of these steps will be exemplified and in Step 4, you will be taught how to use/employ situational and/or pattern practices.
First you will be shown what is expected of you in each of Steps 1 – 5 even as a structural item is used to illustrate.
3.3.1 Situation Method The chosen items are Where?
When?
How?
On the board or on a cardboard, prepare your teaching aid thus Where?
When?
How?
Abuja June Plane London July ship Ondo August road Nnewi October train Step 1 – Presentation Purpose – learners hear the language in action in real situations and contrived ones.
Think deeply on the situations.
Say: I want to go on a holiday.
Where do I go?
Answer (pointing at one of the town under where) Abuja Ask: When do I go?
Answer: (pointing at a date under when) - August Ask: How do I go?
Answer: (pointing at a word under how) - I’ll go by road.
Put your three questions on the board Where go?
When do I How Repeat questions with ‘we’, ‘you’, ‘they’ and add these pronouns to your third column.
74PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Where I When do you go?
How we Step 2 Brief Explanation (2 – 3 minutes) Explain the fact that she, it, he and Bola will not fit in to this substitution table but can be elongated to cater for these.
Step 3 Oral Practice (15 minutes) Allow systematic oral practice.
You may develop pattern drills (Language Drills) meant to make your learners skilful in the use of the item.
You may now elongate your table to accommodate more pronouns and more finite verbs in the fourth column.
Where I go?
When do you wash?
How we write?
Where call When they teach?
How pray?
does he she Titi Ngozi Your learners must be encouraged to read out many sentences from this table of 3x1x4x4x6 + 3x1x4x6 = 144 sentences.
Can you see why it is said that the substitution table is a very cheap way of teaching!
Step 4 – Language Activity (5-10 minutes) This is for further practice in real situations.
You can organize a dialogue a rhyme or a dramatization of a scene.
75PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Step 5: Written Practice This must at least start in the class and be completed from home if time does not permit.
Begin with this work in the next class.
Exercise 3 What is pattern practice?
Name three types of pattern drills that your learners will benefit from.
3.3.2 Pattern Practice This is a widely used course which pays systematic attention to the formal features of sentences.
The aim is to teach the grammar to the point of being able to produce and to respond to the signals of structural meanings without necessarily being aware of the grammatical principles involved.
A lot of oral practice patterns is provided – to produce strong habitual associations between words and patterns.
There is less insistence on the need to associate syntactic patterns and real- life situations.
They need not become just the mechanical, meaningless repetition, if you know how to make and use pattern drills.
In fact they give your learners confidence.
In what follows, you will be shown pattern drill that you can use.
Aim at using more than one in any grammar lesson.
You must ensure that your learners know the “cues” you would be using e.g.
“All of you, Ask, Say, Do this, Answer”.
You must begin each drill with the first sentence/actual sentences in your presentation.
3.3.3 Different Kinds of Pattern Drills Each of the drills discussed below is useful in presentation but much more in your steps 3 and 4.
(a) Repetition – as the name suggests, learners just repeat what you say.
Your voice must be the last to be heard.
(b) Fixed Increment Drill You add the same fixed pattern (being taught) to each phrase e.g.
teaching ‘ought to’ Teacher: I say “be faithful”.
You say: We ought to be faithful.
be faithful Class: We ought to be faithful.
76PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Teacher: We ought to be faithful Obey our parents Class: We ought to obey your parents Teacher: We ought to obey our parents.
Work hard.
(c) Substitution Drill This is not the table.
In this your learners substitute one/more items in the patterns e.g.
teaching Future Tense going to Teacher: I say We are going to the school farm next week “see a film” You say.
We are going to see a film next week.
(d) Conversion Drill Class converts what you offer to another given form – question to answer and vice versa e.g.
Teacher – I say The economy is harsh.
You say: The economy is harsh, isn’t it?
The weather is hot Class: The weather is hot, isn’t it?
Teacher: Yes it is It rained last night.
Ask me Class: It rained last night, (e) Integration In this, your learners combine two sentences.
The connective although is being taught.
Teacher: I say He tried hard.
He failed you say.
Although he tried hard, “He failed”.
He had sleepless night, He did not finish early.
Class: Although he had sleepless night, he did not finish early.
Exercise 4 Write out three more cues for your learners using integration to teach although.
77PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Other pattern drills you may want to find out about are action chain question and answer and ripple drill Substitution tables and dialogues though not pure pattern drills are also useful in teaching grammatical structures.
You may take these drills, in groups, whole class as a group, pairs or individually.
Each of these has its advantages and disadvantages.
Discuss these with a classmate/course mate.
3.4 Grammatical Explanation This method says that the learners at the higher skills level need a more sophisticated treatment of grammatical rules which provide insight into the deep structure of the language.
You are therefore expected to combine habit-formation of the audio- lingual approach (drills) with fairly sophisticated grammatical explanations.
Your lesson will go through (a) Presentation of the new pattern (b) Explication of grammar rules (c) Verification/practice to include structural drills You have to learn and use with your learners transformational grammar because it is explicit.
The rules constitute a full set of instructions for the derivation of sentences leaving out no gaps, no details.
Your knowledge of it will check your method.
In essence, what this section is saying is read more on the techniques of teaching grammatical structures.
You will find some of the books listed for you under For Further Reading.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is not possible to be proficient in English without being proficient in the grammar of English.
You and your learners must learn the grammar of English language.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been told what grammar is, the importance of grammar to an L learner, the three main approaches to teaching 2 grammar; namely situational approach, audio-lingual approach and the grammatical generative explanation approach; and the different language drills available for your use are also discussed.
78PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT (TMA) Of what importance is the use of interplay of approaches in the teaching of grammatical structure?
Develop three types of pattern drills to be used in teaching the present continuous tense.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Allen, J.P.B.
and van Buren, Paul (eds) (1971) Chomsky: Selected Readings.
Language and Language Learning Series Lond.
OUP.
Allen J.P.B.
(1974) “Pedagogic Grammar” in Allen JPB and S. Pit Corder (eds)Techniques in Applied Linguistics OUP.
79PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 2 TEACHING WRITING Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Writing?
3.2 Stages of a Graded Writing Course 3.3 Why Should Students Write 3.4 Kinds of Writing to be taught 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 60 Tutor Marked Assessment Question 7.0 For Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Writing is a continuous progression beginning early and going on after leaving the school at whatever level.
A writing course should, therefore, be adjusted to the level of difficulty of the learner.
Level of difficulty has more to do with the help given, the amount and kind of, rather than the subject to be written about.
You can give the same topic e.g.
“Myself” to both a primary school pupil and a university candidate.
It is your expectation and amount of help provided that makes the difference.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this lesson, you should be able to: (a) mention the five stages of a writing course.
; (b) discuss what each stage entails; (c) state why you and your learners must write, and (d) state three important factors to bear in mind as you teach writing in the elementary school classes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Writing?
Writing is a way of thinking and the quality of the writing depends largely on the quality of the thinking the writer has about the subject both before and during the writing.
In writing, five main stages are recognized but the stages do overlap.
80PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.2 Stages of a Graded Writing Programme Stage One This is meant for the primary school level when learners’ / pupils’ writing is identical because it is strictly controlled.
Recall that we said earlier that the amount of help provided is a factor.
In this stage, pupils’ impressions made through oral work are confirmed and deepened.
The aim is also to help the pupils master elementary mechanics of writing, spelling, handwriting, word order and word divisions etc.
This aim is achieved within the narrow range of vocabulary and structure already mastered orally.
If anything goes wrong at this stage, there would be a need to correct it in the next stage or else it becomes an issue for higher levels.
Have you noticed writings with the words not separated properly, the letters not well formed and the pronoun I written as small letter i?
These point to a faulty stage one development and must be corrected whenever and wherever detected.
Stage Two This also is a primary school stage.
The sentence structure is controlled but the learner has freedom in the choice of vocabulary or lexis.
Substitution tables are cheap means of teaching here and for correcting (i.e.
remediating) errors carried into the secondary school level.
The Substitution Table Your substitution table must make available acceptable sentences; some sentences may be grammatically but sensibly wrong.
Such sensibly wrong sentences may stick in the minds of the young learners, therefore do not allow them in your table.
Study the table below and see how many acceptable sentences are in it.
The table teaches the use of the Present Perfect Tense 1 done it You have worked on the farm We not written the test They washed the plated Bola and Uche have read the instructions to them The Students turned down the request He had breakfast Uche has gone to the hospital She not heard form him Uncle talked it over with her friend 81PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS The subject pronoun, ‘it’ has been deliberately left out because a sentence such as – It has washed the plates – It has read the instructions to them – may be grammatically correct but they lack sensibility.
You can use this type of table also in teaching grammatical structures too.
Stage Three May be needed for remedial purposes in the secondary school stage.
At this stage, you provide some help or guidance especially with the sentence structure that may prove difficult.
Guidance about arrangement and technical problems above the sentence level are provided.
Most of the sentences are framed by the learners.
This is the beginning of the secondary school stage and we will see how to conduct the writing lessons in this stage in a latter unit.
Stage Four This is still a secondary school writing stage.
Now the nucleus of stage three work becomes the responsibility of the learner.
He is only guided in the problem to tackle.
The structure, form, choice of lexis is all his responsibility.
This is the senior secondary school stage.
Stage Five This is post school certificate stage.
The learner now operates independently.
He answers letters and or examinations and writes minutes and possibly his first literary work.
You will notice that the five stages of writing have been stated.
This is so that you can situate your task.
Problems unsolved in the first two stages will make your work difficult and the errors must be remedied.
Problems left unsolved in stages three and four may lead to errors in stage five.
There is, therefore, the need for you to teach writing- continuous/essay properly.
This you will do well if you are aware of what follows.
Exercise 1 Why is it necessary for you to know the stages of a graded writing course?
3.3 Why should Students Write?
As a teacher of English you need to know your learners strengths and weaknesses and this will help you teach well.
Writing is believed to be 82PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS difficult to teach and mark, so why worry?
You, as a teacher of English, must be aware that (1) no one writes except he wants to (2) writing is essentially individualistic and (3) writing is difficult.
These are truths or what do you say?
Exercise 2 Do you agree that writing is difficult, that it is individualistic and that most times we write better if we feel like writing?
What has been your personal experience as far as writing is concerned?
If you agree with the views above, then share them with your learners; making them understand that difficult does not connote impossibility and that there is more to gain by learning to write well than running away from writing.
Write and teach your learners to write for the following reasons among others: (a) Sharing of inner thoughts in addition to being taken into confidence, (b) Preparing for examinations may militate against sharing the inner thoughts with the learners because this calls for sharing the three truths about composition with them.
Remember and be guarded by the fact it is no good your students pass their examinations without being educated just as it is no good being educated without passing examinations.
Your primary duty is not to train the students to pass examinations but to ultimately use language effectively and effortlessly.
(c) Writing is a valuable form of expression.
Language is related to thought.
Learning to write clearly will help your learners think clearly.
A learner learns better when he knows that someone else shares his problems and values.
Share with them the fact that writing is difficult and that you like them forget things read easily; so you write.
(d) Through writing we keep documents which may be forgotten if not recorded.
Except you share the three truths with them and encourage them and yourself, the writing process may be a fruitless exercise for both you and your learners.
(e) Passing examinations and passing well.
83PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (f) Taking notes in class or during private studies.
(g) Communicating with the teachers, mates, self, acquaintances, general audience etc.
Do you get the message of this point?
It is that your learner needs an audience in addition to knowing the topic relatively well.
3.4 Kinds of Writing to be taught At the higher primary classes, the learners’ written work is based on their lessons.
They will do a lot of narrative work related to their work in science giving accounts of happenings in their integrated science classes; Geography e.g.
The Story of Groundnuts, oil palm; Religious Knowledge – great religious leaders; Social sciences - the family, kinship relations in Nigeria or Africa and in English – fairy tales and or adventure stories.
You will notice that their work in English has been tied to their experience.
Also the learner’s written work will include Explanatory work – this calls for more care in organization.
Summary will also be taught.
It is essential here when the separate points of summary are turned into a paragraph in a writing class.
Other writings for this level of education include outside school work- keeping a diary of events, activities etc.
; writing letters to relatives and friends; attempting writing articles for class library; writing formally to ask for assistance for the class or self; putting up notices.
The list is endless in the hands of an eclectic teacher.
At the secondary school level, Narrative, Explanatory; Letter Writing are re-taught in addition to Descriptive, Article, Report Writing and Argumentative Essays.
If success has been made of the foundation laid in the junior secondary school classes, your responsibilities at this level become easier.
The skills needed for writing at all levels include expression skills, organization, using appropriately the mechanics of the language and being conversant with the content of the topic on hand.
These have been arranged into four main categories by external examining bodies like West African Examinations Councils and Nigeria Examinations Council (NECO).
You need to familiarize yourself with these categories since your learners will write these examinations.
Textbooks in use in the schools break the content ie what to teach or syllabus into schemes for you.
Be systematic in your coverage of the scheme of work.
84PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS In the next lesson you will be exposed to techniques that may lighten the load of marking which make many teachers run away from teaching the writing of composition.
Exercise 3 List specific area to be taught in a graded writing course.
Divide them into higher and lower primary classes.
4.0 CONCLUSION The aim of the writing course is to enable you provide your learners at whatever level the skills of organization, expression, selection of content appropriate to the kind(s) of writing and to use appropriately the mechanics of the English Language hence the division into stages for easy implementation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been shown that writing essays is: (i) not easy; (ii) an individualist effort and (iii) done well if one is interested in writing.
You have also learnt that a graded writing course goes through five stages which merge and gets blurring and that any fundamental error at any earlier stage constitutes an error to be remediate as soon as detected.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT QUESTION (a) Which are the five stages of a graded writing course?
(b) What truths are essential to be shared with your learners?
How would this impact on the learners’ disposition to writing?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bright G.P.
& McGregor (1970) Teaching English as a Secondary Language Lond.
Long.
Rivers Wilga (1969) Teaching Foreign Language Skills Tiffan B. ed.
A Language in Common Lond.
Long.
85PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 3 TEACHING GUIDED COMPOSITION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Teaching Writing in English Language 3.2 Useful Patterns and Practices 3.3 Importance of Patterns/Exercises 3.4 The English Frame and You 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment Question 7.0 References and For Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last Unit, we discussed the five stages of a graded writing course.
We said that stage three often called guided composition or controlled composition is a stage where the pupils make the least mistakes if they follow the directions.
You may be asking “How is this possible?” In this lecture you will be looking at things you can do to ensure that learners’ errors are limited.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) develop and use frames in teaching composition and (b) discuss the steps to take in ensuring that the learners’ work is as much as possible error free.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teaching Writing in English The primary school pupil will commit minimum errors in his written composition if you, the teacher (1) give a lot of preparatory language work, (2) pose a problem or problems and (3) use the study point technique 86PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Give preparatory language work through oral discussions, develop their vocabulary, and train in the structural patterns etc.
Exercise 1 What is the assumption behind controlling your learners’ written work?
3.2 Useful Practices and Patterns Controlled writing assumes that the learners need help in writing in English Language and that controlled writing reduces the amount of errors committed.
The pupil needs to reduce most of what he writes to habit just as he does with speaking.
Written practices and patterns should be provided one after the other to eliminate errors.
Below are some patterns and practices that you can use.
Some provide more control than others.
Type One: Turning questions into statements - Activities Topic: Who I am Is my name Ope?
Am I tall or short?
Am I sitting or standing?
Do I like rice and dodo or tuwo masara?
Do I come to school late every Wednesday?
Answers My name is not Ope.
I am tall, I am standing up.
I do like rice and dodo much.
I do not come to school late on Wednesday but on Friday.
Type Two: Fill in the blanks Blanks are to be filled with appropriate selections from given alternatives e.g.
direction/instruction.
Copy the following: (statements, questions, paragraph etc).
Fill in the blanks with an appropriate choice of word from this list: as……as, although, to, until, in spite of ……………..cold ………….
it was that December evening, Jide did not wear a sweater.
He said he did not feel the cold………..his hands and legs began to grow numb.
………..he was not too far from his room, he could no longer wait reach it.
He ran……..fast……….his legs could carry him to his friend’s room and snatched his muffler from him.
87PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Type 3 Insertion i.e.
combining types 1 and 2 above Instruction: Turn the following questions into statement and insert one of the following appropriately.
The words: frequently, often, seldom, never, rarely, always Question: Have you ever travelled by plane?
Statement: I have never travelled by plane Before using this in writing, the meaning of the verbs (adverbs of frequency), their positions in statements would have been taught and mastered through pattern practice in your grammatical structure classes.
Type Four: Writing in a set of Pattern Instruction: Write a paragraph of a given number of statements entitled “My Best Dish”.
Alternate the beginning of your sentences with My best dish… It is … My Best Dish My best dish is chicken rice risotto.
It is a Chinese dish prepared by cooking the chicken with the fried rice in bacon.
My best dish is as delicious as it is expensive.
It is a dish of the well-to-do financially but of the under privileged nutritionally.
This Type Four can have content words such as dish, chicken risotto and all other words referring to dish omitted so that your learners provide their choices of dishes, sports, drama etc.
Type Five: One sentence controlled; the next free e.g.
using the Present Perfect, the Past Tenses Introduction: Write a given number of paragraphs following this plan.
Turn the first question into a statement using the present perfect tense; follow this with your own statement using the past tense e.g.
Question: Have you passed several examinations Statement: I have passed several examinations.
I passed the school certificate, the higher school certificate and the NCE examinations.
88PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Question: Have you ever travelled by train?
Statement: I have travelled many times by rail.
I traveled to Kano, Maiduguri and Port Harcourt many times in the past year.
Exercise 2 (a) Read through the types of patterns and practices discussed thus far again.
Be creative by mixing up some of them like we did in type four.
(b) Draw up a four question item for type five on an interesting topic for a primary 6 class.
Type Six: Just a “push off” Instruction: Finish the half sentence below and go on with the essay.
Question: Give one activity after another of one of the busiest persons you know.
Write freely and use the present tense.
A Busy Person Chukwuemeka is one of the busiest person I know.
He wakes up at 3.00am every day and does not go to bed until 11.00pm.
When he wakes up, he prays, he cleans his house and begins to prepare his breakfast.
He packs the breakfast and sets out of the house at 5.30am daily.
The bus passes by at 5.50am and he cannot afford to miss it.
The next he can take, if he misses it, is at 6.30am and arrives his work place two hours after office opens… Type Seven: Topic limits the Tense Only the topic and sometimes some guidelines are given.
This is free composition - the type your candidates will have in WAEC and beyond.
Topics can be on any area of interest.
3.3 Importance of Patterns/Exercises The advantages of the patterns discussed above are: (1) They give the learners an intermediate step between writing lists of sentences and writing full compositions.
(2) Errors to be made are limited and can easily be corrected.
89PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (3) Practice is given and carried out not in isolated sentences but in the basic sub-division of the theme and the paragraph.
(4) Copying and recopying of a whole piece of writing is eliminated (5) Grammar embedded in the structure of each sentence is a tool not a subject.
(6) Marking is made easy for you because you and the learners are focused.
3.4 The English Frame and You A veritable tool in the hands of an English teacher is the frame.
Through the frame/table (substitution table), your learners’ writing can be controlled in terms of length and content.
Take a look at frame No.
2.
Stage One.
Three subjects: The trader, The man, The student can be written about and any composition taken from this frame will be error free.
Frame No.
2 Strictly Controlled stage No.
1 The trader blue shirt who was sitting man with the long nose student torn clothes heavy basket against back bus sitting the front seat of the train was standing only empty carriage learning His long Olu Saw nose with his little finger Stephen noticed cigarette piece of string I that a match Jimoh the man next to woman who was sitting beside him was schoolboy behind in front of 90PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS peeling a pencil water cleaning cup with rag while he Sharpening an orange razer, blade filling his glasses a knife As she her handkerchief orange filling the glasses jerked sharpening cup stopped was cleaning pencil the bus suddenly swayed peeling it train them razor blade jumped cup skipped out his hand touched The knife of her cup and cut the glasses shot the fell on water dew hit them eye trader’s right jumped his student’s ear He sprang out of the seat man’s leg shot away from nose ear eye Put his hand to clothes and started to shout Stook the water from his trousers, began scream Wiped the blood from nose yell He meant hurt him She had not intended to cut wanted make him wet, but spoil his clothes give him a shock 91PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS At first at last, would not listen to him finally he refused to me in the end, For a true Some time a few minutes realized understood what had happened however, he began to understand had occurred why the accident had happened how it and stopped shouting sat down again went back to his seat Shout Woman I began …... ………… ………… ….... tell him and ……ed at the other ……… …… explain ……… …… make……….
Hurt …………….
she meant …………………., understand ……... …... had intended to make………….wet, not ………ed spoil………..clothes, give………..a shock, …….. first me …….
a time …… at last, But ……time refused to listen to finally, a ……minutes he ………not ……….
…..end what understand …... stopped shouting However, realized Had occurred he began to…… and sat down again why it…………… went back to his how the………….
seat Frame No.
2 92PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Stage No.
3 The man………who was……….seat of……..nose with…….. ………..that …..who ………behind……………with ………… while ………the bus……the cup………………and …………….
……..he ……….seat, ……….. to about………… tried …………………had not……………, but……….
Finally…….and ………….. Frame No.
2 Stage No.
4 Write a short paragraph which tells what happened during a journey.
Try to include information which will answer these questions (a) Who made the journey?
One or more than one person?
You, or someone else?
(b) Who did he specially notice in Man, woman or child?
the vehicle?
Old or young?
(c) What did this person look like?
What was he/she wearing?
What was he/she carrying?
(d) What was this person doing?
Doing something with fingers or hands?
Using something to do it with?
(e) What happened?
Was the other person hurt or surprised?
Did the other person suffer?
Did the other person get angry?
(f) What did the traveler do?
Which?
Do/say something?
(g) What happened in the end?
Watch Do/say something Your learners’ composition will be similar, in some cases identical but all would be acceptable.
How study Frame 2 stage 2 (frame 2 stage 2 here) Learners are expected to fill in the blank spaces with their own choices.
Frame 2 stage 3 even gives less help.
Frame 2 stage 4 is merely guided.
4.0 CONCLUSION 93PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Teaching composition in the primary school classes can be made easy if you think of what patterns and exercises to use.
Your work is made easy because your pupils write with minimum errors and they are encouraged because their feedback is instant and the paper is not painted in red (love letter is red as students call it).
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have looked at those exercises that you can use to train your learners to write with the least stress and enjoy their work while you too can mark easily and reinforce what has been taught.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT – WRITTEN ENGLISH UNDER CONTROL.
OXFORD 1979 (a) Identify and discuss the differences there would be in your approach to teaching composition to lower primary class and an upper primary class.
(b) Describe a particular lesson you might give at one of these levels 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bright J.A.
& McGregor G.P.
(1970) Teaching English as a Second Language Lond.
Long.
Rivers Wilga (1969) Teaching Foreign Language Skills Tiffan B. ed.
A Language in Common Lond.
Long.
Moody R.W.
(1979) Written English Under Control.
Oxford.
94PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 4 TEACHING SUMMARY WRITING Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Summary Writing 3.2 Skills to be Taught 3.2.1 Selecting Main Ideas 3.2.2 Identifying Topic Sentences 3.2.3 Ability to use Synonyms 3.2.4 Ability to Paraphrase 3.2.5 Ability to Identify Paragraph Format 3.3 Subsidiary Skills 3.4 Procedure For Summary Writing 3.5 Management of Human and Material Resources 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 7.0 For further Reading/ References 1.0 INTRODUCTION You and indeed every one is called upon daily to exercise summarizing skills.
When you give an account of an experience and due to time and space constraints, the gist of the experience is given you are summarizing.
In spite of the fact that everyone does it at all times, little is known about it and even the way to develop its skills in learners is often found difficult.
It happens to be one area that is woefully feared and failed in public examinations.
Take any WAEC report and see for yourself.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to (a) define summary; (b) state summary writing skills; (c) say the major skills essential to writing a summary; and (d) discuss the procedure for summary writing.
95PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Summary Writing Summarizing is an important academic skill and must be developed in your learners.
Summary writing involves an interplay of the following major skills: (a) identification of the main ideas as opposed to supportive or illustrative ones; (b) identification of topic sentences; (c) using the several skills of comprehension – this may be why Montgomery (1969) sees summary as a comprehensive type of comprehension; (d) using synonyms; (e) ability to paraphrase or replace; and (f) being able to complete the whole exercise efficiently within the stipulated time.
You need to note that while ability to write a summary calls for comprehension summarizing has a rich potential for developing vocabulary and comprehension.
The major intension in writing a summary is the main points (s) of a text or a selection.
This main point is written in a complete sentence or sometimes a paragraph made up of short sentences.
Summary is as much a part of writing as of the reading programme.
First the output of summary work is a piece of writing.
Secondly and more importantly summary teaches how to pick out the important ideas of a passage which in itself is an essential preliminary to writing.
Exercise 1 (a) Why is summary considered an important academic skill?
(b) Mention four (4) skills that interplay in writing a summary.
3.2 Skills to be taught In Section 3.1 above, a list of seven skills that are essential in learning to write summary effectively are given.
You will recall that is also said that all learners at all levels, indeed all human beings do summarize.
96PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Summary is thus an important academic activity because it is a tool used in all subjects in the curriculum of the school.
In what follows, five of the listed skills; namely identification of main ideas; of topic sentence; using synonyms; ability to paraphrase and identification of paragraph format or structure will be discussed.
These are some of the skills that interplay in writing any summary.
3.2.1 Selecting Main Ideas This is the most important skill in summary writing, it is not easy but it must be done before writing a summary.
It involves your learners being able to distinguish between supportive and main ideas; essential and non-essential ones; illustrations as opposed to main points.
This depends on the ability to perceive relationships.
Various writing forms such as paragraphs and linguistic pointers such as so, also, however, on the other hand , could all be of help to the learner in identifying the specific types of points or ideas.
Arriving at the main ideas of a passage involves the use of deductive, inductive and analogical reasoning process.
Sometimes the main ideas are at the beginning, the middle or even end of the passage.
These strategic sentences containing the main ideas are called topic sentences.
You may have to teach also that a topic sentence may have to be inferred since details do support or point to the main ideas.
The determination of what is the main idea is the most important skill in summary writing.
Teach your learners that the main idea can be text explicit, text implicit or even script implicit.
You must, provide them with constant practice exercises in locating the main ideas.
Bring to class text selections that demonstrate various ways in which the main ideas of a passage can be located.
Questioning is an effective instrument.
Take a look at following short passages: The examples are taken from Oyetunde, T.O.
1988:45.
The main idea in each selection is underlined.
1.
Main idea at the beginning Firemen provide many important services to the community.
Their most important duty, of course, is to put out any fires that may occur.
They also try to prevent fires by inspecting homes and buildings to make sure that they are not firetraps and by presenting talks to schools and other community organizations to make people aware of fire causes and their prevention.
Firemen are all trained life savers and, thus, are often called upon in emergencies other than fires.
97PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 2.
Main idea at the middle The firemen’s most important duty, of course, is to put out any fires that may occur.
But, firemen provide many other important services to the community.
They also try to prevent fires by inspecting homes and buildings to make sure that they are not firetrap and by presenting talks to schools and other community organization to make people aware causes of fire outbreak and their prevention.
Firemen are all trained life-savers and, thus, are often called upon in emergencies other than fires.
3.
Main idea at the end The firemen’s most important duty, of course is to put out any fires that may occur.
They also try to prevent fires by inspecting homes and buildings to make sure that they are not firetraps and by presenting talks to schools and other community organizations to make people aware of causes of fire and their prevention.
Firemen are all trained life-savers and, thus, are often called upon in emergencies other than fires.
It is easy to see that firemen provide many important services to the community.
3.2.2 Identifying Topic Sentences A topic sentence expresses the main idea and is supported by other sentences.
It can be located anywhere in the selection.
It may not even be given see the last passage of 3.2.1 To determine the topic sentence, the learners must read the whole paragraph.
The sentence that encompasses the details of the paragraph is the topic sentence.
Below is a model you can use to help your learners determine the topic sentence.
1.
They are to read through the whole passage/paragraph or selection.
2.
Read sentence one, assume that it is the main one 3.
Read sentence two, if the meaning of sentence one includes sentence two continue to assume that the first sentence is the topic one.
(b) If sentence one is narrower, broaden it to include sentence 2 except where sentence two clearly encompasses sentence one.
98PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Drop sentence one then for sentence two as the topic sentence.
4.
Continue with each of the succeeding sentences as in 3 above.
Constant practice is a necessity if your students are to succeed in this task of identifying topic sentences.
As the learners engage in this exercise, you are to discuss what they are doing with them.
Ask probing questions e.g.
why they consider a particular sentence a topic sentence.
Their response will give you an insight into their thinking.
3.2.3 Ability to Use Synonyms After your learners have succeeded in identifying the topic sentence of the selection, the next thing is for them to supply synonyms for the key words in the sentence.
This is a rewarding exercise in vocabulary development.
Encourage your learners to see synonyms as substitute words to those of the author.
Ability to use words different from the author’s words is a good sign of someone who can summarize.
3.2.4 Ability to Paraphrase This involves rewriting in words other than the original.
It is giving the gist or import of the original.
It leads to better understanding.
Copying passages verbation does not aid comprehension and long term retention just as it does not result in writing accurate summaries.
Copying verbatim also shows that the person does not understand the passage.
3.2.5 Ability to Identify Paragraph Format or Structures Your learners must be taught how to determine the authors’ paragraph organization.
There are many types of paragraph formats but, teach these four 1.
Cause – effect: here, help your learners identify why certain occurrences happen.
Linguistic signals such as if, because of, as a result of, since, and so , in order , thus, consequently, therefore, for these reasons and hence are some useful signals.
Your learners must be trained to locate cause-effect relationships, signalized by these linguistic items if passages are to be fully understood and for inferences and making generalizations.
2.
Comparison –Contrast Paragraph Type This you must realize organizes the elements on the basis of similarities and differences – and must be so taught to your 99PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS learners.
The clue words among others are like, although, however, different, from, same as, alike, similar to, resemble, but, on the other hand, whereas, in addition to, again, yet, etc.
3.
Enumerative Paragraph Type - this is signaled by key terms as additionally, also, besides, and another 4.
Chronological Paragraph Signal Structures Type This has key signals such as ‘when,’ ‘next’, ‘by’, ‘eventually’, ‘after’, ‘finally’ ‘meanwhile’.
Your students need practice, practice and practice in order to understanding paragraph structures.
Exercise 2 Recall some of the linguistic markers that signal paragraph formats of (a) Cause – effect (b) Comparison effect (c) Enumeration 3.3 Subsidiary Skills There are yet two more skills that your learners must develop.
These are: (a) Ability to express the selected points in clear and concise language: This largely depends on the students good control of English or fluency in the language; the students versatility in the use of structures which must have been accomplished through teachings of grammatical structures.
(b) Ability to complete in as short a time as possible the operation of selecting points and expressing: Familiarizing oneself with summary writing would enable the student to be conversant with this mental operation and help him to identify the writer’s ideas quickly in any given passage.
3.4 Procedures for Summary Writing Teaching the skill of identifying specific points: Assuming that pupils already know how to find the main point in a paragraph, it is necessary for you to point out that the main idea may not necessarily be found in a paragraph but two.
Several ideas may also be 100PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS found in a paragraph and vice-versa.
It all depends on the author’s choice.
He may decide to describe four to five species in a paragraph.
Check your learners’ ability to identify specific points by giving them a variety of passages.
In these passages, an idea to be sought may extend to.
While in others, several points to be sought could be in one paragraph.
In this way, flexible attitudes towards passages and ideas will be developed in the students.
To increase pupils’ attention to what is essential and non essential in a passage your students could be given summary passages either in written or oral form.
They should then be asked to write down from the given passage, the main points or specific points.
Scoring their work would now be based on the points written: a mixture of essential and non essential points.
For every essential point the student puts down, award him a mark and for omission of non-essential points, marks are also awarded.
Through this method of scoring an incentive is provided.
Another device for teaching the distinction between essential and non essential is telegram writing.
In telegrams function words are omitted, emphasis is on content word.
The telegram though does not teach correct expression, it can be introduced in summary writing because of its brevity.
Select words that serve as the core of the summary.
You can also teach.
Summary writing through the use of outline of a composition.
Give the students an argumentative essay to write: Topic “Should Boarding Schools be Abolished?
Each student is asked to make an outline for both sides of the topic.
(a) Go round the class to check out points the learners have written.
(b) Students are then asked to write a meaningful essay from their outlines.
(c) Pair up the students and make them exchange their exercise books.
(d) Ask each student to summarize the main points in his or her partner’s essay.
(e) Ask each student to summarize why boarding schools should be abolished.
The two summaries will help the learners select specific types of argument at a time and distinguish it from other point.
After the exercise, students return the exercise books to their owners.
The students discuss their errors and their strengths.
If effectively done, this exercise will put the students through a better essay writing as well as working on summaries.
101PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Exercise 3 What steps would you take to teach summary in primary 4?
In the teaching of summary writing, students should be acquainted with linguistic pointers which the author used.
Linguistic pointers or thought pointers are essential clues to the relationship of one idea to another in any piece of wiring.
In teaching this skill, enough time should be allowed for the students, to practice how to recognize and handle linguistic pointers in a comprehension before summary writing begins Giving passages with a variety of pointes.
They are then asked to select particular types of pointers and ask your students from the passages.
As a stimulus to gear students to thinking fast, give oral comprehension passages.
Instruction is given that the passage will be read aloud twice.
During and after the first reading, you must see to it that no student writes down anything.
This is to avoid divided attention.
Your second reading should help the a student check their original selection of points and to note the key words.
The students are then given maximum of five minutes to make a summary of the passage.
Later introduce the learners to note-taking which is the last step in the ability to summarize quickly.
To effectively teach this skill, give instructions to students on the technicalities of note-taking.
For instance, notes should be made only when the points have been listed.
Encourage the students to be independent of the teacher.
And that their good reading habit will allow proficiency in summary writing.
The use of libraries for reference, lively school clubs and societies and the pursuit of particular interests by individuals are also advantages to proficiency in summary writing.
4.0 CONCLUSION Summarizing is what we all do everyday and your learners need not to be afraid of doing it.
Encourage them to summarize because summary is an important academic skill.
It is a skill your learners will use in all their school curriculum and even after leaving the formal school system.
5.0 SUMMARY This has been a fairly long unit.
The aim is to point at the importance and complexity of the subject matter on hand.
In this unit, summary has been defined as expressing the main idea of a paragraph of a given exercise.
A variety of skills interplay in writing summary.
These are: 102PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (a) ability to identify the main idea which may be anywhere in the text under consideration; (b) ability to identify the topic sentence.
This too can be at the beginning, the middle or the end of the text under consideration; (c) ability to use synonyms.
In this vocabulary development also takes place.
(d) ability to paraphrase, that is restate or rewrite using as less of the author’s language as possible;.
(e) ability to identify paragraph format.
Four types are identified.
Subsidiary skills are the ability to put down in acceptable sentences the summary work and ability to finish the work on time.
Your were also shown how to conduct summary skills training lessons.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT (TMA) (a) Give at least three basic considerations that would guide your choice of passages meant for summary exercises.
(b).
Describe three techniques you would use to help your students in Primary 6 to acquire skills in summary writing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bright & McGregor G.P.
Teaching English as a Second Language TESL.
Montgomery M. “Summary Writing” in Tiffen B. ed.
A Language in Common Oyetunde Timothy O.
(1986) Teaching Reading Comprehension and Summary Writing in the Secondary School Perspectives and Strategies.
Taylor K.K.
(1983) “Can College Students Summarize” in Journal of Reading Vol.26 No 6 March.
Tiffen B. ed.
(1969) A Language in Common Long.
Group Ltd. 103PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 5 PROCEDURES FOR TEACHING AND MARKING ESSAY Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sample Lesson: 3.2 Lesson Procedure for Teaching Expression 3.3 Teaching Organization Skills: A Procedure 3.4 Teaching Content: A procedure 3.5 Marking the Written Work 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 For Further Reading 7.0 Tutor-marked Assessment Question 1.0 INTRODUCTION The main aim of teaching writing is for the candidates/learners to express whatever they want in writing.
In Units 2 and 3 of this module you learnt the various ways of teaching writing to your pupils.
In this unit, you will learn more about writing especially about how to write essays.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: (a) write a lesson plan for writing essay at the primary level; (b) incorporate into your plan activities that would help your learners write with less rigour and thus commit less errors.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sample Lesson: Through practice, you as a teacher will implant new linguistic habits more firmly in your learners.
This you can do effectively if adequate preparations and rehearsals are done.
Filling the page of a writing with 104PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS red marks and doing corrections are a nuisance both to the teacher and the learners.
You can minimize mistakes by giving several oral practices before your learners write.
Let them write short controlled paragraphs to start with and increase the level of difficulty gradually.
Focus on a particular aspect of writing at a time.
3.2 Lesson Procedure for Teaching Expression.
Step 1: Revise the language expressions and organization skills previously taught.
You may present your class with a passage that contains the expression.
A paragraph or two will do.
Your comprehension passage with questions to answer may be useful here.
(Recollect some of the activities of the immediate past unit).
Step Two: Present your new expression items.
This must lead to a further amendment of the passage in step one.
Step Three: Practice the new item The class practices the new item using any appropriate activity discussed in the previous unit.
Step Four: Using the new items in writing Three options among many are opened to you.
(1) Provide the learners with a passage that has blank spaces into which the new items will be inserted.
(Controlled Writing).
(2) Provide the learners with paragraph plans to be expanded.
The outline must provide the chance of using the new items and this must be compulsory.
(3) The students under the guidance of the teacher may work out a paragraph plan on the board.
The plan must include for the use of the new items.
Alternative 1 will be useful in lower classes while alternative 2 & 3 will be useful in higher classes.
If much teaching and learning have taken place, alternative 3 becomes very useful in the junior secondary school classes.
Amend and correct the students’ work individually.
If you so desire you may group your learners into mixed ability groups but each student individually ultimately works and amends the group work.
105PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS It is this individual work that you will collect for marking paying attention more to the new expression skills taught in the last lesson and the current lesson.
Marking and rewriting are reasonable tasks when the length of the passage is short.
Step Five: Home Work You may give a paragraph plan or give a paragraph topic that will make them use the new item taught Exercise 1 You are to teach the topic: My Pet in primary 2.
What language activities will you employ?
Write out two of such activities.
You are free to look back at your previous unit.
Teaching Organization Skills Organization has to do with the form of the writing.
Whatever type of essay is involved, organization is important.
Essential activities in this area includes jotting down ideas, paragraph topics, paragraph planning, linking paragraph.
These must be taught and used as and when necessary in the writing class.
Organization is scored out of 10 in both NECO and WAEC.
Lesson Procedure Step 1 Revision This is essential in any class and for all topics.
Step 2 Presentation Question learners to discover the main points in the paragraph they are working on in step 1.
Ask learners to jot down the points as they are marshaled.
The different group work is considered.
Step 3 Practice Give more related paragraphs to your learners.
They are to extract and jot down the main points (Do you see the beginning of teaching summary?)
Ideas jotted down may now be arranged in order (of time).
Ask the learners to compose their own plans on narrative topics that are common to them e.g.
a drama they all watched or an escortion they undertook.
If you are 106PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS teaching paragraph topic, ask them to find the topic paragraphs and write the topic sentences of paragraphs Step 4 Homework Written work based on Step 3.
To link paragraphs ensure that the connectives are taught so that the learners plan round your set topics and write related topic sentences and link expressions.
3.3 Teaching the Skill of Organization Did you decide to use fill in the blanks, a substitution table, just a push off or even one sentence control?
Then you are right.
Look at the immediate past unit for more of the exercises available to you.
It is now time to look at how to teach the skill of organization in writing.
You must teach your learners how to plan their work.
The plan is the beginning of organization.
It is the points jotted down as they come to mind that are arranged (organised) into Introduction, Main Body and Conclusion.
These three divisions constitute a whole essay.
Practice and a lot of it would help your learners master this.
Each essay must have each of these sub-divisions and at least be five paragraphs in length – one paragraph for introduction, three for the main body and one for conclusion.
3.4 Teaching Content The content is the subject matter and attracts a mark of ten in WAEC and NECO.
In your assessment, use this standard.
Lesson Procedure.
Step One - Revision A paragraph with one or more faults is presented.
These faults may be the absence of interesting detail, not being conscious of an audience; irrelevancies, expression and organization defects.
Learners are encouraged to point out the defects first individually, then in groups.
They should also try to correct them.
Step 2 Presentation Introduce a new topic; a new paragraph related to the one already started will be a right step.
107PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Step 3 Practice Encourage learners to improve the paragraph in step 2 or develop a totally new one.
Step 4 Homework Students are to write paragraphs using all the ideas they have collected.
Exercise 2 We have mentioned group work several times.
Do you think it is useful in teaching writing?
Ask your tutorial facilitator to help you out.
What are the advantages of group work in language teaching and learning?
3.5 Marking the Written Work One reason many teachers of English advance against teaching writing/essay/composition is the tedious nature of evaluating or marking the learners’ work.
Do you feel the same!
There is no denying the fact that a badly written piece of essay is a nuisance to both the teacher and the learner.
But marks made by teachers on a student’s work are messages which must be read and taken into consideration.
To make the students heed these message work on specific items at a time and make him correct his work.
Your learners’ mistakes may arise out of slovenliness or lack of knowledge.
The first type of mistakes may easily be corrected but the second type will call for your active participation by (1) writing in the correct version (2) writing in the correct version with the necessary explanation; (3) asking the learners to see you and taking him through; or (4) ignoring the mistake especially if the point will soon be taught.
Symbols: Some teachers like using symbols when marking.
This makes your marking easy if both you and the learners know these symbols.
Some symbols are universal – use them.
Generate some together with your learners.
Your marking must motivate your learners.
Return work early (feedback) and display good or deserving work.
You may even publish good work in the school’s magazine or use very good ones to build up a class library.
108PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION Writing lessons must focus on a skill at a time.
As the learners learn the skills they should also practice the skills not in isolation but corporately.
5.0 SUMMARY In this lecture, you have been shown steps in teaching expression, organization and content.
We have also discussed the importance of feedback to both the teacher and the learners.
Remember also that expression score is 20, organization 10 and content 10 in the external examination to be written by your learners.
Use them as you assess their works.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Below are two essay topics for primary 6.
Choose one of them, (a) state the class in which you will teach it.
(b) state how you will teach organization and selection of content for the chosen essay topic.
Topics: (a) You students have read a passage on Life in the Old days when families sold their children to others to work as servants.
Write a speech for the school speech club entitled ‘Life in the old days’.
At least three aspects of life must be discussed.
(b) Nigeria is going through some transformation.
Write a letter to an uncle aboard describing some of these transformations pointing out their effects on your family.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bright J.A.
& Magregor G.P.
(1970) Teaching English as a Second Language Lond.
Long.
Davies Aloun and H.G.
Widdowson (1974) Reading and Wriring in Allen J.p.B.
& S.P.
Corder eds Techniques in Applied Linguistics Vol.
3 Oxford Univ.
Press.
John A.
Green (1963) Teacher – made Tests Harper & Row.
109PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Omojuwa R.A. (1979) Marking, and Use of Errors in Learners’ Writing in Ubahakwe Ebo ed The Teaching of English Studies Ibadan Univ.
Press.
110PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS MODULE 4 Unit 1: English Language Evaluation Unit 2: Preparing for Public Examinations Unit 3: Organizing an English Department UNIT 1 ENGLISH LANGUAGE EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Evaluation, Examination and Test 3.2 Requirements of a test 3.2.1 Discrimination 3.2.2 Reliability 3.2.3 Validity 3.2.4 Testing Techniques 3.3 What to Test and How 3.3.1 Sample Technique to Test Problem 3.4 More on Testing Techniques 3.4.1 Subjective and Objective Classroom Measurement 3.4.2 Objective Testing Technique 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment Question and for Further Reading 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION The anxiety to succeed by both the teacher and the learners often drive many into unethical practices.
But you and your learners need not get into exam-passing techniques if right from year one, evaluation has been thorough because the right things have consistently been evaluated or tested.
If your teaching has not been focused only in passing but rather giving an all round teaching, your students would be able to confidently pass any English Language examination based on the syllabus you taught and you must teach a recommended syllabus.
In this unit, you will learn what evaluation is and how to evaluate your pupils’ learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) discuss the importance of evaluating your learners’ knowledge and use of English, (b) state the important requirements of a test; 111PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (c) discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the multiple choice objective techniques and the subjective type techniques.
Note: This unit may be extra long because we do not want to break it up into two.
Let us together go through with patience.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition: Evaluation, Examination and Tests Your must have heard people use these terms interchangeably.
What would you say constitute the major differences between the three terms?
Evaluation is all encompassing; it can be formal or informal and can either be done through tests or examinations or both.
Evaluation is either for formative or summative purposes.
Tests and examination consist of questions, exercises or practical activities to measure someone’s skill, ability, or knowledge according to Longman Dictionary of contemporary English.
Tests are usually used for formative purposes i.e.
during the process of teaching to find out how well learners are doing.
Examinations are for summative purposes given at the end of term, year or programme.
Tests and examinations invite your learners to display their knowledge or skills in a concentrated fashion.
The results are graded and inferences are made from the standards of performance.
The daily or weekly class quizzes are examples of tests while end of term, year or WASC, NECO are examples of examinations.
Exercise 1 What is Evaluation?
Distinguish between tests and examinations.
Which would you use more in the course of teaching?
3.2 Requirement of a Test Nothing that you teach must go without being tested or evaluated.
A test or examination should have certain qualities built into it as follows: Discrimination, Reliability and Validity.
3.2.1 Discrimination – measures how well an item separates the better candidates from the weaker ones.
To attain discrimination, after drawing up your questions arrange them in order of merit.
Divide the pack of answer cards into three equal groups.
Secondly discard the 112PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS middle group answers/responses.
Thirdly, count the number of correct responses for each item in each of the top and bottom groups for those who attempted the items.
Calculate in effect the facilities for the top and bottom groups respectively as proportions.
F = Facility for top T T = Facility for bottom B Lastly subtract F – F = D (Discrimination) l B 3.2.2 Reliability: This has to do with a measure of the consistency of test scores between one administration of the test and the next.
A good test must give the same results every time.
There are three basic ways you can measure reliability, namely, test-retest method, split-half method and internal consistency of the test.
(a) Test-retest method In this you will set two forms of the test that are of comparable standards; the correlation co-efficient of the two tests of scores is a measure of its reliability, (b) The split half method is used when only one test is available.
This one test is divided into two by picking all odd numbered items together and the even numbered items as another group and each group is taken as a test.
The correlation between the scores using an empirical formula called Spearman – Brown formula Rx = 2r where r = original correlation; r = find reliability x 1rr between the halves is worked out.
Your general methods or statistic facilitator will be of help here use of internal consistency of the test.
(c) Use of Internal Consistency of the Test Each item is considered as assisting towards the final overall order of merit.
There are statistical formalae which you should not bother about.
3.2.3 Validity Validity ascertains how accurately the test measures what it purports to measure.
A good test must actually measure what it intends to measure.
Validity can be ‘face’, or follow-up.
113PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (a) Face or Content Validity: A subject-test is assumed to be inherently valid.
A test you will agree, is designed for a particular group in a particular setting and is believed to be valid for that group.
No academic test is culture free; all tests are influenced by the environment and the training of those taking the test.
Where the culture and environment are divergent, the same test cannot be said to be valid.
(b) Follow up Validity can also be by follow-up researcher.
Validity and reliability are two fundamental statistical criteria of any test.
A highly reliable test is useless if the validity is low except confidently say what is being measured.
As you write test items, aim first at a high reliability, and an equally moderate validity because it is often difficult determining accurately validity.
Note that the key to a successful language testing is to test what has been taught.
Your test items must be appropriate to the levels for which they are designed.
In your classes where English is a second language, (L ) grammar, lexis, comprehension, speech: stress and intonation and 2 writing – indeed usage will form the core of the content to be tested.
3.3 What to Test and How Discussions of testing often focuses on techniques as the main concern without giving thought to the linguistic problems involved.
Questions often asked betray this view – should a teacher use composition?
Are objectives tests easier?
Are they valid?
Can oral examination be said to be objective?
Have you ever asked yourself any similar question?
But you must focus on the more specific description of what is to be tested.
A structural understanding of the language by you will be of immense value in setting your test.
Your test items must attempt testing the marking of the units and patterns that are different from the native language and thus constitute the learning problems.
Your first consideration should therefore be what to test not how to test.
You must be concerned with the identified teaching problems.
A comparison of the Nigerian language and English may produce lists of problems of pronunciation, grammatical structure, vocabulary, cultural meanings related to language among others.
Your tests must, therefore, measure degree of mastery of these problems.
What follows are illustrative samples of testing some of the problems identified.
3.3.1 Sample Techniques to Test a Problem If you have identified the specific areas of problem in phonology – consonants, vowels phonemes; you also know the learning problems in 114PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS intonation, stress, and rhythm and you can write tests in a variety of ways.
You can test your learners on hearing the difference through spoken sentences or by stating ‘same’ or ‘different’ without stating their meanings.
An example is with students mixing up /§/ and /§/ Using pronunciation through auditory comprehension, your learners hear the sentence “The man is watching the dog” and “The man is washing the dog”.
You may need to show the picture of a man watching not washing a dog.
Learner must hear the phonemic difference between /§/ and /§/ Auditory perception is one in which an example of the same-versus- different technique to test is used.
You read out three sentences: 1.
The man is watching the dog.
2.
The man is washing the dog.
3.
The man is watching the dog.
Your learners give the number of sentences that are the same.
Nos.
1 and 3.
Production technique elicits the utterance that contains the problem sound and listens for only that sound.
Pictures are good stimuli.
Paper-and-pencil techniques are essential where qualified examiners to read the test and listen to the student’s response are not available.
The techniques compare sounds in words in which the letters that represent them have been omitted.
This is what you do when you use minimal pairs – stood, wood; rhyming schemes.
You can use these techniques informally in the class and thus prepare them for test of oral examination in their primary 6 class.
The position of word and sentence stress can also be paper-and-pencil tested and trained.
Exercise 2 (a) What must you train/train your students in?
(b) List some of he techniques you can employ in training/testing your learners.
3.4 More on Testing Techniques Broadly your test items can either be subjective or objective.
Essay forms of testing are said to be subjective though they are easy to set.
Essay forms are economical in setting but their validity are difficult to determine Disadvantages of this type of test are that they are difficult to 115PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS mark and are, highly uneconomical in time expended in marking; marking can be highly subjective therefore the reliability and validity will be low.
In addition such a test does not cover adequately the syllabus and it allows for favouratism.
Objective forms on the other hand have the following advantages.
(i) Specific content and coverage.
Items cover more of the syllabus than is the case with essay tests.
The relative importance of any section is determined by the number of items devoted to it.
(ii) Precise problems posed: - An objective test item asks a single precise question to which there is a uniquely correct accurate response (iii) Repaid and accurate marking.
Though difficult to set and time consuming, the marking is rapid accurate and valid as it measures the student’s knowledge accurately.
(iv) Purity of Content Items are understood by all even where the weak candidate cannot solve the problem.
Overlap problems are eliminated.
3.4 Subjective and Objective Classroom Measurement - Objective types are easily scored this eliminates the influences of examiner’s opinion or bias.
- Provides a mutalise incr Exercise 3 What are the major differences between objective testing techniques and the subjective type?
Essay test subjective or items require the responses composed by the examinee, usually in one or more sentences and in which no one form of single response or pattern is listed as correct.
Only the skilled and informed in the subject can accurately mark and this too may be subjective depending on the mood of the marker.
The objective technique however are said to be challenging, calling for originality, need specificity and requiring careful thought to set.
The marking is also objective.
116PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.5 Objective Testing Techniques S/N Advantages Disadvantages 1.
More easily scored as saving More difficult to prepare 2.
Less time is required in scoring More time consuming to prepare 3.
Opportunity for under sampling Difficult for students with reading problem 4.
Validity may be higher because Emphasis may be on meaningful of the intensive sampling rather than recall 5.
Reliability Higher Measures no language or grammatical ability effectively 6 Do not favour verbally facile May favour students experienced students in test taking 7.
Objectively scored May foster poor reading or Reinforcing (rewarding) studying habit by emphasizing details over principles 8.
Demand more accurate and 9. specific information 10.
Facilitate frequent testing and testing 11. prior to instruction Much information may be 12. secured in a short time 13.
Allows for item analysis Provides for good item pool Less “halo effect” Can be scored by machine or clerical help freeing teacher for other duties The Subjective Testing Techniques S/N Advantages Disadvantages 1.
More easily prepared More difficult to mark (score) 2.
Do not necessitate secretarial More time consuming & score help.
3 Can be presented on chalk board Provide a limited sampling of information 4 Give an opportunity for a Reliability low measure of ability to organization interpret, compose, cite etc 5 Provide measure of long Some verbally facils shut many knowledge of language and depend upon quantity of facility production not quality 6.
Provide less opportunity for Validity may be low because guess limited of the old sampling and low reliability 7.
May give evidence of depth of Difficult to read, so create a comprehension.
negative attitude 8 Offer a chance to describe More time for responding to a relevant application feed items 9.
May provide more basis for May tend to encourage honesty diagnosis of incomplete or and careless construction.
117PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS incorrect comprehension.
10.
Questions are not often specific enough and encourage of lettering generalities.
11.
Provide greater chances for “halo effect” to operate 12.
Scoring is highly subjective 4.0 CONCLUSION Testing or evaluating your learners is a necessity.
Testing must not be left to the end of term but must be continuous.
You would have noticed that some of the discussions can also be applied in teaching specific topics.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you have been shown: (1) the requirement of a language test: discrimination, reliability and validity.
(2) that reliability and validity are very crucial; (3) that many are the techniques that you can employ and (4) that what to test is more important to test and (5) that there is nothing inherently good or bad in a technique as long as it satisfies the purpose for which it is designed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) What do you understand by the terms validity and reliability in language testing?
(2) Identify and discuss the factors that affect validity and reliability.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Mc Gregor English in Africa Brown J.
Objective Tests and their Construction: and Analysis Ingram Elizabeth (1973) Language Testing in J.P.B.
Allen and S. Pit.
Corder ed.
Techniques in Applied Linguistics Vol.
3.
Lado Robert (1979) Language Teaching: A Scientific Approach, Tata Mc Graw Hill.
118PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Finnochiaro Mary (1969) Teaching English as a Second Language, Harper & Row.
119PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 2 PREPARING FOR PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public Examination Defined 3.2 Essential Preparatory Factors 3.2.1 Confidence 3.2.2 Planning 3.3 Illustrative Preparatory Techniques 3.3.1 Tackling Summary Writing 3.3.2 Tackling Literature Exercises 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 7.0 Reference/ For further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There has been and there still are talks, do we say public outcries on the standard of education in our country.
The consensus is that the standard has fallen because many more fail nowadays than before and those who pass perform below expectation.
One thing that has gained currency is exam-malpractices engaged in, if the reports are true, by all and sundry.
That all includes you, the teacher.
But do you know that you do not need to condone or drive your learners into partaking in this hydra- headed monster?
One sure way out is to teach all components of English and assess them conscientiously through out the pupils’ stay in school.
Another very important route out of it is what will be shown in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) confidently present your learners for public examinations; (b) teach your learners not to indulge in examination malpractices in English examinations.
120PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pubic Examinations defined Public examinations are the ones conducted by either nationally or internationally recognized examination bodies such as West African Examination Council (WAEC), Nigeria Examination Council (NECO) and National Board for Technical Education (NABTEB).
The candidates’ results from these institutional examinations are pre- requisites for entry into post secondary/tertiary institutions.
At least a credit pass in your subject – English Language for all courses in the higher institution and English Literature for some selected courses such as Law and English is a requirement.
Can you now see why some students would do anything to pas English?
Exercise 1 What can you as a teacher do to help your learners enter the hall on the day of English Language examination with little anxiety?
3.2 Important Preparatory Tips Two essentials in dealing with these problems of preparing your learners for public/external examinations are confidence and planning.
Each of the essential will be treated in detail.
3.2.1 Confidence Confidence is of paramount importance in everything we do in life.
Your learners will develop confidence quickly when they know what to do, how to do it, and why it is best done in the way that has been suggested to them.
Red marks are a discouragement.
You need to demonstrate confidence in your own ability to handle, the class too.
Your confidence and theirs will be premised on mutual trust and demonstration of abilities.
Exercise 2 What is the role of planning in developing confidence?
3.2.2 Planning Planning is the main instrument for developing confidence.
121PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Begin by finding out as much as possible about the classes’ past experiences.
The schemes are there but also informally talk with the class about their progress.
Be frank in the discussions and be professional too.
This is to enable both you and them know and cooperate; not to run down anyone.
Give a pre-test to ascertain the learners’ weaknesses and strengths.
You must not apportion blame but explain to the learners as a result of the pre-test that (1) all language skills are related and need practising even in the final year; (2) reading practices are very important and time must be found for them.
You can imbue this confidence in your learners through personal experiences.
Teach by precepts.
Ensure that what is read is used in their written work by insisting on regular written exercises, short pieces can be used or short paragraphs which ultimately form a whole essay.
From the above, you can see also that writing is of importance.
Practising with short paragraph may appear meaningless at the beginning but these paragraphs lesson the burden of marking especially if your class is large and also reduces the level of discouragement on the part of the learner as errors are minimized and get corrected quickly.
Encourage a great deal of systematically planned written work.
Encourage your learners to take responsibility for almost all their work for they are becoming adults.
Group work is one other thing you should encourage in your class.
Yes, each will write the exams individually, but working in groups has a way of fostering the spirit of togetherness and helping one another.
You must be familiar with the curriculum of the examining body and cover much ground.
Find out the examining body’s mode of marking, if possible mark their papers and apply what you learn from the exercise in your teaching and marking i.e.
mark using their standard.
It is more beneficial to be very strict at marking throughout the course of studying.
The Chief Examiners’ Comments or Reports which are available yearly with the examining bodies should be your constant companion.
As far as literature is concerned, encourage many of your Arts or Social Science Students to offer it in their final year.
Literature is a veritable tool in improving the language use of the learners.
It also helps in developing some moral awareness.
122PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Your students will develop confidence in you and your subject if you announce the plan for the term, stick to it and are punctual for all lessons even the extra ones you volunteer to give.
Rreturn their work promptly.
Exercise 3 How would you prepare specifically for some components of English?
3.3 Illustrative Preparatory Techniques You have so far been shown general ways of preparing for external examinations.
You will now focus on some specific components and it is hoped that you will be able to transfer what follows to areas not covered.
3.3.1 Tackling Summary Writing Select many passages from various sources.
You may use past question papers at the start but graduate to personal selections that are of the same comparable standard as the examining bodies’ past questions.
Your learners are to work together first in groups which you supervise and later individually.
The work must be checked and corrected.
Encourage your learners to possess a good dictionary; a good book on lexis and structure and another on or in spoken English.
What is available in the market will determine what you recommend.
Be systematic in this practice as you employ the techniques discussed in the unit on summary writing 3.3.2 Tackling Literature Exercises In Literature whether externally or internally assessed, one principle of grading must be observed, hence the need for you to be familiar with the grading system of the examining body.
Aspects to be considered are content, form, preparation.
Content deals with the knowledge or range of skills, the subject matter, the theme while form deals with the techniques used.
Preparation however is the organization of the work, the activities undertaken and the general atmosphere in which it proceeds.
You will do good to thoroughly understand, teach and examine your students on the following.
(1) Detailed study, careful analysis or even memorizing may destroy the interest and pleasure of the work.
Where however an analysis is relevant to a proper appreciation of the whole, go ahead and allow it as this may heighten the learners’ interest.
123PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS (2) Examinations in literature restrict the range of students reading while the essential value of literary studies lies in the quality of the reading and the significance of experience gained.
(3) Be aware that anxiety to succeed drives many students into exam- passing techniques e.g.
memorizing model answers, spotting questions, pleasing examiners.
Discourage all these by training your learners on what would be tested.
These are: Information – what happened?
When?
Where?
How?
How many?
Names?
Date?
Concepts - the perception of how the basic data of work is organised.
Here questions on what kind of…?
With what effect…?
Why?
(Purpose) Why?
(cause-effect), what essential problem (s) arises(s)?
Which are the factors involved in the problems?
Perspectives - of what significance.
How typical?
Where does it fit in?
Are there conclusions to be drawn?
Where else could it happen?
What meaning von alue does it have for the world, me?
Appreciation should be both literary and linguistic.
Why is it exposed like this; what is the effect of this word, phrase, punctuation mark, construction, image of this episode, or even of this character?
What type of language-mood?
Etc.
Some techniques that you can employ in checking or sampling the level of acquisition include context question, paraphrasing, essay writing.
Checking on information questions such as the poem/play/novel was written by who?
Or give a list of names; it was published in (give years to choose from) the author is a – (nationality).
The poem is written in blank verse, couplets, ballad measure, iambic pentameter etc.
Choose the most appropriate answer from a – d. The Abiku is believed to (a) reincarnate itself over and over; (b) be born only once; (c) be born only among the Yorubas; (d) be born twice only.
The Abiku returns to the same family several times as a means of (a) punishing its mother (b) punishing the society (c) rejoicing with the family (d) enjoying itself.
124PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS You can examine concepts through asking your learners to write a short paragraph on e.g.
the Significance of Abiku in the Yoruba tradition or Abiku and the Yoruba Society.
Perspectives: Questions you can ask here may include “Write a paragraph of about ten – twelve lines on (a) Wole Soyinka’s particular interests in Abiku (b) Refer to any other work (s) of literature with comparable themes.
Appreciation Choose an extract from the text and ask your learners for example to do the following: (1) Describe the scene presented as graphically as possible in their own words.
(2) Comment on any features of language employed to give effect to He aim of the poem.
4.0 CONCLUSION Writing external examinations need not be arduous; there should be no room for exam malpractices if the teachings and preparations have been thorough.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been told that preparations if thorough would lead to confidence both for you and your learners as they write public/external examinations.
Your confidence and theirs would be strengthened by good planning.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSISNGMENT (a) What is the place of planning in preparing for public examinations?
(b) Discuss some of the essential things to plan and prepare for especially in the last two years of a senior secondary school.
125PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Order s. Pit (1971) “The Significance of Learners’ Errors”, International Review of Applied Linguistics 9 (2).
Grieves, W.D.
(1964) English Language Examining.
Ibadan African Universities Press.
Lado R. (1961) Language Testing Lond.
Long.
McGregor G.P.
English in Africa Moody, H.L.B.
Teaching of Literature Obanya P.A.I.
(1979) Types of Functions of Tests in English Language Teaching in Ubanhakwe Ebo ed.
The Teaching of English Studies – readings for colleges and universities Ibadan Univ.
Press.
Obanya P.A.I.
Evaluation Model for English Language Teaching in Ubanhakwe Ebo ed.
The Teaching of English Studies – readings for colleges and universities Ibadan Univ.
Press 1979.
126PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS UNIT 3 ORGANIZING AN ENGLISH DEPARTMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1What is a Department?
3.2 Composition of English Department 3.3 General Duties 3.4 Organisational Structure 3.5 Management of Human and Material Resources 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 7.0 For further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION English Language is a service-subject in the school; its department too must also be a service department.
Service connotes being responsible to and for all other department of the school.
This places a heavy responsibility on the department and its staff.
The department also has special responsibilities or duties to carry out.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (a) mention the general duties of an English Department (b) mention the special duties of an English Department; (c) discuss the organizational structure of an English Department; (d) list at least five activities the Department can forster to maintain discipline among both staff and students, and (e) discuss the relationship that ought to exist between English Department and other units of the school.
127PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is a Department?
A department according Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (3rd Edition 2000) is “one of the groups of people working together to form part of a large organization such as a hospital, a university or company”.
The English Department is therefore, made up of the Staff who teach all aspects of English and administer the Department, Students and indeed all facilities as far as the English Curriculum is concerned.
3.2 Composition of English Department The English Department is made up of the staff, students, and facilities The Head of Department (HOD) is responsible for the running of the Department.
His duties are as assigned by his nominee normally, the ministry, or the school.
He is allowed some initiative and can delegate duties.
H.O.D and Students He is a father or elder away from have and therefore receives more than he divulges or says out.
He keeps the students secrets secret; though not to the Principal if pertinent.
He is Firm, friendly and shows concern about the learners’ problems without getting involved.
He carries out home visitation where society favours it.
H.O.D.
and His Staff He is the Deputy Principal at the department level.
He calls meetings regularly and Discusses class and students problems with staff.
Once in a while a social gathering is organized; it is financed by all.
He delegates duties appropriately End of session student questionnaires to evaluate successes and failures of the department is developed and administered.
He maintains a give and take spirit.
(a) The Staff who teach all aspects of English (b) i Facilities include textbooks for staff and Students’ use; a machinery for easy accessibility.
128PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS ii.
Duplicating facilities iii.
A range of basic books for reference: Appropriate dictionaries, encyclopedia, critical works etc.
iv.
Suitable and adequate materials for supplementary reading.
v. A department library with a language section.
vi.
Basic audio-visual equipment e.g.
tapes recorder, cassette recorders, film projectors, cardboards, markers, wall charts, flash cards etc.
This list though not exhaustive may look idealistic.
It is necessary and those that can be provided should be provided.
vii Syllabus for the whole institution.
viii.
A computer Exercise 1 The English Department is comprised of …………and ………………….
The main facilitator of this role is the Head of Department (HOD).
3.3.1 Organizational Structure of the Department This is the H.O.D’s responsibility.
He, however, must know that he is dispensable.
He sets up a system that is open and can be run by others in his absence.
The Department has an HOD who is the overall head.
Under him are the following: - the Departmental Examination Officer - the guidance counselor who helps the learners in their social and academic problems.
- the different staff of the various components.
- the Departmental typist or secretary.
Also there is the library and its attendants.
If there is a language laboratory, someone must be in-charge.
129PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Aims of a departmental organization are (1) ensuring a consistent and sensible policy of English teaching in the institution and (2) keeping the department administration running smoothly.
These aims will be achieved if (a) useful information is made rapidly and easily available to staff concerned.
(b) duties are delegated appropriately (c) HOD is accessible to criticism of self and the system and losing its basic frame work on which its continuity and efficiency rests.
(d) the department is consistently being assessed without Exercise 2 What are some of the general duties of the English Department through its HOD?
Why is it necessary for this Department is it necessary for this Department to liaise other Department in the school system?
3.4 General Duties/Role of H.O.D.
He is both an academic head and a counselor who knows his staff’s professional problem and is ready to assist.
If personal problems arise he helps if possible.
He knows he is not indispensable, acts in an advisory or supervisory role.
He is the human relation’s officer.
- He supervises and assists staff in evaluating and improving methods and materials towards achieving departmental goals.
- He holds meeting as and when necessary to encourage personal and professional interaction.
- Organizes seminars and talks on current issues that affect the department.
- Conducts orientation programmes for new staff and students.
- Since English is a service-subject, he maintains cordial relationship between his department and others and provides support services.
- Plans and revises phases of the English curriculum; stores teaching aids; weeds out when necessary.
- Takes decisions on textbooks etc for use, current with books in the market.
- Makes fairness and firmness his watchword in dealing with problems coming from students, staff and school authorities.
130PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS - He is a guidance counselor who listens more, speaks less, builds up confidence in self with students and staff; maintains orderliness in environment and behaviour of staff and students.
Exercise 3 Mention six duties you consider special that the English Department through its HOD undertakes.
3.4.1 Special Duties Apart from serving other Departments because English is the language of education, supervising and assisting staff evaluate and improve their methodology and materials, planning and conducting orientation programmes and taking decisions on textbooks to be purchased and stored, the HOD has some special duties also.
These are load allocation, time table development and allocation.
He works with the time-table master to ensure that his department is adequately, is catered for and he also Works as twins with H.O.D.
literature where this is separate without being an S.S.S.
(Security Agent) he moves around occasionally to ensure attendance at classes by students, and staff supervises and marks teacher’s lesson plans and records of work (weekly).
Other duties are organizing, Organizes setting and marking of examinations; opportunity coordinators but checking their work; collating and interpreting results; maintaining students’ records, filling in students’ cards for Principal and making remarks.
He also takes inventory of books and all equipment in the department.
He is responsible to the Principal and runs both external and internal examination.
All facilities in English Department are under his care Educational Printed Materials are essential in any English Department.
They are kept in-charge of the H.O.D.
but he can delegate.
Extra copies of such materials are kept with staff in-charge of the components.
The school library should have a language section.
A senior language teacher oversees this.
He appoints a pupil librarian to help.
H.O.D.
organizes acceptance of donations in kind and cash.
He encourages individuals and PTA to donate private reading materials.
In the contemporary world, computers, electric type writers, language laboratory and special type writers with characters that can type 131PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS phonetic symbols etc are to be made available in the English Department.
The staff and student may organize excursions the reports of which are kept in the class or departmental library.
Through donations, prizes won in debates and drama outings, the Department stock of facilities is improved.
Exercise 4 When you took over the leadership of the English Department of your school, you discovered a dearth reader, teaching aids and the like may out how to improve on the facilities within your first year in office.
3.5 Management of Human and Resources This can be designated or direct.
Activities include registration, discipline in the school and classroom which may be due to environment, academic or physical handicap.
Better avert a problem rather than seek solutions.
“Know staff and students to help discipline”.
On truancy – be in touch with parents and students, counsel where necessary; punish where desirable; restitution and apology from students may be necessary, dismissal or rustication from school authority at the instance of HOD if necessary.
Maintain department discipline among staff by involving them in Activities such as the following: Library hours Counselling hours, teaching aid hours Literary societies - Debating, Drama, Field Trips, School Magazine.
These are useful in training language skills.
Oratory; English Cultural Club versus Mother Tongue Club; Writers Hour/Club; English Teachers’ Organization.
The list is not exhaustive.
You can plan several activities within the first year in office to attract donations and encourage your students invest their talents in writing that form a part of your class library.
Parents can be invited to visit and counsel learners, newsletters may be produced and sold to raise funds to supply missing items.
If you are seen to be working hard to improve the lot of the Department, the school authority and even the Ministry may listen and yield to your request.
Learners that are kept busy productively are not likely going to have time for unruly acts.
132PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS 4.0 CONCLUSION Organization of an English Department is not easy because a lot of finances and energy is needed but the results if properly set up can be very rewarding.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been taught the duties – general and special – of an English Department.
The, fact that the said Department belongs or plays a supportive role to all other Departments is also pointed out.
You have also been told how to raise funds to meet the needs of the Department while the learners and staff develop their inmate abilities.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Map out a plan of the Organizational structure you would employ if you were heading an English Department.
Remember to point out the duties of each office mapped out.
You have attended a workshop on the use of some oral language teaching material.
Discuss how you would organize a similar workshop for the staff of your Department and or school.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Broughton G. et al (1978) Teaching English as a Foreign Language, Routledge and Kegan.
133PRD 104 PRIMARY ENGLISH CURRICULUM & METHODS Organizing an English Department 1.
Organizational Structure Principal Vice Principal Vice Principal (Academics) (Administration) English Department H. O. D. Exam Secretary Staff Staff Departmental Officer i/c of Librarian Language Laboratory 2.
Organizing a Workshop (a) Brief Principal through Vice Principal (Academics) seeking permission (b) Invite relevant staff (c) Prepare useful materials for each participant (d) Think of refreshment – an encouragement (e) Involve some other staffers in the running of the workshop (f) Make it short but meaningful and rewarding.
134
