NoneSED 724: CURRICULUM TRENDS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2Introduction Curriculum Trends in Science Education is a three-credit course.
It is a core course for all those offering Masters in Science Education M.Sc (Ed).
The course consists of twenty-one units approximately three volumes i.e.
7 units in a volume.
It will change your outlook to science teaching for good.
It will help you to begin to think and act like a professional.
The course involves aspects of stages of curriculum development with reference to science education and science curriculum projects in Nigeria and Britain.
The course includes: nature of science and scientific inquiry, science education development in Nigeria before and since independence, trends in the stages of science education curriculum development, Nigeria science curriculum projects at primary and secondary levels, British science curriculum projects, current and contemporary issues in science education in Nigeria.
What you will learn in this course The overall aim of the course in Curriculum Trends in Science Education is to keep you abreast with development in science education and science teaching in our schools.
The course is developed on the premise that science teaching can be greatly improved upon if we understand how we come about what we intend to teach.
This course will further expose you to better understanding of your job as a practising science teacher that need to be deeply involved in curricular problems because this is one of the pivots on which the education of the child revolves.
For those of you who have undergone some training in curriculum, you still need to be constantly reminded of the major issues and problems involved and further enlightened on some issues that are central to science education curriculum.
It will help you to compare science curriculum projects in Nigeria with that of the British Science Curriculum projects with the aims of reflecting upon and making meaningful contributions towards the teaching of sciences in Nigeria.
Some of the topics will inform you about the current issues in science education in Nigeria such as the curricula and the problems of implementation, performance of students in the sciences and information and communication technology (ICT) and science teaching.
They are expected to increase your knowledge as a science teacher, what to teach and how to teach it.
Aims of the Course This course aims at providing a meaningful explanation of science education in Nigeria, trends in the stages of science education, curriculum development, familiarization with some issues that concern science curriculum projects at primary 3and secondary school levels in Nigeria as well as a wide knowledge of British science curriculum project with the intention of comparing the two together.
The course provide a comprehensive description of current issues in science education in Nigeria.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets over all objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit, you should endeavour to read them before you start reading through the unit.
You may as well want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In this way, you can be sure that you have done what was required of you by the unit.
The wider objectives of the course as a whole are stated below.
For you to say you have achieved these objectives, you should have successfully achieved the aims of the course.
On successful completion of this course, you should be able to: 1.
Differentiate between science and non-science using Paul Hirst Postulate 2.
Explain science education in Nigeria before and since independence 3.
Explain the new direction for science education in Nigeria and other countries of the world 4.
List some of the curriculum activities in science education in Nigeria.
5.
Explain why science curricular have changed over the year 6.
Describe the criteria for identifying and selecting contents in science education 7.
Outline the trends in content of science education.
8.
Discuss the trends in science curriculum projects in Nigeria 9.
Identify the various primary and secondary science curriculum projects in Nigeria.
10.Compare Nigeria secondary science curriculum project with British Science Curriculum projects 11.List and describe the current issues in science education in Nigeria 12.List and describe the contemporary issues in science education Working through this course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read set of recommended books and other materials prescribed by your tutor.
Each unit contains activities to enable you follow the trend of what you are reading and be sure you understand it.
There are tutor-marked assignments which you are expected to 4complete and submit to your tutor for assessment.
There will be a final examination at the end of the course.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First are the Tutor-Marked Assignments, second is a written Examination.
In doing the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and technique gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline agreed upon in the Assessment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 50% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for final written examination of three hours duration.
This examination will also count for 50% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA) There are twenty-one marked assignments in this course.
You are encouraged to submit all the twenty-one except any counter directive from your tutor, in which the best require number will be counted.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Tutors and Tutorials There are 12 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your TMAs to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not refuse to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail or direct discussion if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor incase: 1.
You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings 2.
You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises 53.
You have a question or problems with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You are free to raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To maximise the benefit from course tutorials, prepare question list before attending them.
You will learn and gain a lot from participating in discussions group actively.
Summary SED 724 intends to introduce you to issues in curriculum practice and issues that affect what goes on in the science classroom.
Upon completing this course you will be equipped with the knowledge of how to deal with the practical problems that confront you daily in the classroom as a science teacher as well as the constant shift in the way of looking at the science curriculum process as a whole.
You will as well be able to answer these kind of questions.
1.
What is nature of science?
2.
What is science education?
3.
When was teaching of science started in Nigeria schools?
4. Who developed the core curricula in primary integrated science and mathematics?
5.
What is a process?
6.
List and discuss the criteria for selecting content 7.
What is a content?
8.
What does CESCA stand for?
9.
When and where was CESCA founded?
10.What will you consider as the aims of primary science education in Nigeria?
11.Name the institutions saddled with the responsibility of preparing science teachers in Nigeria 12.Describe the difference between Nigeria secondary science curriculum and British science curriculum 13.What are the current issues in science education in Nigeria 14.Discuss the contemporary issues in science education.
6SED 724: CURRICULUM TRENDS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developers Professor Cathrine O. Amen – Anegbe Department of Science Education University of Jos, Jos and Dr. Femi A. Adeoye School of Education National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Unit Writers Professor Cathrine O. Amen – Anegbe Department of Science Education University of Jos, Jos and Dr. Femi A. Adeoye School of Education National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos Course Coordinator Dr. Femi A. Adeoye School of Education National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA UNIT 1 7NATURE OF SCIENCE & SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY 1.0 Introduction The nature of science and scientific inquiry has been partly dealt with in the units 3 & 4 of SED 701 (Foundations of Science Education).
The continuation in this unit will further expose you to study what makes science different from other areas of knowledge.
1.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Differentiate science from non-science on the basis of: (i) Concepts (ii) Structure by which concepts are related (iii) Ways by which statement are tested against experience  List some common misconceptions  Derive the implications for science teaching  Describe how science progresses.
1.2 Nature of Science and Scientific Inquiry (Abridge) Paul Hirst in attempting to distinguish between the various forms of knowledge postulated four distinguishing features claiming that every forms of knowledge possesses:  Characteristic basic concepts Every form of knowledge has some characteristics basic concepts, example of valency in Chemistry, flux density in Physics, revolution in history etc.
Some concepts are shared by different disciplines, example, the atom is a basic concept in physics, chemistry and biology.
 Characteristic structures by which concepts are related The periodic table is a structure and the activity series is another one.
As the knowledge of science expands its structures becomes more and more mathematically complex.
 Characteristic ways by which statements are tested against experience 8In the sciences, the test takes the form of observing, if some particular experimental results or observations at particular instances of a generalization, the results of such tests in sciences are usually very sharp.
Let us not become ignorant of the practical aspect of experimental results (experiment errors even in the equations that has been derived).
It may be wrong to claim that, only the sciences are capable of making statements which can be tested against experience.
Rather it is correct to claim, the tests to which the statements of science are put which are usually more clear-cut than those of other forms of knowledge; all forms of knowledge have characteristic tests to which ideas claiming to be new knowledge are subjected before they are accepted.
It is worth mentioning than in some areas such as art, these tests are entirely subjective, as well as depending on personal response and being difficult to rationalize, the results of such tests are not likely to be supported by the consensus of opinion usually in science.
 Characteristic techniques and skills for exploring experience In the past, much of school practical work was concerned with instructions in these techniques, in chemistry for example, volumetric analysis and the Wheatstone Bridge in Physics were the kinds of activities.
We may ask, do pupils actually use these skills in exploration?
They might have been getting excellent results during the practical lessons in the classroom.
But they were given little opportunity for exploration.
The modern practice is to allow pupils develop skills for exploration.
The Nuffield project and Science between 5 – 13 years are examples of the programmes which gives pupils the opportunities to develop skills for exploration.
These four characteristic are of great importance to science teachers.
For every topic he teaches, he should relate to at least one of the four characteristics.
The understanding of these characteristics will help the teacher.
Characteristics 2 (the structure of science) for example is abstract, should be introduced only at later years (13 above).
Our science courses should be designed in such a way that, at the end of the 6th year of secondary school our pupils should have experience of all the four characteristics of the form of knowledge which he is studying.
The most illuminating way in which we can explore the methods of science further is, through an examination of the relationship between theory and observation.
9In the introduction and guide to the Nuffield Chemistry Course, the authors stated: We want pupils to learn to distinguish between observed phenomena and explanation put forward by the creative thinking of the human mind.
Pupils must learn to see the interplay between observed fact and explanation…and to appreciate how science develops through this interplay.
Popper (1985) used what distinguishes science from other forms of knowledge to define science as the only subject which could provide statement that could be tested against observation.
This definition serves as a solution to the problem of demarcation between science and other forms of knowledge.
Activity 1.1: How will the four postulates of Paul Hirst be of useful to you as a science teacher?
1.3 Observation and Theory (Some Misconceptions) To understand more clearly the relationship between observation and theory let us consider two examples of some kinds of logic given below Logic ‘A Logic ‘B (i).
The exterior angle of triangle is All insects have six legs equal to the sum of the two interior opposite angles.
(ii).
The angle on a straight line is two right All beetles are insects angles.
(we deduce that) (iii).
The sum of the angles of a triangle is All beetles have six legs.
equal to two right angles.
Considering logic A, statement (iii) which we have proved to hold.
It is always true, it will always hold.
Suppose you tell a mathematician that you have proved by drawing different triangles statement (iii) to be wrong i.e.
the sum of the angles of a triangle is not always two right angles.
He will not agree with you but rather argue that your diagrams (triangles) are faulty somehow.
The only way you can show statement (iii) to be wrong is by disproving either of the first two statements.
10Now look at logic ‘B’ if by some observations you found out that some beetles have four legs, you will not be disproving statement (iii) but rather showing faults in the initial statement (statements (i) and (ii)).
Because of the precision in logic, it’s applications in science could be accepted and has been applied successfully in many areas, in all the sciences.
Logic is all right for relating one part of a theory to another but when logic is applied to link an observation with a theory, trouble arises in some cases (faults).
Let us turn to Logic B.
If the initial statements are true ((i) &(ii)), the conclusion (iii) is incontrovertible and any observation of a creature we should like to classify as four legged bettles would cast doubts on the initial postulates ((i) & (ii)) rather than the argument (iii).
It is fairly easy for us to see that it is impossible to deduce (in the sense in which we have been using the word) a generalization from a number of observations.
It would be an attempt to make a statement covering an infinite number of instances from a finite (few) number of instances; deduction can only apply to the relationship between generalizations and definitions (or other axioms).
Some Common Misconceptions One of the ways in which a science is different from an art or social science lies in the nature of its theories: they are much more firmly established.
The misconception here is that scientists accepts without questioning all aspects covered by a theory.
It looks delicate to them, like something that could not be tempered with.
Another misconception is held by students.
Here they are made to learn (cover) a large area of scientific concepts, principles etc there seems to be no or less time for other scientific activities such as experimentation, exploring etc; which could lead students to discovered things by themselves.
This practice makes students to think that science does not provide opportunity for the expression of differences of opinion, for imagination, and for creative work.
They feel that there is no scope for personal contribution, that knowledge is embodied in the natural world waiting to be discovered and, once discovered, must be accepted without any question.
The scientist is seen to be entirely objective: he makes his observations and deduces generalizations from them.
11Students also come to believe without thinking about experimental results, the prove that a theory is right, and they accept easily things that they cannot see such as the existence of the molecules electrons etc.
Relating the nature of science to science teaching Nature of science Science teaching  As a body of knowledge Develop learning strategies that will lead to the acquisition of cognitive skills.
 As human involving processes of Develop learning strategies that inquiry will foster the spirit of enquiry, like observation, testing etc.
 Conceiving science as a human Develop learning strategies that activity carried out by scientists will stimulate creative ability, critical thinking, curiosity and open-mindedness of the learners.
 Science as a social institution and Provide group activities for an important agent to social change children.
Draw examples from other areas to support teaching.
Encourage students to participate in science organizations.
Activity 1.2: Describe the most common misconceptions held by students about science subjects.
1.4 The implication for Science Teaching  This paper suggests the adaptation of the Nuffield projects in the teaching of science in schools.
However, it is advised that the approach should be adopted with caution.
 The misconception that science is the “truth” should be ruled out of our minds (teachers/students).
Popper expresses the failure to apply the rules of logic to science with this analogy: 12Science does not rest on solid bedrock.
The bold Structure of its theories rises as if it were above swamp.
It is like a building created on piles.
The piles are driven down from above into the swamp, but not down to any natural base and if we stop driving the piles deeper it is not because we have reached firm ground.
We simply stop when we are satisfied that they are firm enough to carry the structure at least for the time being.
The understanding of the uncertainty and of the dependence of science on human imagination and reason help to reduce the misconception that science is the fundamental truth.
Finally, science teachers should shift from the traditional way of teaching scientific facts, principles and rules to the teaching of science process skill and of encouraging students to explore things (their environment).
Activity 1.3: How will you explain science process skill to your students.
1.5 How Science Progresses Science progresses through the process of induction and also by the process of conjecture and refutation.
Kuhn puts forward that theories of science change because scientists cease to adhere to one theory and adopt another, a process he considered to be political in nature.
Kuhn argues that in much of science, in what he calls ‘normal science’, scientists are not concern with the fundamental questioning of the theory but rather in solving the problems generated by the theory, the extend (area) in which it can be applied or in refining it.
This is the ability of the scientists to use the theory (normal science).
Before a theory is put into question the following factors must be considered  The practical importance of the theory  How long it has existed  The fundamental of the theory When a theory is about to be discarded efforts are made by a large number of sciences to weaken the old theory in order for the new theory to gain acceptance (extra-ordinary science).
Kuhn sees the progress of science as succession of revolutions in which a variety of factors plays a part rather than a logical progression of conjectures and refutations.
13Lakatos combined the ideas of Kuhn and Popper and came to conclude that the process in which science progresses are logical.
However, he considered the importance played by convention as attached to scientific research.
Lakatos seems to agree more with Kuhn.
To him there is no firmly established or widely held theory of how science progresses but the process; Problem - Hypothesis - Experiment - Result needs to be applied with caution.
IMPORTANT: Scientists should agree more with Kuhn when he said, it is the experimenter who is at test and not the theory.
Scientists should concern themselves more with discussing the results of experiments (Scientific community) suggesting ways of reducing experimental error rather than discussing theories.
Activity 1.4: What is Kuhn’s view of normal science?
1.6 Conclusion Having understood all the four characteristics of knowledge, the modern science teacher is now left with the option of choosing one or combining a number of them and relate each of the topic he would teach to it, and by the time a student has completed six years of secondary education he would have experience of all the four characteristics of the subject he learnt.
I would emphasize that in science teaching, students should be given enough chance to explore, and the acquisition of the science process skills should not be left out as was the case in the olden days.
1.7 Summary So far, you have been able to learned how to distinguish between various forms of knowledge using the features postulated by Paul Hirst and some common misconceptions about science as well as its implications for science teaching.
Kuhn, Lakatos and Popper ideas about science were used in explaining how science progresses.
You will learn in the next unit: development of science education in Nigeria before and since independence.
1.8 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
List the four features postulated by Paul Hirst in distinguishing various forms of knowledge.
2.
In a tabular form, briefly discuss how you will relate the nature of science to science teaching.
14References David, A. T. (1974) The Nature of Science and Scientific Inquiry University of Keele Dept.
of Education, in Sutten C. R. and Hagson J. T. (eds).
The Art of Science Teachers Education Project London: McGraw Hill Pp.
19 – 29 Kuhn, T. S. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolution, University of Chicago, 1962.
Nuffield Physics (1967) Teacher’s Guide 1 p. 186 Longman/Penguin.
Popper, K. R. (1958) The Logic of Scientific Discovery 15UNIT 2 SCIENCE EDUCATION IN NIGERIA 1 2.0 Introduction This unit is a continuation of Units 21 and 22 in SED 701 (Foundations of Science Education).
The unit centre on the development of science education which is concerned with understanding the learning and teaching of science.
The main focus of the unit is the development of science education in Nigeria before and since independence.
2.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain development of science education in Nigeria before and since independence.
 mention the roles played by Federal Government of Nigeria in science education development since independence to date.
 List the curriculum agents involved in making teaching of science possible in our schools.
2.2 Science Education in Nigeria Before Independence The history of modern science teaching in Nigeria is very recent.
When western education was introduced to Nigeria in 1843 science was not part of the school curriculum.
Examples was on literary education.
Science education in Nigeria started from the primary school unlike what obtained in most western countries where science teaching grew from the Universities to higher schools.
The foundations for modern science education in Nigeria was laid between 1861 and 1897 when rudiments of science were developing into full science course (Aliyu 1984).
By 1926, Nature Study had become a popular subject in some Primary Schools and Teacher Training Colleges.
Elementary Science was taught at the first Government Teachers’ College in the North.
Later a Teacher Training College which specialized in teaching Rural Science was established in Minna.
The depth and coverage of the subject were shallow because of scarcity of teachers and resources.
Post Secondary institutions were opened for the study of science due to pressure by some nationalists who studied abroad.
The first of its kind was Yaba Higher College established in 1934.
It was aimed at provision of 16intermediate manpower in Medicine, Agriculture, Survey, Engineering and Teachers to teach basis science subjects in secondary schools.
Most Nigerian secondary schools started offering General Science as a single subject.
It started losing its popularity when students who successfully completed the course could not be accepted into high school to study Chemistry, Physics or Biology.
By the mid 1950s most Nigerian secondary schools were operating the two-tier approach where every student was taught General Science for two years in a five year education programme.
Students were allowed to specialize in the last three years in two or three subjects of their choice.
The West African Examination Council took over from Cambridge the School Certificate Examination in 1950.
From that period changes were introduced to reflect the need to indigenise the content and scope of education in Nigerian secondary schools.
In an effort to popularize science in the schools, science teachers all over the country met in 1957 to inaugurate the Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria.
The Federal Government later established the Federal School of Science in Lagos in 1958.
Activity 2.1: When and where was the teaching of science first started in Nigeria?
2.3 Science Education in Nigeria Since Independence With independence in 1960, foreign technical aids started coming into the country.
In 1962, Ahmadu Bello University established the Arts, Science and Technology branch.
University of Ife also established the College of Arts, Science and Technology.
Primary Science Education was unco-ordinated.
Some states operated Nature Study, Agricultural Science, Health Education etc, in their curricula while others operated the more modern and integrated curricula like those of the African Primary Science Project (APSP), the Mid- West Primary Science Project (MPSP) and the Primary Education Improvement Project (PEIP) of the Northern States.
Classroom implementation of these curricula relied on reading and memorization of textual materials.
There were no laboratories or facilities for science teaching apart from designated corners known as “Science corners” in classrooms.
There were no qualified teachers to teach science as they learned little science if any, during training.
Pupils were mainly trained to “remember” content-centred, examination oriented and not relevant to the child’s world.
These inadequacies were recognized by the provision for Primary Education with following generalizations to, • Lay a sound basis for scientific and reflective thinking; 17• Develop in the child the ability to adapt to his environment; • Give the child opportunities for developing manipulative skills thatwill enable him to function effectively in the society within the limits of his capacity… (NPE, 1998) Consequently, core curricula in Primary Integrated Science and Mathematics were developed by the Federal Ministry of Education for adoption nationwide.
The Federal Government mandated and funded the Nigerian Educational Resource Development Centre (NERDC) to implement a National Primary Science and Mathematics Project (NPSMP) based on the curricula.
With this project there was a shift from rote-learning, content- centred curriculum to the acquisition of the science process skill – an approach known as Science A Process Approach (SAPA).
The NPSMP Integrated Science is organised into columns of topics, content, performance objectives, activities, suggested equipment and assessment questions.
Activity 2.2: What is responsible for the unco-ordinated nature of primary science education a little after the independence?
Influenced by the wave of science reforms worldwide and the changing needs of the Nigerian pupils, the Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria (STAN) was invited by the West African Examination Council to spearhead the movement for change in school science.
Subject panels were set up which developed curricula in Biology, Chemistry and Physics for the senior forms and later in Integrated Science for the Junior Secondary School.
The efforts of the Association was supported by grants from the Comparative Education study and Adaptation Centre (CESAC) and the British Council/Curriculum Renewal and Educational Development Overseas (CREDO) in the United Kingdom.
These efforts led to the production by STAN in 1972 of pupils’ text and workbooks and teacher’s guide for forms 1 and 2 under the Nigerian Integrated Science Project (NISP).
The intention of NISP materials was that science should be taught as “what is science and how a scientist works” (Ajeyalemi; 1983).
The separate science curricula developed by the Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria were taken over by the CESAC from which curriculum materials were developed for the Nigerian Secondary Science Project (NSSSP).
These materials adopted for the conceptual-centre and scientific inquiry methods.
The Federal Government also created the Ministry of Science and Technology in 1985 and launched the first National Policy on Science and Technology in 1986 all in a bid to boost Science and Technology education.
In spite of these efforts many secondary schools lacked the basic facilities for science teaching.
Some had no laboratories, the 18classes were over crowded due to population explosion in schools.
Consequently, instruction was teacher-directed, textbook bound and examination oriented.
Students learned science by reading and memorization of concepts.
Practicals were delayed to the last few months before external examinations.
With the introduction of the 3 – 3 secondary education programme came a change in the broad aims of science education.
These are preparation for useful living within the society and for higher education.
The scope and content of the curriculum was upgraded; Integrated Science from two to three years and those at the Senior Secondary level beyond GCE O’ level but not up to the advanced level standard.
There is also a shift in the structuring of the science curriculum into conceptual units or themes and the content arranged in spiral sequence with each unit treated more exhaustively as the course progresses.
The guided discovery approach was recommended and it is meant to provide students with experiences in science process skill and engage them in active participation in learning.
As regards tertiary science, Colleges of Education run a sub-degree course leading to the award of the Nigeria Certificate of Education (N.C.E).
Science subject combinations offered include Mathematics/Chemistry, Physics/Chemistry, Biology/Chemistry, etc., and Integrated Science which counts as a double major.
The content of the curriculum is up to and some times above G.C.E A’ level standard.
A National Commission for College of Education (NCCE) was set up in 1988 in order to harmonize standard of courses offered in all the colleges.
All universities run basic and applied science courses and majority of them run science teacher education programmes.
The Federal Government has given each of the conventional universities a mandate to maintain the 60:40 Science/Technology to Arts admission ratio.
This is because of the need for higher level scientific and technological manpower for the country to forge ahead.
The course offered in the universities compare in terms of standard to courses in other universities worldwide in terms of objectives and content.
However, they have often been criticised for being academic, theoretical and irrelevant to the needs of the Nigerian Society.
The greatest problem faced by science student is that of lack of suitable textbooks, up-to-date journals and inadequate supply of modern equipment.
Activity 2.3: What are the names of the national bodies in charge of universities and polytechnics?
192.4Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt that the foundations of modern science education in Nigeria was laid between 1861 and 1897.
Science education started as Nature study at Primary Schools and Teacher Training Colleges.
You also learnt about the inauguration of the Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria in 1957 by Science teachers all over the country.
The unit also exposed you to development of science education in Nigeria since independence when government and different curriculum agents were involved in shaping the teaching of science in Nigeria.
2.5 Summary Among the things you have learnt in this unit are: science education in Nigeria before the country gain independence from British Government in 1960 as well as state of science education in Nigeria from 1960 to date.
2.6Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
What will you consider as impediment to the successful implementation of science education programmes in Nigeria since independence?
2.
Discuss the contributions of some curriculum agents to the success of science education in Nigeria.
2.7References Ajeyalemi, D. (1987) Science Education in the Last Two Decades: Are we really serious?
In Ejiogu, A. M. and Ajeyalemi, D. (eds).
Pg.
147 – 159.
Aliyu, A.
(1982).
Science Teaching in Nigeria.
Ilorin: Atoto Press Ltd. 20UNIT 3 SCIENCE EDUCATION IN NIGERIA II 3.0 Introduction In the last unit, you learnt about science education in Nigeria before and since independence.
This unit also continues with the discussion on the same issues but from another perspectives.
Here the discussion will be centred on the new direction for science education development and the changing nature of things in the world as it affect science education in Nigeria.
3.1Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to:  List the issues that can be regarded as the new direction for science education development in Nigeria  Discuss some of the issues listed above as it affect development of science education  Describe some of the occurrences in the world that is challenging science education in Nigeria.
3.2New Direction/New Dimension for Science Education Educational systems all over the world place serious emphasis on Science and Technology because of their implications on technological advancement which is tied to national development.
This desire is the case with all developing nations including Nigeria.
This being the case, the curriculum content of science education stands as a life wire through which learners in schools are trained to attain goals in technological advancement.
The content of science education curriculum therefore should be reviewed in line with the trends of events in our changing world and the need of the learners.
There is need to adjust to and develop the fast moving world of Science and Technology.
Computer Literacy, Information Technology, Population and Family Life Education, Environmental Studies on Environmental Population Degradation, Protection, Global Warming, Science Technology and Society Education, Scientific and Technological Literacy for all, empowering women in Science Technology and Mathematics Education, Bioethics, Genetic Engineering, Inhibiting factors within the school system are new directions/dimensions for science education.
There is urgent need to inject meaningful innovations in the curriculum content of science education, innovations in terms of methodology (hands-on, minds-on, mapping, etc) research reports, manpower needs, curriculum development, etc.
21There should be a re-think as far as instructional strategies in science education are concerned for meaningful learning to take place.
Science teachers should devise ways of motivating students.
The decline in the trend of students’ choice of science subjects at the secondary school level is trend that must be nipped if Nigeria will attain its full technological potential in a changing world.
Science Education requires more massive funding.
This is another direction the Federal and State Governments should have a re-think.
There should be continuous government commitment to funding in the areas of science education and research in science education in line with the provision in the National Policy on Education that “a greater portion of University Education funding shall be devoted to Science and Technology.
In re-thinking science education in Nigeria, There should be determined efforts to re-shape the science teacher.
He should be encouraged, exposed to trends, research findings and innovations in the area of science education through seminars, workshops, conferences, long and short-term courses.
This will help to keep him abreast of current developments in the field as well as improve his efficiency in the field.
There should also be a motivation and reward structure to attract and retain a substantial percentage of the society in the mainstream of science education.
The current situation in university education and science based courses where many graduates roam the streets unemployed or under employed is another dimension that needs a re-think.
Universities should seek ways of linking science educations with productive work Science education should be aimed at solving societal problems not compounding them.
If the reports on rationalization of courses in universities are faithfully implemented, if universities improve their funding through endowments and consultancies and if the government gives adequate funding for science education there may be still hope for reactivating and redirecting science education to meet the challenges/demands for a future generation in a changing world.
The formation of Junior Engineers Technicians and Scientists (JETS) club and organization of science fairs by the Ministry are steps in the right direction in the promotion of science and technology education.
More importantly, the Ministry should promote the improvement of science learning through funding and research as does the National Science Foundation (NSF) in the United States of America.
Again, monitoring of quality and standards in classroom instruction should be taken seriously by the Inspectorate Division of the Ministry of Education because presently, not much is done in this regard.
22Activity 3.1: How can government re-shape the science teachers for better performance in our schools?
3.3Changing World and Science Education The world is changing every day.
Science and Technology Education which are vehicles for technological advancement and national development have to change too.
There are changes in the area of information technology.
Computers are used in virtually every facet of life.
They are used in surgery, in business and airports to display information.
Engineers use computers to design air crafts.
Immigration Departments use computers to process applications.
Traffic lights are controlled by computers.
At home, computers are used as washing machines and for playing games.
They are used in school for recording scores, marking examination papers, time tabling and other schedules.
The internet has brought the world into a closed unit that one can obtain information from any part of the world.
Computers have as a matter of fact brought revolutionary changes in the state of the world giving us a new form of civilization in all aspect of life.
In view of all these changes there is an urgent need for our science educators and curriculum planners to make Science Education functional to meet the needs of the hour.
This is in line with the observation of Nedosa and Esseyin (2001) that “computers have now invaded Nigeria and almost all activities are now being computerized.
To cope with these changes, our students need to be computer literate.
Medical scientists have not been able to find out the causes of cancer or how to cure the various viral diseases including HIV, which have infected a lot of our people.
Man is faced with multiferous environmental problems and challenges that man himself or science has introduced into the environment.
Atmospheric pollution brought about by burning fuels has changed the face of world.
There is an increase in the level of carbon oxide gas in the atmosphere which in turn has led to global warming.
Global warming refers to the constantly increasing mean temperature of the earth manifested in the high rate of degradation of the Arctic and Antarctic regions of the world.
Our water bodies are polluted by heavy metal from mining activities of our people.
Sewage and industrial wastes emptied into waterways have done damaged to water.
The use of chemicals like Gamalin 20 has done a lot of damage to aquatic life in these water bodies.
Incessant felling of trees for firewood and timber destroyed our mature forests making them prone to desertification and erosion which are now serious threats to many parts of Nigeria.
For instance, in the southern part of 23Nigeria, erosion has destroyed a lot of farmland, access roads, houses and even lives.
In the field of education in spite of the effort of the Government to improve science education, students still perform poorly in science teaching and learning.
The Federal Government admission policy of 60:40 in favour of sciences for University Education has not been met.
The problem of population explosion in our schools have not been solved.
Many more changes and challenges are still on the way because the world is not static.
It is only through well-planned science education programmes drawn in line with these challenges and changes that we may hope to make the world a better place to live in.
Activity 3.2: What are the merits and demerits of science and technology to human race?
3.4Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt that the new direction to proper development of science education in Nigeria are: to have re-think in instructional strategies, re-shape science teachers, re-think on unemployment of the young science graduates, formation of science clubs etc.
You also learnt about the changing world and science education with reference to the benefits and hazards of science and technology.
3.5 Summary This unit explains the need for our science curriculum to reflect the new dimensions for science education such as Information Technology, Computer Literacy, Population and Family Life Education, Global Warming etc.
It also emphasizes on how to re-shape our science education to achieve the national goals.
The units also discuss some merits and demerits of science education at global level.
3.6Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Discuss the better way by which government and private sectors can re-shape science education in Nigeria 2.
What challenges does HIV, Global Warming, Pollution, Computers etc pose to development of science education in Nigeria?
243.7 References Ajeyalemi, D. (1987).
Science Education in the Last Two decades: Are we really serious?
In Ejiogu, A. M. and Ajeyalemi, D. (eds) .Pg.
147 – 158 Nedosa, P. S. & Esseyin, E. G. (2001).
Introduction to Library and Information Communication Technology.
Jos: Deka Publications.
Yoloye, E. A.
(1983).
Science and Education in Nigeria Primary Schools: A Need for Radical Approach.
A key into address, proceedings of Annual Conference of Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria Pg.
11 – 17 25UNIT 4 TRENDS IN THE GOALS OF SCIENCE EDUCATION 4.0 Introduction This unit traces the past goals of science education which appeared to be mainly for acquisition of science knowledge.
The current goals of science education which include acquisition of science literacy, the development of independent learning skills and application of science to solving societal problems.
4.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss the goals of science education  List the attributes of scientific attitudes  Describe the qualities of scientific literacy person  Describe how to achieve the goals of science education.
4.2 Goals of Science Education The goals of science education at school level is that of making students acquire the knowledge of science and understanding of nature as well as appreciating science as a field of disciplined inquiry.
There were several problems associated with the teaching of science purely for acquisition of knowledge because it led to a mis-representation of science.
Teachers taught the knowledge (facts, concepts and principles) of science in a dogmatic fashion.
Schwab (1962) reported that to teach science as a ‘dogma’ would mis-represent the facts about the nature of scientific enquiry.
This approach also create an undesirable tension between science as it is practised, and science as it is presented in science textbooks (Siegel, 1978).
The teaching of science mainly for the acquisition of knowledge has also led to the development of passivity, docile learning and dependence on teachers and textbooks instead of an active learning in which lecturers and textbooks are challenged.
Activity 4.1: Mention the problems which the teaching of science in a dogmatic fashion will create.
At the rate science is developing, it seems impossible to teach students all the science information they will need.
Instead, Booth (1978) suggests that 26children should be given opportunities to discover, invent and get caught up in the rapid expansion of scientific and technological information.
It is more appropriate to teach students how to learn; to have them acquire the skills that will enable them learn on their own; and to provide them with a foundation of skills and attitudes for acquiring and processing knowledge so that they will be adequately prepared to deal with changes in the future.
It is not that scientific knowledge is not important, but it is certainly not sufficient to teach science only for the sake of knowledge.
It appears as it will be more beneficial to identify the fundamental aspects of science (basic conceptual models) and represent them with a general education emphasis involving topics presented in a personal and social context and to carry this out in such a way that the full range of cognitive levels is emphasised.
Especially when it is known that majority of the secondary school students will not do much science after this level.
Activity 4.2: Describe how you will encourage students to develop proper scientific knowledge.
Another goal of science education added in the recent past was the development of scientific attitude.
The concept “scientific attitude” implies behaviours that demonstrate accuracy, honestly, open-mindedness, objectivity, non-bias, scepticism and possession of a critical questioning and rational mind (Gauld, 1973, 1982).
According to the Education Policies Commission of United States, possession of a scientific attitude, aside from being the mark of a scientifically-minded person, is also the mark of rational one and would naturally seem to represent predispositions appropriate for solving problems in everyday life.
This is perceived as beneficial for the individual and society alike.
The current goals of science education include developing scientific literacy which requires making learners to understand the impact of science on them as individuals and society.
Activity 4.3: List some other scientific attitude apart from the one mention in this unit.
4.3 Qualities Expected of a scientific literate person  Recognise that scientific concepts (e.g.
velocity, force, energy and photosynthesis) are invented or created by acts of human intelligence and imagination and are not tangible objects accidentally discovered.
27 Comprehend the distinction between observation and inference and to discriminate between the two processes in the scientific context under consideration.
 Distinguish between the occasional role of accidental discovery in scientific investigation and the deliberate strategy of forming and testing hypothesis.
 Comprehend the limitations inherent in scientific inquiry and be aware of the kinds of questions that are neither asked nor answered.
4.4 How to achieve other goals of Science Education  Organise activities around or orient activities towards real world of problems, including value-laden issues.
 Organise activities around or orient activities towards issues related to student needs recognizing the use of the natural environment and community resources can be very hopeful.
When using informal learning settings, be familiar with the setting so that before the activity, you can help student acquire sufficient knowledge about what to look for and what to expect so that they will be comfortable in the informal, free- choice setting and will get as much out of it as they can.
 Consider career education and subsequent learning about the science involved in certain careers, have the students actively involved in doing and observing what people in specific occupations actually do, and  Deal with students misconceptions, make students aware of them and help them identify their misconceptions.
Also, help them ‘learn how to learn’ and “learn how knowledge is constructed” as this can be useful in dealing with this problem.
Activity 4.4: Mention the qualities you as a science teacher will expect the students in your class to possess.
4.5 Implications of the Goals of Science Education for Teaching The goals of science education aimed at all ages of learners of all abilities and interests, it appears many changes need to be made in classroom teaching.
Many reviews of studies on science teaching in Nigeria indicate that the focus is the learning of content.
Although, that is a part of some perceived goals, the process being used towards that end is in conflict with other goals.
Course to be thought need to include content and process towards problems resolution using appropriate value sensitivity.
Science teachers need to apply multiple teaching strategies, focusing on learners needs towards making what is learned relevant to all learners.
28Humphreys et al.
(1982) in analysing several studies found co-operative learning to be more beneficial towards increasing students achievement than either competitive or individualistic learning settings although they recommend occasional use of competitive or individualistic learning settings when appropriate.
Wise and Okey (1983) in a meta-analysis, and Okey and Butts (1982) in an analysis of several studies found focusing discussions, making students aware of and careful planning towards objectives, frequent feedback on progress but not indicating an evaluative nature from the teacher, student’s physical interaction with materials and a wide range of activities for students and longer wait-time all enhanced achievement of instructional objectives.
Anderson (1983) in a consolidation of meta-analysis concluded that there is evidence supporting the use of inquiry teaching towards greater student achievement .
However, the use of multiple teaching strategies including inquiry teaching should be adopted by all teachers in order to meet different learning styles in the classroom.
4.6 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt the goals of science education which include the development of scientific literacy, career awareness, teaching students to learn, how to learn and the application of scientific knowledge to solving societal issues, qualities expected of a scientific literate person, how to achieve other goals of science education as well as its implications for teaching 4.7 Summary This unit discussed the following  The goals of science education at school level is to make students acquire the knowledge of science and understanding of nature of science.
 The need for development of scientific attitudes  The need for development of scientific literacy  Qualities of scientific literacy person  Implications of goals of science education for classroom teaching.
4.8 Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss how the goals of science education can be successfully achieved in secondary school level in Nigeria.
294.9 References Anderson, R. B.
(1983).
A consolidation and appraisal of science meta- analysis JRST, 20 (5), 495 – 509 Booth, N. (1978).
Science in the middle years.
Education 3 – 12 Gauld, C. F. (1982).
The scientific attitudes and science education: A critical Reappraisal Science Education, 66(1), 109 – 121.
Okey, J. R. & Butts, D. P. (1982).
Linking teaching behaviours and student behaviours in science.
In M. B. Rowe (Ed).
Education in the 80s.
Science Washington DC.
NEA.
30UNIT 5 CONTENTS OF SCIENCE EDUCATION 5.0 Introduction In the last unit, we looked at content in a broad sense.
Now, we will do a little recap and bring in new perspectives to the subject.
Content peculiar to Nigerian context is discussed as revealed in the trends and why content has changed over the years.
5.1Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain the term content as used in science curriculum;  Describe briefly the trends in the content of science output Technology,  Discuss some criteria used in identifying and selecting content,  Explain why the content of science has changed over the years.
5.2 Meaning of Content The term content is used to refer to the materials selected to be taught or learned.
It constitutes the subject matter the teacher is expected to assist learners to learn in a discipline.
This will include the knowledge, skills, attitude, values and ethics deemed necessary for the learner to acquire.
Onyike (1996) describes content as the knowledge, skills, concepts, principles, attitudes and values to be learned.
To Ehindero (1986) curriculum content involves “providing opportunities for students to learn and utilize skills, processes, attitudes and values”.
Content may be viewed as selected relevant knowledge, skills, attitudes and values considered appropriate for the functional development of the learner.
It is necessary that what would be considered as good content must be relevant to the learner and help him to be useful to himself and the society.
Activity 5.1: What is content?
5.3 Trends in Contents in Science Education The society we live is dynamic.
The changes in the society coupled with the changes in the needs of man has greatly influenced and is still influencing the science education curriculum, bringing about a shift in the content of what is learned to accommodate such changes.
The trends in the contents of science education therefore reflects where we are coming from, where we are going.
31It is important to note that content is not selected in isolation of the goals and objectives earliest.
Whatever is selected must be such that will bring about the accomplishment of attainment of the goals and objectives of science education for which they are selected for.
Based on this premises, the trends in the content of science education is determine mostly by the objectives science education sought to achieve at any particular time.
The introduction of science education in the Nigerian educational system can be traced to 1895 when the church missionary schools were established in Lagos (Omolewa, 1977).
Science then, according to the author was taught as Nature study.
The content was predominantly on agriculture and some few environmental issues.
Learners were expected to observe plants, animals and non-living things.
By 1920, it was observed that the nature study was inconsistent with the psychology, philosophy and general objectives of education of the time (Bajah 1982).
This lead to the introduction of General or Basic Science.
Subject matter that were selected as content during this era were those that can invoke and foster scientific thought and method.
Science then was mostly for knowledge acquisition and so the content was a collection of short topics drawn from several aspects of sciences.
Although, science hadn’t strong bearing in Nigerian education history until the 1969 curriculum conference, the launching of the first satellite (Sputnik) into space by the Soviet Union in 1957 had a dramatic influence in the growth and development of science globally especially in U.S.A.
It triggered off a world-wide movement for a broad based and more functional science.
During this era Nigeria has shifted from basic science to compartmentalized (separate) science subjects namely – Physics, Chemistry and Biology.
Content was selected and organized in these individual subjects.
Although this approach to the organization of science content is still in vogue, much criticism has been levelled against the system.
Such include among others, its lack of coherency among subjects, its relevance to solving everyday society’s problems.
Some of the above limitations gave room for the introduction of the integrated science (courtesy of STAN), an approach that brings this subjects into one umbrella subject.
Under the integrated science, content of the subjects are organized to show relationship among students and how they could be used to solve real life problem.
This makes science more meaningful.
However, integrated science is still limited to the junior secondary school.
32It is important to state here that at the primary school level, science is taught as primary science, general science or elementary science.
The content reflects the current science objectives.
The trends in science content is far more elaborate and is a continuous one so as to meet the ever changing societal needs and aspirations which are reflected in the objectives of science education at various stages of its development.
Activity 5.2: Why was nature study regarded as being inconsistent with Nigeria philosophy of education?
5.4Criteria for Identify and Selecting Contents It is crucial to remark that the development in science and technology has brought about knowledge explosion.
Equally important is the fact that not everything can be learned at the same time.
Similarly, societal needs of any nation are reflected in its educational policy and the curriculum becomes the mirror of these needs, and setting stage to meet these needs.
To this end, it becomes imperative that only those content that are needed at a time will be selected.
Thus, criteria must be set so that only those things that will bring about the actualization of the objectives of the educational policies are identified and selected as content.
The following criteria may be used in identifying and selecting content:  Validity: The validity of a content can be explained in two ways.
First, validity of content refers to the ability of such content to bring about the attainment of set goals and objectives.
So, for anything to be included as content, it must be related to the objectives they are selected for.
One other aspect of validity is how true the subject matter is.
Taking into consideration the rapid accumulation and changes in knowledge, what is considered as breakthrough in the past are today obsolete.
This calls for continuous strutting of knowledge before they are selected as content.
• Learnability: This is concerned with the ability of the learner to grasp what is selected for learning.
Learners learn at different levels.
The implication is that the ability of the learners for which any content is selected must be taken into account.
Contents that are beyond or below the ability level of the learners will make mastery difficult or impossible.
• Utility: Utility implies the usefulness of the content.
A content is said to be useful when it is meaningful to the learner – meaningful in term of application to real life situation.
For any subject matter to be considered for selection, it should be that which enables the learner apply whatever is learn to his daily life and find solutions to his problems.
This criterion 33emphasizes the relevance of content to real life situation.
It implies finding meaning in what is learned as it related to the learner and the society.
• Interest: This is another important criterion that must be given attention in selecting content.
The interest of the learner is a fundamental factor in inculcating the right knowledge, skills, values and attitude that the curriculum sought to attain.
Interest helps in sustaining concentration, purpose and commitment and co-operation with the teacher in the teaching – learning process.
It is however, worthy to be cautions in applying this criterion as not all that interest the learner may be worthwhile and not all that are worthwhile interest the learner.
Here, the teacher plays an essential role in shaping the interest of learner.
While these criteria may not be conclusive, it should guide any science curriculum planner in selecting what should be included as content.
For effective selection of content, it should not be done in isolation of other processes such as objectives learning experience etc.
The criteria discussed are also interrelated and so should not be considered as independent in the selection process.
Activity 5.3: List the criteria you will use in identifying and selecting content.
5.5 How and Why Content has changed over the years As it is always said, the only thing that has remain constant is change.
All other things have always changed including science content.
Many reasons have been advanced as responsible for this.
Okeke (1996) identified the following:  change in the objectives of education emanating from change in the social values beliefs, traditions, etc;  change in the nature of knowledge or content of education;  change in what is known about learning process;  change in the system of education; and  change necessitated by feedback from curriculum evaluation.
The reasons for change in science content will be discussed under the following: • Change in national aspiration • Knowledge explosion • Development of now theory and curriculum design 34• Global revolution Change in National Aspirations Every society has what it wants to transmit to it members in form of education.
A change in these societal ideals will result in the change of the content.
Since independence Nigeria has witness series of shift in the content of its science curriculum to meet its aspirations in bids to provide its citizens with basic science education and to catch up with global advancement in science and technology.
The country’s national policies on education reveal these aspirations at various times.
Knowledge explosion One of the field of study that has witness exponential growth in knowledge over the years is science.
With this knowledge expansion many issues beg for attention while some become obsolete.
There is need to sieve through for the relevant.
This may account for change in the content of science education so as to accommodate the need, idea and to exclude invalid ones.
This must be considered in line with what was obtainable as the content of science education at such time.
Development of Theory and Curriculum Design Theory is a product of science.
Science education like any other field of learning and particularly educational activities are heavily guided by theories.
Theories serve as guide to the curriculum planners in selection of objectives, contents, methods etc.
Many great theories such as Bloom, Dewey, Piaget, Brunner have in various forms influenced the curriculum process in many fields of study including science education.
Disciples of these theorists have at one time or the other change science content to reflect such theories.
Similarly, the choice of curriculum design has also influence the change in the content of science education.
There are many types of curriculum designs such as the teaching-centred, the child-centred, the integrated or interdisciplinary, the compartmentalized etc.
Whichever is adopted at any time will influence the content.
For instance, what is included as individual science subjects-chemistry, physics and biology under the compartmentalized design differs from the interdisciplinary design that reflect integrated science.
Global revolution 35No nation is an Island.
The growth and development of science in one nation pose a challenge to the others.
A case in point is the launching of the sputnik by the Soviet Union in 1957.
This advancement saw a great revolution in the field of science especially in U.S.A.
It so challenged the United States that there was total transformation in US science education in all ramifications.
Nigeria too is not left out in such struggle to meet up with the challenges of the other world science and technology.
This is marked by a drastic change from the liberal arts to much concentration in science and technology.
This was influenced by the content of science education.
Activity 7.4: What are the reasons for change in science content?
5.6 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt the meaning of content, the trends in contents of science education as well as criteria for identifying and selecting contents.
Changes that has occurred in the educational setting and the reasons for these changes.
5.7Summary All that you have learnt so far are to help you as a science teacher to understand that contents of science education are dynamic.
That is the materials selected to be taught or learned in science should be prone to change.
5.8Tutor-Marked Assignments (1) Explain with reference to science curriculum the term content (2) List and discuss the criteria for selecting contents in any science subject taught at secondary school level.
5.9References Bajah, S. (1977).
The Place of formal education in special reference to popularising science in the teacher’s education.
Journal of STAN 16(1) 1.
Ehindero, S. (1986).
Curriculum foundations and development for Nigerian Students.
Lagos: Concept Publication.
Okeke, E. A.
(1996).
The dynamics of curriculum revision In Ugo Onwuka.
Curriculum Development for Africa (Ed) Onitsha: Africana – FEP Publishers.
36Omolewa, M. (1977).
Some earliest problems of science education in Nigeria.
1859 – 1982.
In Journal of STAN.
15 (3).
Onyike, I. O.
(1996).
Steps in Curriculum development.
In Ugo Onwuka, Curriculum development for Africa (Ed).
Onitsha: Africana FEP.
Publishers.
37UNIT 6 SCIENCE EDUCATION CURRICULUM REFORMS IN NIGERIA 1 6.0 Introduction This unit shall examine the roles played by Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria (STAN), Comparative Education Study and Adaptation Centre (CESAC) and Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC) at reforming science curriculum in Nigeria.
6.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  State the aims of STAN  Mention the functions of CESAC  Describe the roles played by the three bodies in reforming science education curriculum in Nigeria.
6.2 The Role of STAN in Science Education Curriculum Reformation The STAN is a professional body inaugurated in October, 1957 in the lecture theatre of Kings College, Lagos through the efforts of Late Chief F. I. Ajumogobia and other founding father of STAN namely; Professor Chimere Ikoku, Tunde Yoloye and Messrs. Dotun Oyewole, Femi Oyewole and J.
A. Bamijoko.
The aims of the Association at its inception according to STAN (1973) were:  To promote cooperation among science teachers in Nigeria with a view to raising the standard of science education in the country.
 To provide a forum for discussion by science teachers on matters of common interest.
 To help science teachers keep in touch with development in science and its application to industry and commerce  To popularize science  To cooperate with and affiliate to other societies and bodies with related interest.
Since inauguration, the Association had over the years devoted its effort to science education curriculum innovation and renewal by translating national and educational objectives into curricula and teaching objectives through the development of curricula designed to help individuals attain cognition, 38acquire process skills and develop positive attitudes to science.
All these would afford the students the opportunity to think critically, manage and use available resources within their environment effectively.
Activity 6.1: How would you describe the efforts of STAN so far in reformation of science education curriculum?
Sequel to the request from West African Examinations Council (WAEC) to critically examine and revise the existing syllabus in the various science subjects and with financial assistance from USAID.
The national executive of STAN constituted three Curriculum Development Committees (CDC) to work on Integrated Science, Chemistry, Biology and Physics Curriculum.
The terms of reference of the CDC as cited by Bajah (1985) were:  To review and revise the existing science curriculum.
 To produce teachers and pupils materials relevant to the revised syllabus.
 To perform such other functions connected with science curriculum development as the STAN executive may from time to time direct  To cooperate with any other science curriculum development groups to achieve these ends.
Activity 6.2: Name the bodies that provide the financial supports for revision of existing science subjects syllabi in 1968 by STAN.
The report of CDC gave birth to the Nigerian Integrated Science Project (NISP) with the set of materials comprising pupils text-book, pupils work- book and teachers guide all published in 1971 and introduced into secondary schools in 1972.
The NISP basic philosophy according to STAN (1970) was to teach students what science is and how scientists work.
It should be noted that this was the first time Integrated Science was introduced into secondary schools, it was formerly called General Science.
To further promote NISP, between 1978 and 1980, STAN carried out an extensive revision of the project in line with the new National Policy on Education.
The result of this revision was the production of three books (with work-books and teachers guide) for the first three years of the 3-3 secondary education system.
The Book 1 was published in 1982, Book 2 in 1983 and Book 3 in 1984.
In view of the general public quest for locally produced textbooks that would cater for individual differences, conceptual difficulties, reading difficulties, local examples and cultural heritage.
STAN commissioned some of her members to write textbooks on the new School Certificate Syllabus in Physics, Chemistry and Biology.
The Biology textbook was published in 391983 while Chemistry and Physics textbooks were later to be published.
Since then, STAN has progressively been producing other textbooks not only for secondary school science but also for primary school science.
To properly address the issue of quality control only the experienced members of STAN were selected from all parts of the Federation for the writing workshops.
These workshops are usually organized by STAN in the various subjects panels.
There are twelve of such subject panels.
These are Agricultural Science, Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics, Technology, Teacher Education, Integrated Science, Primary Science, Environmental Education, Science Technology Society (STS), Physical and Health Education.
The subject panels were also mandated to organize a week annual workshops on various strategies for teaching and learning science in other to make science more enjoyable and less difficult for both science students and teachers.
Activity 6.3: What is the basic philosophy of NISP?
How far have we achieve this philosophy in the secondary school level?
6.2.1 List of Text books produced for Primary, Secondary and Teacher Education by STAN S/N NAME CATEGORY CLASS PUBLISHER - IFICA TION 1.
STAN Primary Science Pupils’ Book 1 – 6 University Press, Plc 2.
STAN Primary Science Teachers’ 1 and 2 “ Guide 3.
STAN Primary Science Workbooks 1 – 6 “ 4.
Nigerian Integrated Science Project Pupils’ 1 – 3 Heinemann (New Edition) Textbook 5.
Nigerian Integrated Science Project Pupils’ 1 – 3 “ (New Edition) Workbook 6.
Nigerian Integrated Science Project Teachers’ 1 – 3 “ (New Edition) Guide 7.
STAN Chemistry for Science Students’ SSS “ Secondary Schools Book 8.
STAN Biology for Senior Students’ SSS Heinemann Secondary Schools Book 9.
STAN Physics for Senior Secondary “ “ “ Schools 4010.
STAN Mathematics for Junior “ 1 – 3 University Press, Secondary Schools Plc 11.
STAN Mathematics for Senior “ “ “ Secondary Schools 12.
STAN Agricultural Science for “ “ Longman Junior Secondary Schools 13.
STAN Agricultural Science for “ “ “ Senior Secondary Schools 14.
STAN Further Mathematics for “ “ University Press, Senior Secondary Schools Plc 15.
STAN Science Teachers’ Hand book - Longman Other ways by which STAN contributes to knowledge is the publication of Journal of Science Teachers Association of Nigeria (JSTAN) twice a year.
JSTAN deals with topical issues and research in science education.
The journal had 40 volumes from 1961 – 2005.
STAN also publishes the proceedings of its annual conference every year, STAN bulletin, History of STAN and also position papers.
Activity 6.4: Take your time to go through all the STAN publications for secondary school level and write out the names of the members of the team that wrote the texts.
STAN has also over the years being organizing annual conferences for its members thereby enriching their professional growth.
The annual conferences serve as a forum for exchange of ideas and for reporting research findings during paper presentations by scholars from universities, polytechnics, colleges of education and schools.
6.3 The Role of CESAC in Science Education Curriculum Reformation The CESAC was established in 1968, as a support to national effort to evolve a more suitable system of education that is continually adapted and responsive to the nation’s economic and social aspirations.
Part of the Center’s functions at inception include the following (CESAC, 1983)  To promote the modernization of curricula in Nigeria at all levels and to introduce change and innovation into our educational system through curriculum development and renewal.
 To engage in original research in the field of comparative education and curriculum development.
41 To arrange from time to time well prepared reconnaissance survey of general and technical education in foreign countries with a view to investigating recent developments in approaches and techniques as would be adaptable to the Nigerian situation.
 To organize teacher education programmes for the introduction of new approaches and for professional growth of teachers.
 To assist in the preparation and publication of curriculum materials and textbooks developed by the centre.
The educational activities of CESAC on curriculum development was centred on the secondary level with special attention directed at six school subjects namely: sciences, mathematics, technical and vocational studies, social studies, english language and moral education.
Other science related subject areas covered include the following: woodwork, metal work, technical drawing, auto-mechanics, building construction, basic electronics and applied electricity.
Activity 6.5: What are the CESAC contributions to science teaching in our secondary schools in Nigeria?
All these subjects are science related subjects which are examined annually by WAEC at the senior secondary school level.
Other non-science subjects developed by CESAC included business studies, typewriting, shorthand, book-keeping, accounts, home economics, home management, food & nutrition, clothing and textiles and moral education.
CESAC efforts at reforming the science education curriculum of secondary schools was strictly guided by its philosophy of active learner participation.
This process is achieved when students are encouraged to learn by inquiry and self discovery, guided by the teacher.
Under this approach, students were encouraged to learn by inquiry and discover concepts and generalizations based on their experiences.
Manipulative skills that are necessary for designing and conducting experiments relevant to laboratory work were also emphasized.
With financial assistance from the Ford Foundation in America and in cooperation with STAN, CESAC set up various curriculum development committees.
The reports of these committees led to the new syllabi in biology, chemistry, physics which in WAEC regulations and syllabus is referred to as alternative syllabi.
CESAC also set WASC examination questions on these syllabi.
Activity 6.6: Mention the approaches suggested by CESAC for students to learn science.
42These syllabi were later used as basis for developing the National Senior Secondary School Syllabi in the science subjects between 1984 and 1985.
CESAC developed and subsequently published instructional materials in form of student’s text and teacher’s guide in 1970, known as the Nigerian Secondary School Science Project (NSSP) in biology, chemistry and physics for forms 3 – 5 of secondary schools.
CESAC also operated regular long vacation training course for science teachers throughout the country.
These training courses were designed to familiarize science teachers with the use of the many project materials developed by the centre.
Prior to 1988 when CESAC was finally merged with other bodies, the centre was able to publish about 50 instructional materials consisting of pupils and teachers textbooks.
It also published out 23 volumes of its occasional publications and in addition 12 volumes and 2 special editions of its maiden Curriculum Journal called The Journal of Research in Curriculum (JORIC).
Activity 6.7: List some of the text materials published by CESAC and their years of publication.
6.4 The Role of N.E.R.C in Science Education Curriculum Reformation The N.E.R.C efforts in revolutionalizing the science education curriculum at the primary school level begins with the publication of the report of the 1969 Curriculum Conference.
Based on the report of this conference and the subsequent publication of the Federal Ministry of Education document titled “Core Curriculum for Primary Science”, the NERC commissioned in 1971 the National Primary School Science Project (NPSSP) with the production of primary science materials (text and equipment).
This project revised and later in 1982 became known as the National Primary Science and Mathematics Project (NPSMP).
Activity 6.8: What will you consider as the NERC efforts towards revolutionalizing science education curriculum at primary school level?
The NERC together with other science curriculum reform bodies like STAN, CESAC, etc involved in the development of the Federal Ministry of Education “Core Curriculum for Integrated Science” for Junior Secondary Schools.
The NERC between 1977 and 1985 also distributed the new syllabus (based on the proposed 6 – 3 – 3 – 4 system of education) on Integrated Science (JSS 1 – 3); Biology, Chemistry and Physics (SSS 1 – 3).
43The NERC also launched a programme on the development and production of Teachers Manuals in Science for pre-service and in-service Universal Primary Education (UPE) Scheme Teachers (Bajah 1985).
It also on a regular basis, organized a number of science education workshops for teacher trainers.
The NERC was later merged with some other curriculum agents in 1988 to form a new body known as NERDC.
Activity 6.9: Look for any two of the NERC and STAN publications on any science subjects at secondary school level.
Write out the authors and the pattern of organization of the topics 6.5 Conclusion This unit identified the roles played by STAN, CESAC and NERC in Nigeria as well as examined the details of the science education curriculum innovative projects undertaken at the primary and secondary school levels in the country.
6.6 Summary This unit has mentioned the founding fathers of STAN, the aims, efforts made in promoting science teaching and lists of textbooks published by STAN.
It also mentioned the functions as well as the contributions of CESAC and NERC to the improvement of science education in Nigeria.
6.7 Tutor - Marked Assignments  Which of the three bodies STAN, CESAC & NERC contributed most to the development of science teaching in Nigeria?
Support your choice with facts.
 There is the need for frequent reformation of science curriculum in Nigeria.
Justify this statement.
6.8 References Bajah, S. T. (1985) New dimensions in science curriculum development strategy in Nigeria.
A Tripatite Approach.
JORIC Special No.
1 CESAC (1983) CESAC: Annual Report 1982/83.
De-Sunshine International Publishing Co., Mushin – Lagos.
STAN (1973).
Constitution of the science teachers’ association of nigeria.
UNIT 7 44SCIENCE EDUCATION CURRICULUM REFORMS IN NIGERIA II 7.0 Introduction This is a contribution of Unit 6.
In this unit the roles of West African Examinations Council (WAEC) and Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) in science education curriculum reformation in Nigeria are examined.
7.1Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to:  Discuss the roles played by WAEC in reforming science education curriculum in Nigeria.
 List the curriculum development bodies that merged together to for NERDC  Mention the functions which NERDC is expected to perform  Discuss the roles played so far by NERDC in reformation of science education curriculum in Nigeria.
7.2The Role of WAEC in Science Education Curriculum Reformation The establishment of WAEC as a separate council to cater for and conduct examinations in West Africa can be traced back to 1948 when the Local Examinations syndicate of the University of Cambridge and the Schools Examinations and Matriculations Committee of the University of London opened discussions on it.
The report submitted by Dr. G. B. Jeffery, the then Director of the Institute of Education, University of London after his tour of the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Ghana (formerly Gold Coast) and Nigeria strongly recommended the proposal for the setting up of a West African Examinations Council, with details of its composition and duties.
Jeffrey Report published in March, 1950 was accepted by the governments of the four British Colonies and the ordinance establishing it was drafted in 1951.
The ordinance empowered the council to conduct examination and award certificates equivalent to these obtainable in the United Kingdom.
Activity 7.1: What is the name of the report that proposed the establishment of an examination body for the four British Colonies in West African?
45The legislative Assembly of Gold Coast in December, 1951 was the first of the four colonies to pass the ordinance for the establishment of the council.
A temporary office was therefore set up by the council in Accra with the first Registrar of the council named Mr. Kenneth Humphreys.
In 1953, the Nigerian government ratified the establishment of the council in Yaba as the WAEC office.
Since its establishment, WAEC is the only examination body in Nigeria charged with the responsibility of conducting all examinations and also determining and approving all examinable syllabi at the secondary school level.
The power of being the only examination body in Nigeria was sustained till October, 1999, when Federal Government of Nigeria announced the establishment of another examination body known as National Examinations Council (NECO).
For some years from 1960 – 1995 WAEC influenced to a greater extent the development of science education in Nigeria.
The body is not a curriculum development organization but its activities especially through its various examinations have made a considerable input into the subject matter content of science teaching.
Activity 7.2: Describe the reactions of some Nigerians to the establishment of another examination body (NECO) in 1999.
In 1968, WAEC felt there is a need to revise the school syllabus, hence the body invited STAN to do the revision of science subjects curricula at secondary school level.
The outcome of the exercise was the revised WAEC syllabus in science subjects introduced in 1974.
This revised syllabus lay more emphasis on the utilization of practical work as the basis of modern science teaching.
Since then, subsequent minor revisions had been carried out on this syllabus every five years.
As Bajah (1985) noted on the revolution in WAEC examination practical in science subjects, “… there was a shift from the use of foreign specimen to local species.
Biology witnessed a determined effort on the part of WAEC to explore and use the local flora and fauna.
In addition, the syllabus content was consistently modernized in the way of science education concepts.
In Chemistry for instance, the gradual progression form “trival” chemical names to the new IUPAC names was significant…” The life span of a WAEC syllabus is five years.
By the third year of usage arrangements are often made to review the syllabus by the syllabus review 46panel, which later submits a draft of its proposal to the Examination Committee of the Council for proper critique and subsequent approval.
Activity 7.3: When was the new IUPAC names introduced to Secondary School Chemistry in Nigeria?
Over the years, WAEC apart from involved in setting public examination papers has also consistently and sufficiently influenced the content area of what is to be taught in schools.
The innovations in WAEC syllabus has always been reflected in the mode and type of examination questions set.
The first public examination conducted by WAEC was in 1955, and since then, yearly up to date.
The question papers set and prepared by WAEC annually, are usually the achievement type in which every participating student achieves according to his/her ability.
To set these questions, the body invites many seasoned science teachers who are commissioned to write question items into a pool where they are moderated and tested accordingly.
WAEC also has a research division with many experts drawn from various fields of education such as Measurement and Evaluation, Educational Psychology and Curriculum Development who carry out research studies on the council’s test development procedures, examination administration, teacher effectiveness and learners conceptual difficulties.
The research division of the council also organizes a monthly seminar where results of scholarly research studies are presented and discussed.
Recently, this unit has also been involved in journal publications of articles.
Activity 7.4: Look for WAEC syllabus of 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005.
Are there any changes in them for Biology, Chemistry and Physics?
Briefly list and describe these changes.
7.3The Role of NERDC in Science Education Curriculum Reformation The NERDC was established by Decree No 53 of 1988 by merging four curriculum development bodies together.
These were: (i) The Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC) (ii) The Comparative Education Study and Adaptation Centre (CESAC) (iii) The Nigerian Book Development Council (NBDC) (iv) The National Language Centre (NLC) Some of the functions of NERDC as stated under the Decree that established it are: 47 Encourage, promote and co-ordinate educational research programmes in Nigeria.
 Identify educational problems in Nigeria in which research is needed and establish the order of priority.
 Identify language problems for the purpose of carrying out research into such problems and finding solutions.
 Establish and maintain a research and development of library to which new educational books and other related publications may be deposited.
 Promote the development of curricula at all levels of the education system.
 Formulate and implement a national policy on book development  Advice and implement all policies relating to language.
 Sponsor national and international educational conferences as may be relevant to the functions of the council.
 Organize teacher education programmes for new techniques.
These functions together with others not stated which are undertaken through research, workshops, seminars and conferences.
To enable the council carry out many of its functions, its restructured and its organization in six collaborating academic centres.
They are:  The Book Development Centre  The Curriculum Development Centre  The Educational Research Centre  The Language Development Centre  The Library and Information Centre  The Special Programmes Centre.
Activity 7.5: List the four curriculum development bodies that formed NERDC.
The major curriculum activities of the council are carried out by the Curriculum Development Centre whose functions include:  Development of Curriculum content  Development of instructional materials  Organization of teacher education programmes  Evaluation of curricula use in the school system  Dissemination of research findings and reports  Collation of information for comparative studies The extent to which the council has involved in the reformation of science education curriculum in schools could be gauged through the development and production of instructional materials in the area of science education.
To 48date, with assets and liabilities taken over from NERC and CESAC, the council has developed the core curriculum for primary science and mathematics and produced instructional materials for both pupils and teachers.
Some of the council publications are:  Primary Science Books 1 – 6  Primary Science Teachers’ Guide  N.P.S.M.P Integrated science Books 1 – 6  N.P.S.M.P Integrated Science Teachers’ Guide  Integrated Science for JSS Books 1- 3  Agriculture for JSS Books 1 – 3  Biology Pupils Books 1 – 3  Biology Teachers’ Guide  Chemistry Pupils’ Books 1 – 3  Chemistry Teachers’ Guide  Physics Pupils’ Books 1 – 3  Physics Teachers’ Guide At the Junior Secondary School (JSS) level all the 18 listed subjects in the National Policy on Education (1998) including Integrated Science, Agricultural Science, Introductory Technology have been developed by the Council and approved by the National Council on Education (NCE).
For the Senior Secondary School (SSS) level, all the 38 distinct subjects (including Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics, Agricultural Science etc) that were listed in the National Policy on Education (1998) have their curriculum content developed by the council with the production of appropriate instructional materials for both the students and their science teachers.
These includes textbooks, workbooks and teachers guides.
In addition, some science and mathematics equipment have been designed by the council and produced locally so as to facilitate pupils’ understanding and retention.
Activity 7.6: Briefly explain how NERDC has been able to manage the assets and liabilities inherited from NERC and CESAC.
To maintain quality control on its activities, the council rely to a greater extent on science education experts from Nigeria Universities, STAN, research institutes who serve as resources persons in the development of science curriculum and instructional materials.
The council also participates in the in-service training of science teachers.
For instance, the Council developed training manuals and improvisation guides for the National primary science and mathematics project which were used to train the master trainers in all the states of the Federation.
49Activity 7.7: List the bodies that assists the NERDC in ensuring quality of its activities.
7.4Conclusion This unit explained the roles played by WAEC and NERDC in reformation of science education curriculum in Nigeria.
Some of the innovative projects carried out by the two bodies are also examined.
7.5Summary In this unit, you have learnt how WAEC was formed and some efforts so far made by the body in certification and science education development.
The unit also mentioned the four curriculum development bodies that merged together to form NERDC, its functions, curriculum activities and lists of the textbooks published.
7.6Tutor – Marked Assignments  Discuss how WAEC and NERDC can support Nigeria to make a breakthrough in technological development.
 Discuss how you will tackle the problems of under achievement and decline in enrolment in science subjects at both secondary and tertiary levels.
7.7References Bajah, S. T. (1985) New dimensions in science curriculum development strategy in Nigeria.
A Tripatite Approach.
JORIC Special No.
1 Ogunleye, A. O (1999).
Science education in nigeria.
Historical development, Curriculum reforms and Research Sunshine International Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. UNIT 8 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS IN NIGERIA 1 508.0 Introduction The unit will examine the trends in primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria from 1963 to 1968.
As a science education learner, you need to have good knowledge of what contains in this unit.
As it will give you the opportunity to know all the changes that has taken place in primary science curriculum in Nigeria.
Therefore, you will be exposed to the following primary science curriculum projects.
 University of Nigeria Primary Science Pilot Scheme 1963  African Primary Science Programme (APSP) 1965  Bendel State of Nigeria Primary Science Programme (BPSP) 1968 8.1Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify the key individuals and organizations (local and foreign) that took active part in the development of each of the programmes.
 State the objectives of each of the programmes  List the printed materials produced for each of the programmes  Describe the evaluation procedures used for the assessment of the programmes  Mention the problems faced by the programmes during implementation of the projects.
8.2University of Nigeria Primary Science Pilot Scheme, 1963 This began at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka in the Eastern Part of Nigeria as a pilot scheme.
The scheme was jointly sponsored by the Faculty of Education, University of Nigeria, Nsukka and the Ford Foundation.
The project came into being through Professor Babs Fafunwa.
He got the inspiration through the Endicott House Conference of 1961 held in Debham, Massachaussetts U. S. A.
The conference was on the need for science in new nations.
He used his office as the Dean of Faculty of Education, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, in collaboration with other interested group to organize series of workshops at Nsukka.
He also made use of the services of Mike Savage who had worked on the Elementary Science Study (ESS) at Educational Services Incorporated (ESI) later known as EDS – Educational Development Centre.
51The focus of the project was on local materials and improvised equipments such as the use of jam-jars, bamboo microscope and bamboo cages etc.
The project placed emphasis on pupils practical activities for eighteen (18) months, Savage tried out ideas and materials on elementary science in the rural environment of Awo-Omama.
Thus, this project served as the first Primary Science curriculum project in Nigeria.
Activity 8.2: What is improvisation in science context?
8.3African Primary Science Programme (APSP), 1965 This is one of the three major projects in Africa sponsored by EDC (former ESI) of Newton in U.S.A The project was a regional programme initiated in Kano in 1965 at a Conference involving fourteen African countries including Nigeria.
Organizational Support The programnme was supported both materially and financially by:  EDC  Ford Foundation and  United State of America Purpose The purpose of the project was to create in the children, the spirit of inquiry, a sense of curiosity and to develop in them the skills, techniques, and metal attitudes to satisfy the inquiry spirit.
Objectives of the Project There was no detailed statement of objectives at the initial stage of the project.
There were only phrases to indicate what they were doing.
But Yoloye (1967), after evaluating the project since 2 years of its inception, came out with the following objectives:  First – hand familiarity with the material world both natural and man- made.
 Interest in further exploration of the world around them on their own initiatives  Ability to find out for themselves ….to see problems and to be able to set about resolving them for themselves 52 Confidence in their own ability to find out for themselves and do things for themselves  Ability to share in a common development of knowledge through collaborating on problems, telling, listening and discriminating use of second-hand sources.
Activity 8.3: State the purpose of APSP.
Activities and materials produced About 25,000 copies of printed materials consisting of Pupils Books and Teachers Guide covering over 30 topics were sent to Nigeria from APSP headquarters in Accra from 1965 to 1970.
These printed materials and educational films were distributed to teachers mostly in Lagos schools.
The teachers’ guide was in booklet form.
It was divided into 2 sections.
Book 1 was for the lower primary classes, and Book 2 was for the upper primary classes.
There was also the “child observation checklist” which was used to evaluate child learning.
However, the teachers found it difficult to identify the learning experiences the units were supposed to be providing.
Activity 8.4: What is the name of the printed material published by APSP headquarters for evaluating child learning?
Evaluation The evaluation headed by Professor Yoloye touched on many aspects of the programme such as  Objectives  Contents  Materials used  In-service and pre-service training of teachers  Some outcomes of the programme on the children.
The performance of the experimental classes were compared with those in the non-experimental classes to evaluate the standard of the project.
The APSP was not popular in most primary schools in Nigeria except with a very small number of schools around Lagos and Ibadan.
The project had been terminated due to financial constraints.
All its materials were thus transferred to Science Education programmes for Africa (SEPA) which began in 1971.
53Activity 8.5: Mention the problems faced by APSP during its implementation.
8.4Bendel State of Nigeria Primary Science Programme (BPSP) 1968 This programme (BPSP) was developed between 1968 and 1969.
It was first called Mid-Western State primary science project and later it became known as the Bendel State Primary Science project.
The project was directed by the State Ministry of Education.
It was jointly sponsored by the UNESCO/UNICEF and the Government of the former Mid- Western State of Nigeria.
Purpose The project based its general purpose on development of primary science curriculum and the training of teachers to teach primary science.
Objectives The objectives were:  To ensure the learning of science by all the primary school pupils throughout their primary school years.
 To ensure the adequacy of trained science teachers in all the primary schools.
 Development of the following in the child:-  the habit of keen observation  the attitude of inquiry  the habit of exploring, experimenting, and the recording of dates.
 the basic concept of cause and effect  the appreciation of the usefulness of the group work.
In essence, the project was designed to be child-centered.
And it aimed at developing in the child, the mind of inquiry, self confidence, and self – reliance through problem solving.
Activity 8.6: List the sponsors of BPSP Materials produced and Activities The materials produced include the following: 54 Pupils’ book titled “Science is Discovering” published by Longman Nigeria (1972 – 1976) for classes one to four (I– IV).
 Teachers Guide for each class.
 Primary school science syllabus for classes one to six  Evaluation for Innovation – A handbook for science teachers.
Items mentioned above were published by Science Curriculum Development Centre, Abraka.
Approach of the Content Materials The syllabus contained nine units.
It was treated in each of the classes one to six (I - IV).
It was to be concentric or spiral in form as follows: (i) Animal life (ii) Plant life (iii) Our health (iv) Safety measures (v) Our universe (vi) Measurement (vii) Air, water and weather (viii) Rocks, soils and minerals (ix) Materials around us Each unit was to be treated conceptually through the basic process skills of observation, experimenting, recording of data etc.
Further to the materials produced, attempts were made to enhance the success of the project.
Such attempts include:-  Introduction of Science in Grade 2 Teachers Training Colleges where duration was increased from 4 to 5 years and science was made compulsory for every prospective teacher.
 Establishment of Science Curriculum Development Centre.
 Establishment of Permanent in-service training centre  Excellent laboratories for all science subjects were built, furnished, and equipped between 1972 – 1974 in all teacher training colleges.
 Continuing Education Centre (CEC) was established in 1972 in Benin- City to cater for students who failed the West African School Certificate Examination Council Examinations (WASCE) and the Higher School CertificateExamination (HSC).
 Vacation Course for Chemistry teacher was organized in 1974 with the co-operation of University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
 Between 1973 to 74, Two thousand (2,000) teachers were produced.
Activity 8.7: Name the approach used in writing the BPSP content materials Evaluation 55UNICEF requested for the evaluation of this project through International Centre for Educational Evaluation (ICEE) University of Ibadan, Ibadan in 1976.
Dr. Wole Falayajo (now Prof.) Dr. Tunde bajah (now Professor) and Professor Yoloye formed the team of evaluators for the project.
Some of the points raised in the evaluation report are that:  The printing of the pupils book for primary five was delayed by the printers for two years.
 The books were not evenly distributed to all schools to the extent that some schools in the divisional areas did not get a single book.
However, the implementation of the project was to a large extent a successful one.
Activity 8.8: List the names of the team that evaluated BPSP as requested by UNICEF.
8.5Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt three primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria namely: University of Nigeria Primary Science Pilot Scheme, 1963; African Primary Science Programme (APSP) 1965 and Bendel State of Nigeria Primary Science Programme (BPSP) 1968.
8.6Summary This unit has discussed the sponsors both individuals and organizations, the purposes, objectives, activities of the projects and materials produced for each of the projects.
The Primary Science Curriculum Projects in Nigeria are continued in the next unit 9.
8.7Tutor-Marked Assignments  In a tabular form write out the names of individuals and organizations that took active part in each of the three primary science curriculum projects.
 To what extent did the three projects achieved their purposes and objectives.
 What will you consider as the constraints to the successful implementation of their projects in Nigeria.
8.8References 56Ogunleye, A. O.
(1999).
Science education in nigeria.
Historical Development, Curriculum Reforms and Research Sunshine International Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Omolewa, M. (1977).
Some earliest problems of science education in Nigeria (1932 – 1959).
JSTAN , 15 (3), 72 – 92.
57UNIT 9 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS IN NIGERIA II 9.0 Introduction In unit 8, you studied three primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria.
In this unit, you are going to study another two of these projects.
While you are reading the unit, try as much as possible to link it up with the previous unit.
In this unit, you will study the following aspects of primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria  “Sayensi” – Ife Six Year Yoruba Language Primary Science Programme 1969  ThePrimary Education Improvement Programme (PEIP), 1970 9.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify the key individuals and organizations (local and foreign) that took active participation in the development of each of the programmes  State the purpose and objectives of each of the programmes  List the printed materials produced for each of the programmes  Describe the evaluation procedures used for the assessment of the programmes.
 Identify those that design the projects  Mention the problems faced by the programmes during implementation of the projects.
9.2 “Sayensi” – Ife Six Year Yoruba Language Primary Science Programme 1969 This programme was located at Ife University, Ile-Ife now known as Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife.
It was started in 1969 and it was the first and only indigenous experimental programme of its kind in this country.
The programme was making use of the mother tongue – Yoruba, as the medium of instruction.
It was first directed by Professor Babs Fafunwa of the Institute of Education of the then University of Ife.
It was taken over by the Institute of Education after the retirement of Professor Fafunwa.
58The project was supported by the University of Ife, Ford Foundation and Carnegie cooperation.
Later the running of the programme was taken over by the Oyo State Ministry of Education.
Purpose The main purpose was the teaching and learning of science in Yoruba.
It was the belief that it is easier to teach ‘kids’ in the language they understand and speak very well.
The belief was also that better understanding can be generated by the use of local language.
Names of objects will appear familiar and meaningful.
Objectives According to Babs Fafunwa (1979), the main objective of the project was:- To develop a primary education for the child and make him an intelligent citizen of his country.
From the main objective, other specific objectives were developed namely:  to develop a primary school curriculum that is relevant and useful both to the child whose formal education terminates in primary six and the child whose education continues thereafter.
 design materials with appropriate methodology for teaching the proposed curriculum effectively  employ Yoruba language as the medium of instruction on the assumption that the child will benefit cognitively, socially, culturally and linguistically through the use of his mother tongue as language of instruction throughout the primary school and thus bridge the gap between the home and school.
 teach English language effectively as a foreign language through specially trained teachers throughout the six years and  evaluate the project continually with a view of determining the presence orr absence of certain significant differences between the project children and those of primary not connected with the project.
Activity 9.1: What is the main trust of this programme?
Who are the sponsors?
Professor R. O Alabi in his article titled “Teaching and Learning Science in the Yoruba Language” Alabi (1976) enumerated the advantages of using mother tongue to teach science as:- 59 Overcoming limited knowledge of foreign scientific vocabulary  Bringing closer to the children scientific examples and concepts  Developing a scientific store of vocabulary in the mother tongue  Helping adults who are not literate in English to understand and appreciate science.
Design of the Project The overall design of the project include the following:  Approval was sought from the then Western State Ministry of Education for the selection of a typical primary school in Ile-Ife to be used for experiment with 2 arms of experimental classes and the third arm as control.
 Establishment of a steering committee to work with the primary school in-service training for teachers, implementation of new methods and materials and the supervision of the project.
 University lecturers in Languages and related subjects and Professors from Ibadan, Ife and Lagos, Principals of teachers training colleges, some primary and secondary school teachers in the old western state, formed members of the Advisory Committee for the project.
 Curriculum writing teams for each subject were organized to comprise of university teachers, primary school headmasters and secondary school and teachers colleges principals.
The following subjects were touched: (i) Science - Sayensi (ii) Mathematics – Matimatiki (iii) Social and Cultural Studies (iv) English Language (v) Yoruba languages Activity 9.2: What are the merits of using mother tongue to each science?
Curriculum Development Four workshops were conducted between 1970 and 1973, for a period of three to four weeks in each summer.
The writing group was made up of thirty members.
The groups was divided into five panels, one panel for each of the five subjects.
Their functions were to examine the existing curriculum, design a more appropriate one, and produce the necessary materials for teachers and pupils.
60Science Panel The Science Panel adapted the Science Education Programme for Africa (SEPA) and the Nigerian Primary Science Programme (BPSP) which were developed specifically for African children between 1964 and 1970.
Materials produced The materials produced include:  Textbooks – “Sayensi” for primary classes (I – IV).
Both the teachers’ guide and pupils books were produced.
 Teacher manuals.
Problems encountered with the project were  Absence of the equivalence of some scientific terms such as sodium, iron, lead etc.
 Finding a commonly acceptable words from possible list of varying dialets.
 Coining local language e.g.
fridge “fifigi”.
 The problem of proceeding to higher institutions of learning, where no such programme may be provided for, is very prominent.
 Mobility of the local labour produced was restricted.
Evaluation Continuous assessment was used in evaluating the first phase of “Sayensi”.
The assessment was on weekly basis of short tests, and end of term or sessional examination.
The materials for the tests were compiled and written by the authors of the text books.
The project on science teaching was once terminated due to some unavoidable circumstances but there was an announcement on its continuation by Oyo State Governments in 1986.
The use of Yoruba for instruction of science was for primary classes 1 and 2 while English was to follow later.
This had also been terminated.
Activity 9.3: State three problems faced by the implementation of this project.
9.3The Primary Education Improvement Programme (PEIP) 1970 61This was launched in 1970.
It was a primary school curriculum.
It was an innovation for the then six Northern States of Nigeria (now 19 states).
It was based in the Institute of Education, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria.
The Programme was jointly sponsored by the then six (6) Northern States, UNICEF and UNESCO.
The project was formerly called UNICEF/UNESCO assisted project but later called PEIP, Primary Education Improvement Programme.
Purpose The general purpose of PEIP was:  To raise the standard of Education in primary schools and to make primary education more relevant to the aspirations and expectations of the society.
 To establish a type of education that would ensure the development of youths into useful citizens in urban and rural settings of these States even if they failed to go beyond the primary level of formal school education.
Activity 9.4: What is the initial name of this project?
Objectives According to Kolawole (1976) there were five major objectives of the programme vis:-  To develop a curriculum that is more modern in its approach.
 To create a curriculum that is for Nigerians in Nigeria, suitable for life in towns and in rural areas.
 To develop children as individual imparting self discipline, basic skills, and strengthening literacy.
 To encourage utilization of the environment.
 To accept that primary education for some 90% of the children is terminal and establish an education that will see to their development as useful citizens in towns or countries.
The above objectives form the major objectives for all the subjects developed by PEIP.
Science curriculum objectives were considered and according to Kolawole (1976) and Lassa (1977) were to enable the Nigeria child to: 62 Observe and explore his environments.
 Develop basic scientific skills and processes;  Develop functional knowledge of science concepts and science principles  Develop scientific attitudes for example curiosity, critical reflection, objectivity etc  Explain, or account for simple natural phenomenon in the light of science  Apply those skills and knowledge gained from science to solve every day problems in this environment, and  Develop self-confidence and self-reliance through problem solving activities in science.
The above specific objectives centered on developing in the pupils the spirit of inquiry and scientific approach to issues.
Activity 9.5: State three main objectives of PEIP.
Materials Produced Materials produced for science include: (a) Primary Science for Primary classes 1 – 6 (b) Pupils workbook (c) Teachers’ guide The books were printed by Longman.
The lower classes (1 and 2) had a section titled “In Creative Activities” while this section was taken up by “follow up activities” in the texts for classes 3 -6.
Book one and two had each section being set aside for science games and projects ranging from games with air/wind, shadows, identification of objects by sound produced, to the making of colourful soap bubbles.
This was to make science interesting to both pupils and teachers.
There were work sheet for answering questions and recording of findings, completing of tables, calculations, labellings etc in the classes 3 - 6 work- books.
Writing of the Text Subject area panels for curriculum writing exercise were organized.
They comprised of the members of the Institute of Education Board of Studies.
63The editing of the work of each panel was done by the Institute’s subject area specialist.
Organization of the Project The programme was time-tabled for six years (1970 – 1976) with two major phases, the pilot phase and the expansion phase.
The pilot phase was for 4 years 1970 – 1974, and the expansion phase from 1974 – 1978.
About 800 primary school children were selected for the experiment.
There were co-ordinators for various agencies e.g.
Mobile teacher trainers in States, subject specialists, and co-ordinators of the programme at the Institute of Education.
Mobile teacher trainers organized regular workshops and training of teachers.
Dissemination of new ideas and materials was through Mobile teachers in workshops and Conferences.
Evaluation Peter N. Lassa (1977), and Peter Asun (1982) evaluated the project on the following areas:  the effect of the programme on participating tutors and teachers,  the value of the mobile teaching force  reactions of parents to the programme  statistical data which could be found in respect of children and staff attendance at courses.
Both formative and summative evaluation were carried out.
The summative evaluation came out with the following constraints to PEIP.
 No suitable model to go by, thus creating several mistakes in planning and administration with curriculum being forced to adopt trial and error approach.
 Lack of enough staff both junior and intermediate and no adequate publication facilities.
 Vast distances in area to be covered, prevented the MTT to visit PEIP school frequently.
 There were sixty-six (66) schools with only one or two specialists per subject thus there were no adequate follow up of their materials  Prevailing conditions in schools such as: - Stealing of PEIP materials 64- Lack of desks or tables to organize lessons as ideally planned - Destruction of PEIP materials due to non-replacement - Transfer of PEIP teachers from their schools without a replacement.
- Lack of incentives for PEIP teachers - Change in Government policies like change in calendar year from January to December, to October to June brought about over-lapping in the case of text-books for each class.
However, all comments about PEIP both subjective and empirical showed that the project has helped the children to develop cognitively and affectively.
Activity 9.7: Identify four constraints to PEIP implementation in a school setting.
9.4Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt two primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria namely the “Sayensi” – Ife Six Year Yoruba Language Primary Science Programme 1969 and the Primary Education Improvement Programme (PEIP) 1970.
9.5Summary This unit has discussed the purposes, objectives, organization of the two projects as well as the text materials produced, problems encountered and evaluation of the projects.
The remaining primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria are continued in the next unit 10.
9.6Tutor – Marked Assignments.
 Justify the use of mother tongue as the medium of instructions in science teaching/learning in all levels of our educational system in Nigeria.
 Describe the efforts of the present 19 states government of the Northern Region in development of science education at Primary school level.
9.7References Ogunleye, A. O.
(1999).
Science education in nigeria.
Historical Development, Curriculum Reforms and Research Sunshine International Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Omolewa, M. (1977).
Some earliest problems of science education in Nigeria (1932 – 1959).
JSTAN , 15 (3), 72 – 92.
6566UNIT 10 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS IN NIGERIA III 10.0 Introduction This unit further continue with the primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria.
This unit will focus on another two of the projects namely:  Ondo State Primary Science Programme (OSPSP), 1974  Core-curriculum, 1980 10.1Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify the key individuals and organization (local and foreign) that took active participation in the development of each of the projects  State the purpose and objectives of each of the projects  Sdentify those that organized the projects  List the printed materials produced for each of the programme  Describe the evaluation proceeding used for the assessment of the programmes  Mention the problems encountered during implementation of the projects.
10.2Ondo State Primary Science Programme (OSPSP), 1974 Ondo State Primary Science Project derived its existence from that of the former Western State which launched in 1974.
It was formerly sponsored by former Western State government before the creation of states in 1976.
The programme later continued in Ondo State after creation of States.
Purpose The Western State Primary Science Programme draw its inspiration from the outcome of the APSP workshop.
The main purpose for the project was to produce a child-centered curriculum with an investigative approach.
Objectives 67The objectives of the programme are:-  To develop the habit of keen observation.
 To develop the attitude of inquiry The panel was charged with the responsibility of surveying the previous primary science curriculum on the following terms of reference:  To examine closely the objectives of various primary science curricula with a view of identifying the common or core elements among them.
 To observe whether or not the core elements are consistent with the objectives for primary science curriculum stipulated in National Policy on Education.
 To find out how much of the content of each state programme actually reflects the core-elements; and  To identify the essential science equipment that would be needed to teach the core-content effectively in our primary schools and thus recommend the following: - equipment that could be improvised by the teacher - equipment that have to be manufactured locally.
Activity 10.1: State the main purpose of this project After proper examination of the objectives of science teaching in eight of the syllabuses or programmes that were currently in use in Nigeria, the panel came with the following general objectives for science teaching in Nigeria within the context of the National Policy on Education.
Given the opportunity to manipulate and experiment with suitable equipment and materials, in a situation encouraging social interaction; science education should enable the Nigeria child to:  observes and explore the environment  develop basis science process skills, including observing, manipulating, classifying, communicating, inferring, hypothesizing, interpreting data, and formulating models.
 develop a functional knowledge of science concepts and principles  explain simple natural phenomena  develop scientific attitude, including curiosity, critical reflection and objectivity.
 apply the skills and knowledge gained through science to solving everyday problems in his environment.
68 develop self confidence and self reliance through problem solving activities in science.
 to develop a functional awareness of and sensitivity to the orderliness and beauty in nature.
 to develop the habit of exploring, experimenting and recording data.
 to learn how to classify  to develop the idea of cause and effect.
Activity 10.2: Mention five general objectives for science teaching as stated in NPE.
Organization and Activities A panel consisting of university lecturers, practicing teachers and inspectors of education was set up by the then Western State Ministry of Education to produce a primary science curriculum.
The programme was on experimental basis of 96 pilot schools from Akure Zone.
The zone comprised of many schools in Ondo State.
Development of science education was the sole responsibility of the Science and Mathematics Division of the State Ministry of Education.
There were units to cater for different aspects of the developmental processes within the division.
The various units perform the following functions:  Organization of induction and in-service courses for practicing primary science teachers, and inspectors of education  Supervising the teaching of the programme and distribution of materials to schools through the Zonal and Area Education Offices.
 Co-ordination of reports emanating from various schools and the Education Offices.
Activity 10.3: List the groups involved in the production of the science curriculum for OSPSP.
Materials produced Pupils book and teachers’ guide were produced.
The teachers guide was not completed for all the classes before the creation of states in 1976.
But the programme continued in Ondo State.
69Curriculum The syllabus consists of several topics, spread over six years and in ascending order of difficulty.
Thus, as the pupil’s ability developed, the demands made upon them increased.
In the first three years, the pupils’ though is closely linked with his environment.
He is guided to collect materials and to observe.
Understanding of measurement, sizes, shapes an simple relationships were developed.
Handling, recognition, identification and classification of common objects and events were developed.
There is a teacher’s guide for each class.
The guide contains the topic to be taught, the mode of presentation and materials required.
Evaluation Formative evaluation was carried out, but as at 1982, no summative evaluation was done because the programme was then still at the trial stage.
The summative evaluation was proposed to take place after all primary schools must have had the opportunity of trying out the programme in all the classes.
By 1979, primary schools in Ondo State were handed over to Ministry of Local Government and Community Development.
There was no adequate supervision due to acute shortage or qualified science inspectors.
Activity 10.4: State the features contained in the curriculum for the first three years on which the OSPSP materials were based.
10.3Core – Curriculum 1980 The Core-Curriculum for primary science education was a modification of the primary science curriculum presented to the Joint Consultative Committee on Education (J.C.C.E).
The modification came about as a result of the conclusions reached at the Common Wealth Secretariat in London which organized seminar and workshop on the “Introduction of Low Cost Science Equipments” in Daressalam, Tanzania from September 20 – 30, 1977.
Some of the highlights of the conclusions of the Daressalam, seminar were that: 70 There is need for all countries to develop and align their science curriculum efforts to serve their needs in the context of their resources.
 All countries were requested to determine a core-content for their science curriculum.
Ministry of Education in each country should then plan their equipment needed for the teaching of this core-curriculum, while leaving enough for the initiatives of school teachers to reflect their various environmental and financial situation and  All countries should embark on production of science equipment locally.
Members of the panel of the Joint Consultative Committee on Education were:  Dr. B. C. E. Nwosu – Federal Ministry of Education – Chairman  Dr. Kolawole – PEIP ABU.
Zaria  Mr. F. Agun – College of Education, Abraka  Dr.
I. Onyike – CUDIMAC University of Nigeria Nsukka  Representative of NERC  Representative of Ife Yoruba Project  Dr. Oshiyale – Lagos State Primary Science Project  One representative each from the following states:- Ondo, Lagos, Sokoto, Imo, Benue and Bauchi The programme examined were:-  Niger State Primary Science  Lagos State Primary Science  Anambra State Primary Science  Oyo State Primary Science  Ogun State Primary Science  NERC Primary Science  PEIP Primary Science  Bendel State Abraka Project.
Activity 10.5: What is the theme of the seminar and workshop held in Daressalam, Tanzana 1977.
Materials Produced 71Teachers’ guide consisting of topics, performance objectives, content, activities, equipment and material to be used and evaluation questions on each topic.
The core contents are listed below: Year One  Exploring the environment: A nature discovery and walk around the school compound.
 Using the senses: seeing, hearing, touching, smelling and tasting  Modelling with clay  Simple properties of Air - its existence - it occupies space  Identifying and classifying objects by their properties  Water - its uses - sinking and floating - playing with water - blowing – bubbles Year Two  Using the sense: Touch, taste, and smell  Further activities with water  Grouping by shape, size and colour  Ordering of objects by comparing volumes, weights and lengths.
 Growing plants from seeds  Air and wind; moving air from one container to another  Making simple objects and figures using match box and clay  Observing animals from the local environment.
Activity 10.6: List the contents of the Year One text material produced.
Year Three  Further activities on plants and animals – comparison of major characteristics e.g.
seeding.
 Further activities on Air and Water  Measurement – length (standard units) - comparing volume, time and weight  Simple activities with mirrors and images  Making sound with different local materials e.g.
paw-paw stalk.
 Colour – dyes from plant and soil.
72Year Four  Soil – types and constituents  Gardening – growing better plant, growth and food  Water Cycle – Evaporation and condensation  Simple ideas on heat and temperature  Weather – regular observation and recording  Measurement in standard unit (metric) length in metre, centimeter volume in litre.
 Names of colours, different shades of the same colour, making rainbow, observing natural colours and changes.
 Food types and uses  Observing changes: in animals, in plants; due to heating; due to rusting.
 Exploring the human body – bones, joints, muscles and movement.
Activity 10.7: List the contents in years three and four text materials that belong to physical sciences.
Year Five  Air - pressure - propulsion, glider, flight of birds and kites - burning  Domestic farm animals  Bulb and battery, ways of lighting bulb  Heat, energy and temperature  Rocks – classification – constituents uses rocks  Soap and alkali  My body at work:- - breathing system - feeding system - excretory system  How life begins: simple activities on flowering plants.
Year Six  Making our task easier – pulley, levers, friction etc  Growing better crops (project essential)  Simple ideas about magnetism  Our earth and sky  Minerals – Uses  Us and where we live: changes causes by man in his environment, rubbish, its problem, disposal of rubbish, things which burn and things 73which can’t, turning plant rubbish into compost, smoke and changes on burning something, oil smoke, danger of using water to put out oil fire, nature of smoke, harmful effect of smoke and cigarette smoking, danger of using water to put out oil fire, nature of smoke, harmful effects of smoke and cigarette smoking.
10.8: Identify the contents that belong to biological sciences in the years five & six contents.
Participants that modified the core-curriculum  Mr. T. A. Fasuyi - Federal Ministry of Education, Lagos  Dr. B. C. Nwosu - Federal Ministry of Education, Lagos  Mr. M. S. Momodu - Muslim Teachers Training College, Surulere, Lagos.
 Dr. P. C. Medel - Faculty of Education, University of Benin, Benin-City.
 Mr. A. O. Abiodun - Ministry of Education.
Lagos State  Mrs. K. O. Igbokwe - NERC Surulere, Lagos  Dr. T. O. Odunusi - Faculty of Education, University of Lagos  Mr. O.
A. Lad - Federal Ministry of Education, Lagos Evaluation The project was said to be a commendable document in that, apart from its synthetic origin, there was the inclusion of some desirable teaching expectations with possible learning outcomes that were in consonance with the objectives of primary sciences as given in the National Policy on Education.
However, it was discovered by NERC writing Committee that some topics that would have furthered the realization of the objectives as well as improve scientific literacy and technological awareness in the young generation were not included primarily because the terms of reference of the drafting committee, namely, to survey existing primary science curricula and determine a core-content that is consistent with the objectives of primary school science, constituted a clear constraint to the indepth exploration of the issues.
The core-curriculum was still at its trial stage when it was terminated due to some anomalies found in it.
Activity 10.9: Briefly assess the core-curriculum project.
7410.4Conclusion In this unit, you studied another two primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria namely Ondo State Primary Science Programme (OSPSP), 1974 and Core-curriculum, 1980.
10.5Summary This unit has discussed the purpose, objectives, organization, materials produced for OSPSP as well as the curriculum and evaluation of the project.
The unit also discussed how core curriculum came into being in 1980.
By listing the members of the panel used, text materials produced with the contents for Year one to Year six, members of the group that modified the core – curriculum and the assessment of the project.
10.6Tutor-Marked Assignments  Discuss how the organization and activities of OSPSP can be of assistance to the present day science teacher development  In a tabular form, identify the contents in Year one to year six of the materials produced in core-curriculum project of 1980 into three categories: biological, physical and social sciences.
10.7References Ogunleye, A. O.
(1999).
Science education in nigeria.
Historical Development, Curriculum Reforms and Research Sunshine International Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Omolewa, M. (1977).
Some earliest problems of science education in Nigeria (1932 – 1959).
JSTAN , 15 (3), 72 – 92.
75UNIT 11 PRIMARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS IN NIGERIA IV 11.0 Introduction In units 8, 9, and 10, you studied the primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria.
You learnt the purpose, objectives, organization and activity, materials produced and assessment of these seven projects.
In this unit, you are going to study the last of the primary science curriculum projects in Nigeria which is known as National Primary School Science Project (NPSSP), 1986.
11.1Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify the organization that took active participation in the birth of the project.
 State the purpose and objectives of the project  Mention the philosophy of the project  List the printed materials produced for the project  Describe how the project was assessed.
11.2National Primary School Science Project (NPSSP) 1986 This is a teaching curriculum development from the Federal Ministry of Education core-curriculum for Primary Science in 1980.
The director of the programme is the Federal Government of Nigeria through the Federal Ministry of Education and Nigeria Educational Research Council.
Purpose This project was developed in order to rectify some inadequacies found in core-curriculum.
Thus, the general purpose of the project was to provide guidelines for meaningful action to make education in Nigeria a true instrument for the reconstruction of our society and to achieve the development of national capacities in support of nationalism, social, scientific, technological, and economic development.
Activity 11.1: What will you consider as the main purpose of NPSSP?
76Objectives The aims and objectives of primary science education for Nigeria that are in consonance with the aims and objectives of primary education as stated in the National Policy on Education, are to:-  Lay a solid foundation in science at the primary school level by introducing the basic processes of science to the children.
 Enable the Nigerian child develop spatial (three dimensional) perspectives in the course of his/her intellectual development.
 Provide opportunities for the Nigeria child to develop manipulative and psycho-motor skills through concrete experience;  Develop problem-solving skills of the Nigeria child to make him/her self- confident and self reliant, and  Develop and sustain the interest of the Nigerian child in science through appreciation of orderliness and beauty in nature.
Philosophy The NERC took cognizance of the need to make the Nigerian society scientifically literate and technologically oriented.
This was encouraged by the unprecedent moral and material support of the Federal Government and thus developed the instructional materials “Aid to the teaching of Integrated Science in primary school”.
The central theme chosen for the writing of the materials is “Science for Living” since it was strongly agreed by the writing panel that the survival needs of the Nigerian society was fundamental.
Attempts were made to appeal to the child’s natural characteristics, his curiosity and his love for asking questions.
To facilitate understanding, some topics and themes in the original curriculum were re-worded, modified or re-arranged in order to bring down the topics to the conceptual level of the primary school child.
New topics were added such as Housing and Clothing and Relevant Technology.
All the topics, themes and concepts are spirally arranged to encourage reinforcement of knowledge, skills and attitude to facilitate retention and retrieval of knowledge and to stimulate interest and curiosity in the subject as well as provide opportunity for creativity.
Activity 11.2: What is the NPSSP all about in terms of its philosophy and arrangement of topics in materials written for the project?
77Materials Produced  A project newsletter and kits  Syllabus and teaching materials  Apparatus/equipment for teaching were distributed to all primary schools in the Federation.
 Text books - Integrated Primary Science for Primary Schools - Teachers’ Guide - National Primary Science and Mathematics Project – A training manual for the primary science - Teachers in Nigerian Schools Trial Edition – This was produced to teach prospective Grade II Teachers or the NCE science teachers who are to teach science in primary schools.
Activity 11.3: List the text books produced for this project.
Teaching Approach A combination of approaches were recommended for the teaching of the programme.
Such methods are processes, conceptual, thematic or project approach, and the guided discovery approach which involves the activity of the child.
This was made to over-ride and indeed it runs through the entire programme.
The format of the teachers guide was structured explicitly into topics, sub- topics, key ideas, background knowledge, lesson objectives, time required, equipment and materials, pre-lesson preparation, outline of lesson, assessment of lesson and follow-up activities or home work.
Activity 11.3: List three approaches emphasized by NPSSP for teaching of science.
Organization and Activities  There was no foreign hand involved  The Federal Government was responsible for the whole cost of the project.
 The personnel, premises and materials needed for the execution of the project were provided by the Federal Government through the Federal Ministry of Education  Supervision of the printing materials, traveling of writers to workshops, in-service training and course orientation workshop were done by the NERC.
78 The NERC was to organize refresher course for science teachers in order to up-grade the quality of teaching.
 The NERC was also responsible for distribution of printed materials to each State Ministry of Education after collection from the Federal Government printers.
Efforts were made to train mobile teachers who will provide NERC with feed backs from the field teachers on the use of materials produced.
Activity 11.4: State the roles played by NERC in the making of this project.
Evaluation The materials of the project were trial- tested in six selected primary schools.
In Zaria, Abeokuta, Port-harcourt, Benin-City, Bauchi and Minna, between December 1982 and September 1983.
Errors discovered during trial-testing stage were corrected.
However, there had not been any known summative evaluation of the programme and it was discovered that the few materials are in slim circulation in all states of the Federation and the impact is not properly felt.
During the past few years, efforts to improve science education in Nigeria have paid little attention to general education in science.
The new projects are modeled after the Nuffield science (U.K) and the Curriculum Projects in the United States in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
These courses in the two countries were developed to produce scientists and engineers.
As excellent as they were improving the education of the science specialists and engineers by presenting science based on the structures of the individual disciplines and the processes of science, they failed to provide the low ability, average and non-science inclined students with basic general education in science.
The integrated science which was designed to provide the general education in science in Nigeria (STAN, 1972) emphasizes mainly the knowledge component of science with no reference to social implications of science.
Activity 11.5: Explain why the impact of this project was not properly felt in all the States of the Federation.
As earlier pointed out, science was introduced in the schools in Nigeria in the 1920s because it was felt that the “scientific worker must play a more prominent part in the creation and administration of the world of the future” (Education Policy, 1947), particularly in Nigeria where there was much ground to be made up in the fields of agriculture, health and industry.
It was then thought that “schools should foster scientific though and 79method” (Education Policy, 1947).
General science was to be taught for the careful introduction of nature.
At the time of independence in 1960 several educators had expressed the need for science education in the schools if Nigeria were to develop.
Elgood (1957) stated that if the nations of West Africa were to hold their own in the scientific age, it was imperative for them to evolve a system of secondary education that would enable the rising generation to have an adequate appreciation of scientific principle.
Activity 11.6: Why was science introduced in the schools in Nigeria in the 1920s.
11.3Conclusion In this unit, you studied the National Primary School Science project.
11.4Summary In this unit, we discussed the purpose, objectives, philosophy and materials produced for National Primary School Science Project as well as the teaching approach, organization and activity and evaluation of the Project.
11.5Tutor – Marked Assignment  Discuss the features of the guided discovery approach.
How is it different from project approach?
11.6References Ogunleye, A. O.
(1999).
Science education in nigeria.
Historical Development, Curriculum Reforms and Research Sunshine International Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Omolewa, M. (1977).
Some earliest problems of science education in Nigeria (1932 – 1959).
JSTAN, 15 (3), 72 – 93.
80UNIT 12 SECONDARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS IN NIGERIA I 12.0Introduction Curriculum innovations in science at the secondary school level came as a product of the joint efforts of STAN, WAEC, NERC and CESAC and the result of an urgent response to the new 3 – 3 system of secondary education.
Efforts made in this direction resulted in the following science curriculum projects undertaken at the secondary school level and at different periods of time.
This unit will discuss two of these projects while the remaining two will be discuss in unit 13.
The two secondary science curriculum projects that you will learn in this unit are:  The Basic Science for Nigerian Secondary Schools (BSNSS)  The Nigerian Integrated Science Project (NISP) 12.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Name all the bodies that participated in making the BSNSS and NISP projects a reality  State the objectives of BSNSS and NISP  State the philosophy of the two projects  List the bodies that provided financial supports for the projects  List the science materials produced for the projects  State the procedure for evaluation of each of the projects 12.2The Basic Science for Nigerian Secondary Schools (BSNSS) The BSNSS was the first pioneering science curriculum development project undertaken in Nigeria between 1963 – 1967 at the Comprehensive High School, Aiyetoro.
Experts from Harvard University in US gave useful advice on this project.
The BSNSS was a curriculum in general science which covered the first two years of secondary school.
 The Objective of BSNSS To develop activity course in which the students would learn “science by doing”.
81 Philosophy of the project The philosophy of the project was “Doing science the way scientists do it”.
That is observing carefully, reporting honestly what is observed and being patient.
The programme is broken up into pupils activities i.e.
the pupils would actually do science and not learning about science.
It is an attempt to shift the science from its dogmatic nature which is teachers oriented nature.
According to Skapski (1969), the approach was that: - students should learn science by sciencing - students experience in discovering facts themselves - carry out processes as scientists does  Financial Support The project was financed jointly by the following bodies: - Western State Ministry of Education - Science educators in the Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, US - Prof. Fletcher Watson, he played a prominent role towards the development of the materials - USAID – United State Agency for International Development - Ford Foundation of America Activity 12.1: Discuss to what extent have you contributed to the achievement of the objective of this project in your science teaching.
According to Ogunnaike (1968), the basic science syllabus developed in Aiyetoro was written by Nigerians and was published in 1967 with the Teachers’ Guide.
The syllabus was conceived to be child-centred with emphasis on the discovery teaching method and with laboratory oriented activities.
The underlying theme of the programme is “energy transfer” – how energy is acquired, supplied and transferred between living organisms and their surroundings.
Activity 12.2: Mention the features of discovery teaching method.
 Science Material produced for BSNSS project The details of the contents of BSNSS were divided into two main blocks namely: Block 1 for Form 1 and Block II for the Form II.
In block 1, there were five units viz: 82Unit 1 - Introduction to science Unit II - Heat Unit III - Mechanics Unit IV - Electricity Unit V - Chemistry In block II, there were four units viz: Unit I - Small Organisms and cells Unit II - Food and Nutrition Unit III - Diseases Unit IV - Ecology  Evaluation of the Project The programme was not widely adopted in schools as it did not go beyond the pilot-testing stage.
Reasons for this could have been that: - the objectives of BSNSS may have been at variance with our traditional science curricula used in the schools throughout the federation at that time.
- the advent of Integrated Science syllabus world wide could be another factor against the BSNSS Activity 12.3: Mention the only success that can be attributed to BSNSS project in spite of its set back.
12.3The Nigerian Integrated Science Project (NISP) The NISP was the first science curriculum project developed by the STAN in 1970.
The Integrated Science Project comprises of disciplines drawn from Biology, Chemistry, Physics and the Earth Sciences.
The Project was written in conformity with the guidelines as specified in STAN’s Curriculum Development Newsletter No.
1 which contained the philosophy, methodology, content and evaluation of Integrated Science.
The Newsletter listed some of the skills students would acquire after having been exposed to a course in Integrated Science as thus:  Organising  Observing  Generalizing  Measuring  Predicting  Classifying  Experimenting  Reporting 83STAN commissioned its members to write the pupils Text book and Teachers guide for the NISP.
The Philosophy of the integration was designed to help the child to: - gain the concept of the fundamental unit of science - gain the commonality of approach to problems of a scientific nature - gain an understanding of the role and function of science in everyday life and the world in which he/she lives.
Activity 12.4: List the processes of science  Financial Support The project was financed with supports from generous philanthropists and foreign bodies such as: - Late Adam Skapski, whose support was received from the Ford Foundation through CESAC - Chief H. M. B Somade through CESAC - The Curriculum Renewal & Educational Development Overseas (CREDO) through British Council in Nigeria - Support received inform of Curriculum materials from UNESCO and from publishing company i.e.
Longman Nig.
Ltd.
According to Ogunleye (1999) the approach used in NISP was the child-centred approach which was basically activity-oriented.
 Science Materials produced for NISP Project - Pupils’ Textbooks I & II - Pupils’ Workbooks I & II - Teachers’ Guide The pupils’ textbooks consists of contents subdivided into Year I and II.
The content is divided into units with chapters.
Each unit has an introduction and objectives to achieve at the end of a unit.
Year I textbook consists of 6 units with 17 Chapters while year II consists of 6 units with 19 chapters.
The content of NISP revolved around the 6 themes given below Unit 1 - You as a living thing 84Unit 2 - You and your home Unit 3 - Living components of the environment Unit 4 - Non-living components of the environment Unit 5 - Saving your energy Unit 6 - Controlling the environment  Evaluation of the project This was made in line with the philosophy of the project - Readability:- Studies conducted by Soyibo (1979) and Jegede (1982) revealed that the readability indices of NISP texts were low (i.e.
not highly readable).
To solve this problem, there is need to simplify the long style used in writing the text in future to enhance proper pupils comprehension.
- Topic Difficult:- Difficulty was contingent on the language level, cognitive demand and instructional methodology of the science curriculum (Bomide, 1983) - Teaching Facilities:- Studies conducted on NISP by Bankefa (1978), Odubunmi (1981) and Igbalajobi (1982) revealed that most of the schools surveyed lack adequate laboratory apparatus for effective teaching and learning of Integrated Science.
To solve this problem, teachers were advise to embark on extensive improvisation of materials Activity 12.5: Will you see the problem of the Integrated Science teachers’ lack of understanding of the philosophy underlying the course as another factor against the success of the NISP?
12.4 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt two secondary science curriculum projects namely: BSNSS and NISP.
The BSNSS was the first and NISP was the second science curriculum development projects undertaken in this country.
Prior to the emergent of the BSNSS in Nigeria, science syllabus was characterized by the topical approach in the structure of the content.
Science was then presented as bits and pieces of information with no conceptual relationship.
8512.5 Summary So far, you have studied the basic philosophy underlying the two science curriculum projects, the financiers, the materials produced to teach the projects and the evaluation of the projects.
12.6Tutor – Marked Assignment  How would you as a science teacher assess the two secondary science curriculum projects in the context of the present curriculum in Nigeria?
12.7References Ogunleye, A. O.
(1999).
Science education in nigeria.
Historical Development, Curriculum Reforms and Research Sunshine International Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Ogunnaike, A. O.
(1968), JSTAN, 7(1) STAN (1970) Integrated Science.
A course for the Junior Forms of Secondary Schools.
Curriculum Newsletter No 1, Yoruba Press, Ibadan.
86UNIT 13 SECONDARY SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS IN NIGERIA II 13.0Introduction In the process of developing various science curricula, experts were of the opinion that relevance to the society, interest and ability of students should be taken into consideration.
When the pioneer secondary science curriculum project, (BSNSS) and that of NISP could not meet the needs of the society which the schools served (Ivowi, 1978) another curriculum innovations in science at secondary school level came into being.
These are what this unit intends to discuss.
They are:  The Nigerian Secondary Schools Science Project (NSSSP)  The National Science Curriculum for Senior Secondary Schoiols (NSCSSS) 13.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Name all the bodies that participated in NSSSP and NSCSSS  State the objectives of the projects  State the underlying philosophy of the projects  List the financiers of the projects  List the science materials produced to execute the project.
13.2 The Nigerian Secondary Schools Science project (NSSSP) The development of NSSSP started in 1970 by CESAC in Biology, Chemistry and Physics as an alternative syllabus for forms III – V of secondary schools all over the federation.
Aims of NSSSP NSSSP aims at developing in students conceptual thinking, manipulative skills and scientific attitudes.
The basic philosophy of NSSSP was the preparation of the young ones for useful living in the society and higher education through training in the use of both the brain and hands.
87Objectives of NSSSP - to obtain a proper understanding of the basic concepts of science - to develop scientific skills especially the manipulative ones - to acquire the right attitudes such as honesty, tolerance, objectivity and cooperation Financial Support - First three years of formation funded by Late Dr. Adam Skapski through Ford Foundation - The Federal Government of Nigeria through Federal Ministry of Education.
Activity 13.1: To what extent will you say the objectives of NSSSP have been achieved?
The NSSSP adopted the guided discovery method of teaching and the conceptual theme approach to content selection.
Science materials produced for NSSSP For each of the science subjects biology, chemistry and physics, textual materials in the form of Books 1, 2 and 3 were developed for students together with Teacher Guides 1 – 3.
Evaluation of NSSSP In the process of implementing NSSSP, various problems surfaced which are:  Inadequate funding by the Government  Lack of support from Ministry of Education officials and school administrations who readily agrees with new plan but show no sign of readiness to put their support into practice  Implementation problems  Lack of infrastructures such as personnel, space, equipment for teaching service  Lack of commitment on the part of teachers  Unpreparedness of the teachers  Lack of effectiveness in teaching due to teachers ignorance of the philosophy and objectives of the project.
 Lack of adequate supply of softwares such as books  Over population of students in the classroom 88 Social factors such as some societies forbid teaching of some science concepts like sex, reproduction, birth control etc.
Activity 13.2: Discuss how the problem of unpreparedness of science teachers can affect the proper implementation of a curriculum.
13.3 The National Science Curriculum For Senior Secondary Schools (NSCSSS) The National Science Curriculum came into being as a result of the National Workshop on Secondary Education Curriculum which was organized by the NERC whose report was submitted by 1978.
This workshop enabled this country to have basic philosophy for science teaching and a national science curriculum which is now used in all our junior and senior secondary schools throughout the federation.
Basic Philosophy of NSCSSS  To enable the learner to utilize science for realization, self-fulfillment and self-development  To equip the youths of this country with such intellectual know how which will enable them to contribute significantly to the development of the country, particularly in the mobilization of national manpower.
 To prepare the more able youths for higher education in science.
Characteristic features of the NSCSSS  The spiral or concentric approach to the teaching of concepts  The use of guided discovery method in teaching as a way of ensuring that learning as an activity takes place during exploration, experimentation and discussion.
 The arrangement of the contents in a logical, developmental and sequential order  The identification of an array of performance objectives for each topic of the curriculum.
 The arrangement of the teaching syllabus into five sections viz: - Topic - Performance Objectives - Content - Activity - Notes 89Activity 13.3: Look for a science curriculum related to your area of specialization.
Write out the general objectives of that subject.
13.3 Conclusion This unit examined the details of the most two recent science curriculum innovative projects undertaken at the secondary school levels in Nigeria namely NSSSP and NSCSSS.
13.4 Summary One common feature of these projects treated in this unit is the desire to improve the effectiveness of practical and relevant science education for Nigerian Secondary schools.
13.5 Tutor – Marked Assignment Discuss what will be your own assessment of the NSCSSS.
13.6 References Ogunleye, A. O.
(1999).
Science education in nigeria.
Historical Development, Curriculum Reforms and Research Sunshine International Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. FME (1985) National curriculum for senior secondary school, Vol.
3 – Science, Lagos.
90UNIT 14 SCIENCE EDUCATION IN BRITAIN 14.0Introduction The unit will examine the historical development of science education in Britain.
The history will afford you the opportunity to have good knowledge of the roles played by Science Masters Association (SMA) and Association for Women Science Teachers (AWST) as well as Nuffield Foundation in development of science education in the British schools.
14.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Write a report of the development of science education in British schools  Discuss the roles played by Nuffield foundation in British Modern Curriculum Projects  List the contributions of the science associations to science education in Britain.
14.2 Development of Science Education in Britain Science was first introduced into public schools before 1900 from there it extended to other state schools during the period between the two world wars.
The affairs of science was handled by science teachers who established about a century ago, the Science Masters Association (SMA).
They developed schemes for science teaching in secondary schools in 1930, followed by formation of Association for Women Science Teachers (AWST) which later merged with SMA to form Association for Science Education (ASE) in 1961.
In Britain, the academically oriented students were taught Physics, Chemistry and Biology while the average students learnt General Science.
The academically inclined students took GCE in the separate sciences, while the others took Certificate of Secondary Education examination (CSE).
During 1945 – 1960, the science syllabus became crowded so the Science Masters Association and the Association of Women Science Teachers established different subject committees in the 1950s.
Between 1951 – 1961, these associations published:  Biology for Grammar Schools  Chemistry for Grammar Schools  Physics for Grammar Schools in London by John Murray Limited in 1961.
91The Science Masters’ Association in 1965 also published School Science and General Education in Cambridge for all pupils in the first five (5) years of secondary education.
Activity 14.1: Identify the roles played by SMA in development of science education in British Schools.
14.3 Modern Curriculum Projects The syllabuses and policy statements published by SMA and AWST earlier were very important in Britain Science Education.
However, when the teachers asked for financial support from the government to extend their work, there was no reply.
Nuffield Foundation that is a British charitable educational foundation like Ford Foundations invested a lot of money in support of teachers in project work.
Hence, Nuffield Science Schemes were launched in 1961 – 62.
The original Nuffield Science Schemes was concerned with the production of new materials for biology, chemistry and physics at the GCE O’ Level for children aged 11 – 16.
The Nuffield foundation also invested in A’ Level GCE, and the Nuffield combined science project which was concerned with Integrated Science in the first two years of secondary education.
In 1964, the Government launched a Schools Council for Curriculum and Examinations which is a representative body of the Department of Education and Science (DES).
The Council receives grant from the Government and the LEAs.
They carry out educational research and curriculum development in England and Wales.
The secondary school science curriculum projects have a common methodology which emphasise students active involvement in laboratory and field experience.
Teachers’ guide, resource books and experimental guides were produced for students use.
Activity 14.2: Briefly discuss the contributions of Nuffield Foundation to Modern Curriculum Projects in Britain.
14.4 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt that science was first introduced into British Public schools before 1900 later to the state schools, that SMA and AWST played major roles in development of science education.
That the effort of the SMA and AWST was supported by Nuffield Foundation.
Which led to launching of the Nuffield Science in 1961 – 62.
9214.5 Summary This unit has discussed the development of science education in Britain.
The topic is continued in the next Unit 15 as British Science Curriculum Project I.
14.6 Tutor – Marked Assignment  Compare the development of science education in Britain with that of Nigeria.
14.7 Reference Encyclopedia Britanica, Vol.
XVI 93UNIT 15 BRITISH SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS 1 15.0Introduction This unit is a continuation of Unit 14.
It examine the emergent of Scottish Integrated Science in 1966 and highlight the various activities carried out towards improving science education in Scottish schools.
15.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss the emergent of Scottish Integrated Science and Science  State the general objectives of the syllabus for the first two years in Scottish schools based on the three domains namely: knowledge, attitude and skills  Mention the teaching techniques recommended for Scottish Integrated Science  State the aims of school council project technology  List the text materials available for Scottish Integrated Science.
15.2Scottish Integrated Science This course is different from the most Modern Curriculum Project.
The 1964 Working Party was established to review the existing science curriculum for Scottish students in non-certificate courses and to consider the “Alternative Syllabus to the lower – level courses.
The Working Party was not established to produce materials for students or teachers use.
In 1966, in order to produce homogenous academic platform for the early years of secondary schools, the working party carried out the following comprehensive review on present science curriculum in  the first two years of secondary education;  the later years of secondary education for non-academic pupils.
The Working Party, then prepared a workable syllabus which was evaluated in schools.
The syllabus was for the first two years (Grades 8 – 9).
The resulting approach is now known as Scottish Integrated Science.
Work sheets were distributed during the period of trial-testing in schools which were revised after evaluation and published.
Text-books were later published following the order of the syllabus and associated teachers’ guides.
94Activity 15.1: Briefly discuss the roles played by Working Party in the emergent of Scottish Integrated Science.
The Syllabus For The First Two Years The first two years in Scottish schools emphasizes the teaching of science which contributes a lot to general education.
Students are exposed to experimental methods of scientists, the apparatus used and methods of drawing conclusion.
The stated general objectives of the syllabus are:  in knowledge and understanding pupils should acquire – - knowledge of some facts and concepts concerning the environments - knowledge of the use of appropriate instruments in scientific experiments.
- an adequate scientific vocabulary - an ability to communicate using this vocabulary - comprehension of some basic concepts in science so that they can be used in familiar situations.
- ability to select relevant knowledge and apply it in new situations - ability to analyse data and draw conclusions - ability to think and act creativity in science Activity 15.2: What is the part of the general objectives of the syllabus on knowledge and understanding emphasizing?
 In attitude – - awareness of the inter-relationship of different disciplines of science - awareness of the relationship of science to other aspects of the curriculum - awareness of the contributions of science to economic and social life of the community - interest and enjoyment in science - an objectivity in observation and in assessing observations.
Activity 15.3: What is the general name for qualifying this part of syllabus on attitude 95 In practical skills – - some simple science-based skills - some experimental techniques involving several skills It was hoped that this syllabus would provide a means of educating students to ‘O’ level grade and beyond the Scottish Certificate of Education (SCE) examinations provided equivalent of chemistry and physics in Integrated science form for those that will not be studying science anymore and at the same time it provided a link for those that would study Advance Science.
Activity 15.4: Explain the rationale behind this first two year syllabus in Scottish Integrated Science.
Recommended Teaching Techniques The Scottish Integrated Science Course involves extensive laboratory work.
Students are expected to work individually or in small groups.
Teachers however, were expected to demonstrate the dangerous techniques to the students.
In Scotland, science is treated as a ‘practical subject’ with only 20 students in a class.
The teachers are provided with experimental procedures from teachers in trial schools to improve and ease their work in form of Memoranda for Teachers.
Ideas on demonstration to be performed by teachers are also provided in bulletins of Scottish Schools Science Equipment Research Centre (SSSERC).
These information also help Technicians to produce the new equipment required in schools in the work-shop.
Activity 15.5: List the teaching technique recommended for Scottish Integrated Science.
Materials available Work sheets were produced for the pupils to use for the course but pupils should not be left alone to work on the sheets without teachers.
Textbook and Teachers Guides The pupils texts and teachers guides were published in the 70’s as the publication of Scottish Education Department and Consultative Committee on the Curriculum.
 Curriculum Papers 7.
Science for General Education: For the first Two years and Early School Leavers.
Edinburgh: Her Majesty’s Stationary office, 1969.
96 Scottish Education Department.
“Science Topics for Third and Fourth Year Non – G. C. E. Courses”.
Mineographed.
 Scottish Secondary Science Working Party.
Science Worksheets: Year 9 – 15.
London: Heinemann Educational Books.
1969.
Working Party on Secondary Science: - Integrated Science Courses: Memoranda for Teachers, Section 1 – 8 (Year 1).
Revised Version.
Edinburgh: Scottish Educational Department.
Integrated Science Course: Memoranda for Teachers, Sections 9 – 14 (Year II).
Edinburgh, Scottish Education Department, Series.
Activity 15.6: Name the major textbooks published for Scottish Integrated Science Project.
15.3Conclusion This unit highlighted the activities of Scottish Integrated Science such as designing of syllabus for the first two years of secondary education in Scottish Schools, recommendation of teaching techniques and production of both students textbooks and teachers guides on Integrated Science and Science Subjects.
15.4Summary In 1964, Working Party was established in Scottish purposely to review the existing science curricula for Scottish students in non-certificate courses.
The outcome of which produced what is known as Scottish Integrated Science for the first two years (grades 8 – 9) in Scottish schools.
In the next unit, you will study another British science curriculum projects.
15.5Tutor-Marked Assignment  Briefly explain how science is thought in Scotland.
15.6Reference Encyclopedia Britanica, Vol XVI 97UNIT 16 BRITISH SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS II 16.0Introduction This unit is also a continuation of Unit 16.
In this unit, you are going to study another British science curriculum project called Nuffield combined science.
The Nuffield combined science team was set up in 1966 to synthesis the science curriculum materials provided for the first two years of secondary education in Britain.
The purpose of this unit is to discuss the activities involved in Nuffield combined science and Nuffield secondary science.
16.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss the roles played by Nuffield combined science in British science curriculum  List seven contents of the Nuffield combined science materials  Explain all the teaching techniques recommended by combined science  List five materials produced by Nuffield combined science  Explain what Nuffield secondary science is in British Science Curriculum  Discuss the aims and objectives of Nuffield Secondary Science  Explain pupils activities under Nuffield Secondary Science  Identify eight text materials produced by Nuffield Secondary Science.
16.2Nuffield Combined Science Nuffield Combined Science team was set up in 1966.
Teachers were expected to exercises their professional judgement concerning details of content and order of the provided structured syllabus in producing a suitable teaching sequence.
Hence, they had the task of synthesizing the materials provided for children in the first two years of British secondary schools.
The content of the Nuffield combined science materials are: - The work around us - Looking for patterns - How living things begins - Air - Electricity - Water 98- Small Things - Earth - Insects - Energy Activity 16.1: When was Nuffield combined science team set up.
What was the duty assigned to the team?
Recommended Teaching Techniques: In combined science, a very strong emphasis is laid on students first hand experience which is reflected in the laboratory experiments.
School authority gives student assignments which are expected to be done from home so that their friends and parents would know what they are being taught in school.
The students are allowed to learn through guided discovery method.
Activity 16.2: Name the teaching technique recommended by combined science.
Materials Produced The materials produced are teachers’ guide, activity books and film loops.
The publications were all published jointly by Renguin and Longmans, 1970.
 Nuffield Combined Science: Teachers’ Guide I, Sections 1 – 15  Nuffield Combined Science: Teachers’ Guide II, Sections 6 – 10  Nuffield Combined Science: Teachers’ Guide III  Nuffield Combined Science: Pack I Activities  Nuffield Combined Science: Pack II Activities Activity 16.3: Name the publishers of combined science Current Work A continuation was set up for the Middle Schools by the LEAs but no materials have been published to date.
16.3Nuffield Secondary Science The Nuffield Secondary Science is for the lower 75 percent of the ability range of the population aged 13 – 16.
Secondary science is based firmly on the principles of the Working Paper with its population extended to include all those unlikely to be taking ‘O’ Level General Certificate of Education 99examinations and those who probably would be taking ‘O’ Level Examinations in other subjects Activity 16.4: What is the age bracket of the population in which the Nuffield Secondary Science is meant for?
Aims Secondary science attempts to provide opportunities to pupils to understand things of the scientific background and implications of economic, social and moral problems and to equip them for everyday life.
The need to solve problems, to predict the consequences of actions and to evaluate assertions, politicians, advertisers and scientists.
Objectives The objectives in secondary science lessons are to provide immediate opportunity for and encouragement of accurate observation, deduction of, generalization, inferences from concepts or generalizations, design of simple experiments and formation of hypothesis.
This opportunity is taken to improve verbal fluency, literacy and numeracy, to encourage self-discipline and responsibility for organization of work.
Activity 16.5: What are the opportunities derivable from secondary science?
Theme of Nuffield Secondary Science Eight themes have been developed by the Working Paper for the secondary schools.
The themes are:  Interdependence of living things  Continuity of life  Biology of man  Harnessing energy  Extension of sense perception  Movement  Using materials  The Earth and its place in the Universe There should be pupils experiments and teachers demonstrations in each theme.
Activity 16.6: Categories the eight themes into physical and biological issues.
100Pupil Activities Students are expected to perform the experiments all by themselves.
By so doing they learn a lot and even discover new things which are useful to them.
Activity 16.7: What name will you give to a curriculum that emphasize this type of pupil’s activities?
Materials Produced The following materials produced were published by Longmans, 1971:  Nuffield Secondary Science, Theme 7 Using Materials by Blackledge, J. Carter, Derek and Milbourne, J. J  Nuffield Secondary Science, Theme 3: Biology of Man by Fox, Denis  Nuffield Secondary Science, Theme 4: Harnessing Energy by Howard, D.  Nuffield Secondary Science, Theme 5: Extension of Sense Perception by Howard, Edgar.
 Nuffield Secondary Science, Theme 8: The Earth and its Place in the Universe by Leigh, R.  Nuffield Secondary Science, Theme 1: Interdependence of Living Things by Marson, J. E.  Nuffield Secondary Science: Examining at CSE Level  Nuffield Secondary Science: Teachers’ Guide  Nuffield Secondary Science, Theme 6: Movement by Richards or, Wand Tollyfield, J. K.  Nuffield Secondary Science: Apparatus Guide by Roberts, K. M.  Nuffield Secondary Science: Theme 2: Continuity of Life by Wiggles Worth, G.  Britains Fueld by Milbourn, J. J. and series of film loops photographs and slides.
Activity 16.8: List eight authors of text materials produced by Nuffield Secondary Science 16.5 Summary 101This unit discussed the development of science education curricula in Britain through Nuffield Combined Science and Nuffield Secondary Science.
This topic is continued in the next Unit 17.
16.6 Tutor-Marked Assignment  Differentiate extensively between Nuffield combined science and Nuffield secondary science.
16.7 Reference Encyclopedia Britanica, Vol.
XVI 102UNIT 17 BRITISH SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECTS III 17.0Introduction This is the last unit that discussed issues on British Science Curriculum Projects.
It examined the Schools Council Integrated Science Project and the Nuffield Science Schemes namely Nuffield Ordinary and Advanced Levels.
It also examined the science programme designed for pupils of ages 5 and 13.
17.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Explain the purpose of the Schools Council Integrated Project (SCISP)  Explain the words Patterns Approach in the context of a curriculum  Identify at least five text materials published for each of the three science subjects (biology, chemistry and physics) at O’ level  Discuss the science programme at 5 and 13 project.
17.2 The Schools Council Integrated Science Project (SCISP) Schools Council Integrated Science Project was organized for student above average ability.
This was to enable students perform better in GCE Examination.
The Primary aim of the project is to inculcate in pupils attitude such as critical thinking and objective observation.
SCISP emphasis intellectual work.
Students were expected to be able to reason why a reaction occurs rather than just recording its occurrence.
In order to guide the development of materials for an Integrated Science course two existing models of science curricula were combined to produce “Patterns Approach”.
This combines “Process Approach” which is the processes involved in science with “Conceptual Approach” which aims to develop awareness and understanding of major concepts of science.
This approach is based on building blocks, interaction and energy.
Activity 17.1: State the aim of SCISP?
What do you understand by “Patterns Approach”.
Nuffield ‘O’ Level Science Scheme 103The Nuffield ‘O’ level science scheme was the very first to be initiated in 1962 in an attempt to reform school science education (Clark, 1972).
The basic aim of the scheme was to foster a different attitude to science subjects in both students and teachers through active laboratory exercises (Gummett, 1980).
The materials produced under the scheme are Pupils’ Manuals, Teachers’ Guides and Technicians Manuals published under the general heading “Patterns”.
Nuffield ‘O’ Level Biology This scheme is divided into five sections of each year’s duration.
The first two years being grades 7, 8.
It’s a three period teaching of 40 – 45 minutes each per week with a double period for practical exercises.
The students are systematically introduced into biology with the later part requiring increasing depth of thinking at a high levels of Blooms taxonomy.
For each year, there is a students’ text book and teachers’ guide.
In addition to these are 8mm film loops, a set of 8 slides on locust development and 12 slides on pleurococcus and photographs of meiosis and nitosis Materials Available for Nuffield ‘O’ Level Biology  Nuffield Biology: Text 1:Introducing living things  Nuffield Biology: Text 2:Life and living Processes  Nuffield Biology: Text 3:The maintenance of life  Nuffield Biology: Text 4:Living things in action  Nuffield Biology: Text 5:The perpetuation of life  Nuffield Biology Teachers’ Guide 1  Nuffield Biology Teachers’ Guide 2  Nuffield Biology Teachers’ Guide 3  Nuffield Biology Teachers’ Guide 4  Nuffield Biology Teachers’ Guide 5  Nuffield Biology: Keys to small organisms in soils, litter and water troughs.
Activity 17.2:  What is the basic aim of Nuffield ‘O’ Level Science Scheme?
 List the three sets of materials produced for this scheme  Identify two other instructional materials apart from text produced for the scheme in biology Nuffield ‘A’ Level Biology 104The Nuffield ‘A’ Level Biological Science has four units each of 90 periods of 40 minutes of class work each period.
The scheme include:  Maintenance of the organism  Organisms and population  The developing organisms  Control and co-ordination in organism Materials available are Laboratory Guides and Teachers’ Guide Activity 17.3: Highlight the difference between the Nuffield ‘O’ Level and ‘A’ Level Biology.
Nuffield ‘O’ Level Chemistry This scheme is divided into three stages.
The first stage is taught in the first two years.
It is a 40 – 45 minutes lesson as in biology.
The materials available are sample schemes of stages 1, 2 and 3 and are produced in forms of:  Hand-book for Teachers  Introduction and Guide  Laboratory Investigation Sheets  Book of Data Materials Available for ‘O’ Level Chemistry  Nuffield Chemistry: Introduction and Guide  Nuffield Chemistry: The sample scheme stages 1 and 2: The Basic Course  Nuffield Chemistry: The sample scheme stage 3: A course of options  Nuffield Chemistry: Collected Experiments  Nuffield Chemistry: Handbook for Teachers  Nuffield Chemistry Laboratory Investigations Stage 1A, Stage 1B, Stage 2 and Stage 3 options.
 Nuffield Chemistry: Book of Data.
Activity 17.4: List the four forms in which Nuffield ‘O’ Level Chemistry text materials are produced.
Nuffield ‘A’ Level Chemistry 105This scheme treats in details inorganic and organic chemistry and some element of Biochemistry Publications including two Students’ Books’, Experiment Sheets, four programmed texts and the Chemist in action and Teachers’ Guide Nuffield ‘O’ level Physics This emphasis the proper handling of equipment by students in the laboratory and individual work.
It’s a scheme of 5 years duration.
In 1968, the Nuffield ‘A’ Level Science Projects in the separate sciences and physical science came into being.
This scheme is for a two-year-post- ‘O’ level state in grades 12 and 13.
The scheme offers an integrated approach to physical science at the advanced level.
It covers both chemistry and physics.
The course is structured into parts namely:- The Basic Course The General Options The Material Options Students are expected to design and construct a piece of equipment as project.
Materials Available for ‘O’ Level physics  Nuffield Physics: Teachers’ Guide I – V  Nuffield Physics: Test and Examinations  Nuffield Physics: Guide to Apparatus  Nuffield Questions Books I – V  Nuffield Physics Guide to Experiments I – V  Nuffield Physics: Optical Instruments and Ray Diagrams for use with Year III.
Activity 17.5: • What is the duration of Nuffield ‘O’ Level Physics?
• When was the Nuffield ‘A’ Level Physical Science came into being?
• Identify all the Nuffield ‘O’ Level Physics text materials that has direct bearing on students.
Nuffield ‘A’ Level Physics 106This scheme is for two years duration.
It has time allocation of 7 periods of 40 minutes each per week.
The students are expected to study supplementary mathematics Materials available are Teachers’ Guide, Practical Guide and a book called Physics and the Engineer and Students’ Books Units 1 – 8 Activity 17.6: Name the supplementary subject which the Nuffield ‘A’ level physics students are expected to study.
22.4 Science Programme at ages 5 and 13 Project This is science programme designed for pupils of ages of 5 and 13.
The project is sponsored by Schools Council, Nuffield Foundation and Scottish Education Department.
The materials are designed to help students learn by excitement and discovery.
The teachers’ guide is called With Objectives in Mind.
Materials available are Working with Wood, Time, Early Experience, Science from Toys, Structure and forces, Metals, Change, Mini-beasts, Holes, Gaps and Cavities, Trees, Coloured things, Ourselves, Like and Unlike, and Plastics.
This project is developed from an early Nuffield Foundation called Nuffield Junior Science Project (NJSP) which has produced Nuffield Junior Science Teachers’ Guide 1 and 2.
Nuffield Junior Science: Animals and Plants Nuffield Junior Science: Apparatus The Booklets for Teachers are Autumn into Winter, Mammals in Classrooms and Science and History.
All published by Williams Collins.
Activity 17.7: • Mention the sponsors of the science programmed at ages 5 and 13 project • Name the project where science programme at ages 5 and 13 project derive its origin.
10717.5Conclusion In this unit, you have learned the reasons for emergent of schools council Integrated Science Project as well as that of Nuffield ‘O’ & ‘A’ levels science schemes.
The different materials available for both schemes in the sciences.
17.6Summary This unit has discussed the following:  The aim of SCISP is to inculcate in pupils attitudes such as critical thinking and objective observation  Nuffield ‘O’ level science scheme is an attempt to reform school science education  Nuffield ‘A’ level science scheme offer an integrated approach to physical sciences at advance level.
The scheme is for a two-year post ‘O’ level stage in grades 12 and 13.
 Science programme at ages 5 and 13 project is designed to help students learn by excitement and discovery.
17.7Tutor-Marked Assignments  Briefly differentiate between the ‘O’ level science scheme of Britain and Nigeria  Advance reasons to support the return of ‘A’ level (known as Higher School Certificate [HSC]) back into our educational system in Nigeria.
17.8Reference Encyclopedia Britanica, Vol XVI 108UNIT 18 CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN SCIENCE TEACHING/LEARNING I 18.0Introduction This unit discussed some issues that features prominently in science teaching/ learning such as culture and language.
You will learn more on how these issues affect science teaching/learning.
This unit will focus on  Culture and science  Language in science 18.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Differentiate between culture on science  Explain the effect of culture on science teaching/learning  Define scientific language  Discuss how language in science affects science teaching/learning  Explain how science language can be developed  Explain the role of language in science teaching/learning  Discuss how to solve language problems in science 18.2 Culture and Science Culture is the way of life of a people in a Community.
Culture also includes rules and regulations that governs people’s language, beliefs, religion, moral etc.
Education is an aspect of culture.
Science has greatly affected the society and society is part of, represents the values, arts, morals and skills that are prevalent in any society.
Societies exist and mirror the science that goes on in the schools.
Schools are meant to perpetuate culture.
Schools also serve to preserve, transmit and act as instrument of cultural change.
Activity 18.1: How does science shaped the society?
18.3 Effect of Culture on Science Learning Nigerian children possess substantial knowledge about every phenomenon, but their knowledge is confounded by their concepts of the supernatural.
Students depend absolutely on the supernatural to answers questions.
The culture, the child grows up in becomes part of him/her.
Our curriculum 109developers do not recognize the influence of the child’s early experience on school learning.
Prominent Nigerian educators have reported findings in the effect of culture.
Example: Okebukola (1986) found misconceptions of some biological concepts in Nigerian students.
Okebukola attributed such misconceptions to cultural influences.
Bajah (1982) attributed misconceptions to superstitious beliefs.
In a study of superstitious belief, Ogunnuiyi (1982) explored the concept of life, heredity and evolution.
He found that secondary school students believe that phenotype characters are determined largely by the guardian spirits of families, that albinos are products of mating that took place in the hot afternoon sun, that the sickle cell condition occurs in children sent to the world as emissaries of some divinities (e.g.)
Sango, Orisa-oko; Sonpono, Ogun and other god), and that a child born just after the death of a close relative (particularly the grand parent is the reincarnation of the dead relative).
Nigerian children bring such culture into science classroom.
Activity 18.2: • Is science a culture?
Discuss.
What do you understand by “Science Culture”?
18.4 Contextual Learning and Culture The construction of new knowledge (learning) is dependent on the knowledge base available, and both are contextual.
This is in consonance with ideas developed by others (Brown, Collins and Duguid, 1989; Connelly and Clandinin, 1990; Solomon, 1983; Martin and Brouwer, 1991) which stress the situation of nature of cognition.
Within the African context, like in any other context elsewhere, cognition cannot be separated from the socio- cultural environment.
Socio-cultural factors or the eco-culture of a learner’s environment significantly affect achievement in school work (Biesheuval, 1972; Jegede and Okebukola, 1988, 1989; Jegede, 1995a & b).
Glaser (1991) asserts that cognitive activity (in school and outside) is inseparable from its cultural milieu.
This has also been supported by anthropologists like Ogbu (1992), who states that school learning and performance are influenced by complex social, historical, and cultural factors.
Because every society educates the younger generation as a means of passing down the socio-cultural attributes of its people, the socio-cultural factors within non-western societies become a composite part of the environment.
These factors control, to a very large extent, what a child in such an environment learns and what a child becomes in later life (Ogunniyi, 1988a).
110Culture, as the totality of all human effort, subsumes every endeavour we undertake, including science and technology education.
Activity 18.3: Explain briefly how culture of a particular area influence the learner performance in the school.
Science and technology education is a cultural and human enterprise involving the transmission of cultural heritage of a people (Gallagher and Dawson, 1984; Maddock 1981).
Every investigation of human organization ought to, therefore, tackle the socio-cultural issue.
Cosson (1993) also argues that since science is a human activity and a central part of our culture, it is the cultural context of science that should provide our starting point in trying to understand how people learn and how knowledge is structured.
In support of the need for cultural studies in science education, Cobern (1993) opined that it is necessary for educators to understand the ‘fundamental, culturally-based beliefs about the world that students bring to class, and how these beliefs are supported by students’ cultures, because science education is successful only to the extend that science can find a niche in the cognitive and socio-cultural milieu of student.
The same applies to technology education which has attracted justification from the stand point of recognizing the role of indigenous knowledge in school of science and technology education (Swift, 1992).
Activity 23.4: Explain how indigenous technology support the culture Two major occurrences on the science and technology education arena are going to significantly affect teaching, learning and research in these areas for next few decades and beyond.
First is the remarkable shift from the old notion of science as ‘Science’ to the notion of science as a cultural enterprise practiced by humans within a social environment.
This has come a long way from the 17th Century rigid, and positivist based Royal Society posture of viewing science.
The second occurrence which perhaps has a broader effect and has implication for the ‘one world-many cultures’ orientation of the modern society, is the fundamental need to recognize and probe into the alternative framework pupils from different cultures bring into science.
In addition, this view has also been supportive in projecting the need for indigenous technologies (Swift 1992; Loving, 1995) Activity 23.5: Explain how science and technology education could affect your teaching/learning in school.
The realization of the central role of culture in science and technology education especially in the non-western environment where western science is seen as second culture has prompted a proliferation of studies beginning 111from the mid ‘80s’ (Jegede, 1989; 1994, 1995a & b; Jegede and Fraser, 1989, 1990; Jegede and Okebukola, 1989 a & b, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993; Jegede and Agada, 1993; Jegede and Olajide, 1995; Jegede, Fraser and Agada, 1989; Jegede, Fraser and Okebukola, 1994; Okebukola and Jegede, 1990; Ogawa, 1986, 1995a; Ogunniyi, 1987, 1988a & b, Ogunniyi, Jegede, Ogawa and Yandilla, 1995).
These and many other studies in these areas have looked at a number of issues including: factors which affect science learning in non- western cultures, cosmology and science learning, science as a foreign culture, how to deal with the influence of traditional culture in science classroom, and the development of instruments to measure socio-cultural environment in science classrooms, and the development of instruments to measure socio-cultural environment in science classrooms.
A notable outcome of some of the studies is the identification of authoritarianism, goal structure, traditional world view, societal expectation, and sacredness of science as predictors of socio-cultural influences on the learning and teaching of science.
This line of research is gathering momentum in many parts of the world and it is hoped that regions where science is taught within non-Western environments would not, in too distant future begin to understanding the issues and remedy any problems which may have for a long time mitigated the healthy study of school science and technology.
Activity 23.6: Modern Science and Technology is a foreign culture.
Discuss?
18.5 Language in Science Language is the most efficient and the most obvious mode of communication.
Language according to Lindgren (1969) is a normative.
System of symbols or symbolic behaviour that can be use to transmit or evoke shared meanings.
Symbols are abstraction, they are sound signs or gestures that represent events or objects or concept.
Bloom and Lahey (1978) define language as a code whereby ideas about the world are presented through conventional system arbitrary to communication.
Language in science is more formal and vocabulary of scientific writing is so different from the active vocabulary of the ordinary use of language.
Banjo (1983) states that the scientific language is characterize by strange vocabularies from Greek and Latin.
Because of this, language in sciences is problematic, more so because it involves activities like descriptions, correlation, classification and explanations, which generate terms which are technical vocabulary of science (Gardner, 1974).
The words and sentences used in science are usually long, and therefore contributes to language difficulty in reading science materials – science textbooks, journals, magazines.
Hence, students find it difficult to cope.
Again, teachers often communicate with students using vocabularies and patterns too high for pupils cognitive structure.
This could with the higher abstract nature of science helps to widen the communication gap in students.
112Ogunnuyi (1986) agrees with this argument.
He sums up by stating that often the science teacher speaks a language completely alien to the students.
This is because he thinks and speaks on the basis of background experience he himself has acquired.
In cases like this, student see such teacher as people with foreign orientations, with little or no learning taken place.
The language which should have been an essential instrument to convey scientific information and the processes for deriving them becomes a barrier to their understanding in science.
Activity 18.7: Differentiate between scientific language and general language.
18.6 Science Language Development In developing children’s language, Piaget laid emphasis on experience while Vygosky laid emphasis on language which accompanies the experience.
Both Piaget and Vygosky agree that speech affects a child’s power to think.
Sutton (1974) explains the process of language development in children.
He states that when very young children begin to speak, speaking is linked entirely with action.
It occurs only as the child handles or points to tangible objects present.
Later, words provoke visual images, and later they have a symbolic abstracted meaning that can be used in place of objects.
From this point the child becomes familiar with abstracted meaning and can be used in place of objects.
From this point the child becomes increasingly capable of planning his own actions in the future.
He has achieved the first liberation of his thought from the immediate context by this process of letting words stands for objects, Sutton contends.
Sutton goes further to state that it is hypothesized that what the child subsequently learns to do with those words has equally far-reaching effects on his mental abilities.
Activity 18.8: Explain how language development could be link with cognition.
Language bears an intimate relationship of thinking.
This is a process that makes extensive use of linguistic symbols.
The symbols of the language we use enables us to identify and define events that can be thought about and the range of symbols that can be identified by an individual, can be used as a measure of his cognitive ability of intelligence.
Wharf (1969) states that the kind of language used by an individual see the pattern of his thinking and perceiving.
Language consists of symbols.
Symbols are abstractions, that is, they are sounds, signs, concepts, people ideas or whatever.
All cognitive functioning is based on abstractions.
Judging from these facts of language development, 113the duty of the science teacher is first of all to know and understand how language is developed in individuals.
Then they apply a similar idea in developing the scientific language to be used for and by the children.
The teacher should foster children’s confidence in the value of language and their own ability to use it to extend their understanding.
Sutton argues that children’s language develops from the specific to the general, from the personal to the impersonal and from anecdotes to the ability to consider possibilities, formulate hypotheses, reach conclusions and make judgements.
Although the language of science is already developed, the process of learning it, Sutton suggests, must be one of the concern of the science teacher.
Activity 18.9: Stress the importance of the use of symbols in science subjects.
18.7 Role of Language in Science According to Kulkarni 91987) the human mind is endowed with an ability of reactions from natural experience, an essence in an abstraction from natural articulating it in a manner that permits its transmission and manipulation.
It is this faculty Kulkarni argues, that humans to derive deeper meaning from their experiences and to generate new knowledge which natural experiences in their raw form could never reveal.
“When a teacher talks to her class, draws a diagram on the blackboard, discusses a chart on the blackboard, or asks pupils to read a textbook, her intended meaning or that of the textbook author is not automatically transferred to the mind of the pupils.
Each individual in the classroom constructs his or her own meaning from the variety of stimuli, including the specific words read or heard, which are present in the learning environment.
How similar the constructed meaning is so that intended by the teacher – indeed if any meaning is constructed at all it depends on the way a pupils copes with the languages we as teacher use so freely as our main means of instruction.” (Osborne and Freybeng 1985).
Osborne and Freybeng argue that if the teachers’ language includes words unfamiliar to pupils, which are not explained in the pupils language, comprehension of what is being said will not occur.
Not being able to use language makes problem solving most difficult.
According to Kemey (1959) if we had no language by means of which to convey our thought and store information, we would be little different from lower animals.
Language plays a vital role in children’s science learning.
114Science language is a bridge between learner and teacher.
For effective communication in science, there is need for language.
Language in science is a crucial issue in science learning.
Language in science enables the learner to understand and appreciate the concepts of science.
It enables the learner to develop scientific attitude.
Activity 18.10 List 5 roles which language plays in science teaching/learning.
Solving language problem in science It has been said earlier that the issue of language is a critical one in science teaching and learning.
Most teachers often do not admit their language difficulties in science.
Where their understanding of concepts is inadequate teachers often, knowingly or unknowingly revert to the use of technical language whether it is verbalized, written on the board of referenced from the textbook.
Personal experience on surveying teachers on practical teaching has shown that many teachers do not know certain concepts and have obscured this by shutting-students up when they ask.
There are practical solutions to science language problem.
The first and foremost thing a teacher should do is to humanize science by giving practical examples from the environment and everyday life.
Usually words which may be considered simple could have different meanings in different context – hence the need to differentiate from everyday languages.
Another solution could be not to assume that a word is simple.
Students learning by doing is suggested for more meaningfulness in science learning.
This avoids a lot of verbal communication, and reduces misunderstanding.
If on the other hand, students are allowed to discuss freely, most of the language problems could be solved by exposing them.
Students should be made to note errors and be clear about the corrections as well as their own original views.
In all essences, however, to avoid much of language problem, a lot of non-verbal communication materials are use for the purpose of interaction between students and objects in science.
Used graphs, maps and models help a lot.
Student could record correct information through the above.
They state that pupils learns to be able to describe accurately what they observe and they are also able to understand the account given by other students.
Measuring and counting are important contribution to such communication.
Pupils share experience when they find themselves comparing object and events using diagrams; models etc.
Schmidt and Rockcastle give some points why the use of inanimate object is very relevant in enhancing children’s science learning.
Some of these include: 115- they supply a concrete basis for conceptual thinking - they concretize ideas which are abstract - they generate a lot of interest in students - they make learning more permanent because people remember what they see, touch, or smell more than what they are simply told (taking into cognizance the problems of language in science) - they offer realities of experience which stimulate self activity on the past of the pupils.
Schmidt and Rockcastle have however cautioned that care must be taken the way these objects are used as a means “of a better communication models because students perceive things differently and give different interpretation to what they see, touch, or hear, the meaning of what is supposed to be communicate to the students by the objects may be altered, and thereby recording incorrect information that are unscientific.
Where the above are unavoidable, the science language can be made simple e.g.
that are unscientific.
Where the above are unavoidable, the science language can be made simple e.g.
- Pronunciation: The teacher should pronounce well and slowly - Spelling: The teacher should provide correct spelling, written on the board.
This also applies to every new word.
- Group work should be encourage.
It allows children to interact freely and thereby learning from each other.
- A science club is where children learn with freedom - There is no unnecessary tension of examination - New words should be explained and the origin of such words should be given e.g.
photosynthesis, a Greek word meaning photo – (light), synthesis – (forming) photo-graph – (light print).
Pseudopodia, pseudo – (false), podia – (feet) etc.
18.8 Conclusion This unit dealt with how culture and science relates, as well as society misconceptions of some scientific concepts.
It also discusses the development of science language, the role and how to solve problems of language in science.
18.9 Summary This papers has looked at the role of language in the special structure of science that demands a specific language development.
The paper has analyzed communication and language as an aspect of communication.
Finally, it has suggested solution to solving language problems in science.
11618.10 Tutor-Marked Assignments  Briefly explain the roles play by science in shaping our cultural beliefs in Nigeria.
 How would you as a science teacher assist your students to develop sound science language?
18.11 References Abudullahi, A (1982).
Towards a philosophical basics of science teaching in nigeria schools Journal of STAN 15 (1) Brenda, L. Paul, E. B., Paul F. B.
(1971).
Teaching elementary science through Investigation and collogium New York: Harcourt Bace.
Banjo, A.
(1983).
Language of science from linguistic view point A paper presented at the international symposium on the culture implications of science Teaching at ABU, Zaria.
Bloom, L. and Lahey, M. (1978) Language development and language Disorder; Canada; John Wiley & Sons Inc. Cardner, P. (1974).
Language difficulties of science students.
Australian Teachers Journal 20 (1) 17 – 31 Ogunniyi, M. (1986).
Teaching science in nigeria Ibadan: Salem Media (Nig.)
Ltd. Conant, J.
B.
(1954) Harvard case Histories.
In Experience Science Harvard University Press Lindgren, H. C. (1969).
Introduction to social psychology New York: Wiley Inc. Ziman, J.
(1987).
Role of Language in science Education.
In Fensham, p. (Ed).
Development and Dilemmas in science Education.
London: The Falmer press.
Osborne, R. and Freyberg, p. (1985).
Learning in science: The implication of children’s science publishing Inc. Kemany, J. G. (1959).
A philosopher looks at science: New York Litton Educational Publishing Inc. Pace, W. R., Peterson, B. D. Burnett, M. D. (1974).
Techniques for Effective Communication.
Reading: Addison Wesley.
117Semit, V. C., and Rockcastle, F. (1968).
Teaching with everyday Things.
New York; McGraw – Hill Inc. Whorf, b. L. (1958).
Language, though and reality.
In Carrol, J.
B.
(Ed) Cambridge Technology press.
Sutton, C.R.
(1974) Language and communication in science Lessons in Sutton, C. R. and Haysom, J. J.
(Eds).
The Arts of the Science Teacher.
London: McGraw Hill Ltd. 118UNIT 19 CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN SCIENCE TEACHING/LEARNING II 19.0Introduction Science is growing, technology is growing, the world is going scientific and technological.
But the number of people doing science is not increasing, the number is depreciating.
Why is this so?
There are many factors that hinder people from going into science.
In this unit, we will look at attitude and gender as factors that hinder people from going into science.
19.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Define attitude  Explain the effect of attitude on science teaching/learning  Mention some scientific attitudes  Define gender  Explain the effect of gender stereotyping in science  Write down comments and observations on articles read in the journals on studies on gender related issues.
19.2 What is Attitude?
Let us put it simply as the predisposition or tendency of an individual to react specifically towards an object, situation or value.
It is usually accompanied by some feelings and emotions.
You can determine someone’s attitude from his behaviour when someone demonstrates or shows an emotional behaviour towards a situation consistently, the person is said to have an attitude towards that situation.
Attitude could come in form of an approach – and – avoidance response, like – dislike towards something, when you present a situation to an individual, his/her reaction to the situation is his/her attitude, be it positive or negative.
Every individual has values, when he/she expresses this fundamental values, it is said that he/she has a kind of attitude to that situation.
19.3 Attitude and Science Education Activity 19.1: Of what relevance is the study of attitude to science education?
119We said in the introduction of this unit, that the number of people who go into science is not as many as the rate at which science and technology is growing.
Attitude to science education means like or dislike towards science education.
An avoidance response towards science education.
The feelings of disgust, repulsion, comfortable or uncomfortable towards science education.
Some are favourably disposed towards science while some are not.
19.4 Effects of Students Attitude on Science Education Effects of attitude depend on the kinds of attitude.
If it is positive attitude, the effects will be positive but if it is negative attitude, the effects will be negative.
 Negative attitude causes poor performance of students in science learning.
 Negative attitude causes students to lack interest in science  Negative attitude causes students to be disillusioned in learning science  Negative attitude causes students to be truant  Negative attitude causes non-challant behaviour towards science subjects.
Affective characteristics determine learning and account for educational achievement.
 Negative attitude may lead to poor performance in examinations, attitude has a causal link between performance and enrolment in science.
 The nations aspirations for science and technology may not be achieved if the future leaders of the nation have negative attitude towards science.
The future development of the nation is bleak if the citizens have negative attitude towards science which is the sine-qua-non for development.
Fewer and fewer people are going into science.
The few already doing science are doing very poorly in science.
Activity 19.2: What will you suggest as to what can be done to change students negative attitude to science learning in secondary school?
19.5 Attitude Change Attitude change is a change in a person’s predisposition.
What can lead to this change?
If we must change people’s attitude, we must first of all know 120how the attitude came about.
From what is going on around us, science should hold an extrinsic value for everybody, but this is not so.
How did children develop negative attitude towards science?
Let us look at some points.
On asking children that shy away from science these reasons were given:  Science language  Poor background of students  Teachers do not seem to know what they are doing in science teaching.
 Some science teachers have negative attitude towards science, hence they do not teach science with zeal and enthusiasm  Cultural beliefs and approach create negative attitude in students  Peer influence, stories from friends that science is a difficult subject.
We have seen some causes of negative attitude towards science.
To change the attitude of students, the earlier mentioned causes must be dealt with.
We can also give some suggestions as to how attitude can be changed.
Suggestions  Class instructions should be activity based and evaluation should depend on a multiple acceptable solutions.
 Identify content that has some meaning within everyday life of the students  Take into consideration, student’s interests and suggestions of activities  When students are involved in any of learning activity, it boosts their ego.
 Teacher can do something about the mathematical nature of science- figures that scare many students.
 High conceptual level of science should be simplified as much as possible  Science language should be simplified and examples given where necessary  Practical work should be part of science teaching  Feedback should be sought constantly  Teachers should show enthusiasm and zeal in teaching science.
19.6 Attitude change and Science Education Science is learnable.
Many people can not learn science because of the negative attitude they brought to science learning.
Attitudes can be changed when we:  Adopt very stimulating methods used in science teaching, learners begins to appreciate science learning.
121 Make science interesting and relevant to learners.
 Provide materials  Get the learners involved in science learning – learning by doing  Humanise science Activity 19.3: What is your attitude to science?
19.7 Developing Scientific Attitude You have seen some suggestions that can help students to change their attitude.
Scientist have some attributes that one needs to acquire in order to have scientific attitude.
These are:  Curiosity  Logic  Reasoning  Open-mindedness  Objectivity  Patience/Tolerance  Humility  Scepticism  Honesty  Creativity  Critical thinking (Rationality) Activity 19.4: Discuss any 6 of the scientific attitude 19.7 Gender and Science Education Gender in science is the classification of the role of males and females in science, technology and mathematics (STM).
This is the consequence of gender stereotyped which has classified different roles for men and women in the society.
The gender stereotype is responsible for the low representation of women in STM.
Women in science came into lime light during the United Nation Decade for Women (1976 – 1985) which addressed women in development.
The UN activities exposes the low representation of women in science and the challenges confronting women in choosing and performing well in science related fields (Hammrich, 1997 and Hammrich et al, 2000) quoted by Ezeliora (2004).
It is sad to note that the baby girl is exposed to avoid STM from birth.
The societal set up did not give her the opportunity to experience the environment which is pre-requisite to science.
Rather, she was kept in doors to do the house work while her brother is left to move about exploring the environment 122(Alele – Williams, 1983 and Ezeliora, 2003).
She is lately exposed to school, even at that level her curriculum did not emphasize science as to awaking in her the interest and curiosity to seek for science (Ezeliora, 1999).
While in school, parents and teachers never expected her to do more than required by the society nor encouraged her to choose career in STM (Fox, 1976), but her brother is prided to read engineering, medicine, pharmacy etc.
Those girls who braved to science received disapproval for trading in the masculine field.
As a result of all these many girls perceived science as masculine and a no go area for girl (Fox, 1976).
Activity 19.5: As a science teacher, how will you influence more girls participation in STM at secondary school level.
19.8 Studies on Gender Related Issues and Achievement in STM The association between gender and the response to STM education has been widely studied in recent years.
Such studies include Head and Ramsden (1990) and Raimi (1999b).
The main focus of their findings is lack of girls opting to study the physical sciences.
Studies on gender differences in STM achievement, interest and participation are enormous in science education literature.
Inspite of the large number of such studies more investigation are still being undertaken in this area.
This is so because a definite and stable picture in respect of gender differences in STM achievement is yet to emerge.
Rather, what is evident is that there are three conflicting pictures in respect of gender differences in STM achievement.
For instance, some schools of thought feel that gender difference have to do with cognitive abilities (Graybill 1975) while others believe that subject choice and achievement are probably controlled by affective factor (Peter et al, 1994).
Extant literature on the effect of gender differences on STM achievement reveals conflicting findings in this connection.
The first portrays a significant gender effect in favour of males, while the second portrays a significant gender effect in favour of females while the third portrays non-significant gender effect all in relation to the overall achievement in STM education.
Activity 19.6: Look for two reputable science journals (preferably 2004 and 2005) which reported researches on gender and achievement in STM education.
Write out their findings.
Significant gender difference in favour of boys were reported by such researchers as Raimi and Akinyemi (1997).
They observed poor employment and poor performance among females.
They also observes that this has often led to the acute shortage of the number of female that gain access to scientific studies and technological training at the tertiary institutions.
12319.9 How to Increase Women Participation in STM Education It is a known fact that gender socialization and stereotype, more than anything else are responsible for women’s low interest, achievement and attitude to STME.
All hands must be on deck towards redressing the situation such that the formal and informal education of women could be enhanced to facilitate their entry into STME.
So parents, teachers, government and non-governmental organizations and the Nigerian public, all have a role to play in order to achieve this important objective.
Science teachers should for example, seek to eliminate all forms of gender- stereotyped behaviours in the form of verbally expressed or non-verbally expressed expectations, praise, criticisms, reward, interaction level, language and communication whenever they relate with students.
Government should formulate and implement policies that would increase female enrolment in secondary schools since it is at this level that formal education in STM realistically begins.
Agencies could also be established for promoting sex equality in education and employment.
Professional bodies such as Association of Women in Science, Technology and Mathematics (NAWSTEM), Nigerian Academy of Education, Science Teachers’ Association of Nigeria (STAN) and National Mathematical Association can also assist in facilitating greater female participation in STME by organizing workshops, seminars, conferences, talk-shops etc on participation in STM education.
Activity 19.7: Discuss some other ways by which women participation in STME can be further enhanced.
19.10 Conclusion In this unit, you have been introduced to attitude to science as a pre- disposition to science learning which can be negative or positive.
Students attitude to science is dynamic depending on the situation in which the learning is taking place.
The unit also discussed issues on gender and science.
It further explain some problems on female representation in STM as well as how to increase women participation in STME.
19.11Summary In this unit, you learn the following  Meaning of attitude and attitude to science 124 Effects of students attitude to science education  Attitude change to science  Developing scientific attitude  Meaning of gender  Findings on gender and achievement in STM.
 How to increase women participation in STME 19.12Tutor-Marked Assignment  Discuss how you will enhance students positive attitude to the learning of STME.
19.13References Alele – Williams, G. (1983).
Science, technology and mathematics education for all including women and girls of Africa.
Keynote address at the Common Wealth Africa Regional Workshop on Gender Stereotyping in STM education.
London.
Ezeliora, B.
(2003) Perception of science among Nigerian School Leavers Unpublished articule for GASAT, South Africa.
Odubunmi, E. O.
& Balogun, T. A.
(1985) The attitude of some Nigerian Students towards Integrated Science.
JORIC, 3(1) Raimi, S. M. & Akinyemi, S. A.
(1997) Socio-Economic Background and Pupils’ gender as determinants of performance in primary science Issues on science and Health of the Nigerian Child, 27 – 35.
125UNIT 20 CURRENT ISSUES IN SCIENC EDUCATION IN NIGERIA I 20.0Introduction This unit examined some of the recurring current issues known to have impact on science education in Nigeria.
This will enable you as science educator to know how to monitor the progress and development of science education in Nigeria.
This unit will focus on  Science Curriculum Development and the National Policy on Education (NPE)  The Science Curricula and the problems of Implementation 20.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  State the general objectives of primary science as contained in National Policy on Education (NPE)  Itemize what the integrating principles of integrated science at Junior Secondary School are intended to produce  Discuss some of the criticism of science curricula according to Irowi (1982)  Discuss factors essential for proper implementation of science curricula  Discuss the problems of implementation of both primary and secondary science curricula.
20.2Science Curriculum Development and the National Policy on Education In line with the NPE and the 6 – 3- 3 – 4 education system, there has evolved a core curriculum for primary school science produced by the Federal Ministry of education.
The unifying general objectives as contained in the core curriculum for primary science are, to  Observe and explore the environment  Develop basic science processes including observing, manipulating, classifying, communicating, inferring, hypothesizing, interpreting data formulating models.
 Develop functional knowledge of science concepts and principles  Explain simple natural phenomena.
126 Develop scientific attitude including curiosity, critical reflection and objectivity  Apply the skill and knowledge gained through science to solving everyday problem in his environment  Develop self confidence and self reliance through problem solving activities in science  Develop a functional awareness of and sensitivity to the orderliness and beauty in nature (F.M.E, 1998) Integrated science was recommended for Junior Secondary School level.
The essence of which is to introduce scientific concepts to students at early level of their secondary education.
Hence, the integrating principles are intended to produce a course which:  Is relevant to student needs and experience  Stresses the fundamental unity of science  Lays adequate foundation for subsequent specialist study and  Adds a cultural dimension to science education.
The scientific concepts and principles are presented in such a way that the students  Gain the concepts of the fundamental unit of science  Gain the commanlity of approach to problems of a scientific nature  Are helped to gain an understanding of the role and function of science in everyday life, and the world in which they live.
Activity 20.1: • List the processes of science • State some of the scientific attitude you as a science teacher expect your student to acquire • What is the essence of introducing integrated science to the junior secondary school level?
The science curricula in Biology, Chemistry, Physics , Agricultural science, Health Science and Mathematics like the curricula for other subjects can be said to be a product of a multiple agency approach to curriculum development.
This was because they were jointly developed by the STAN, CESAC, WAEC, the State Ministries of Education and the Nigerian Universities.
The curricula have, however, come under criticism by experts in the field of science education.
Odunsi (1978) observed that there was a growing gap between what students learn at schools and what they are required to cope 127with in technological oriented society in which they live.
Ivowi (1982) reported that the curriculum objectives are over ambitious.
Consequently, they have been found difficult to achieve in reality in all the subjects.
He further observed that the content is overloaded and practical work are not available in most schools.
Equally observed was that, most science teachers do not adopt the prescribed instructional techniques in implementing the programme.
Activity 20.2: Name seven science curricula agencies in Nigeria.
By now, some teachers have come to realize that the context, content and level of treatment of the topics in the teaching syllabi are quite different when compared with the estwhile General Certificate Examination (GCE) Ordinary Level (Adeyegbe, 1993).
Some curricula analysts have infact come to the conclusion that the syllabi have 25% of Advanced Level topics injected into them.
The framework of the science curricula has been built on student’s acquisition of knowledge and understanding of,  Scientific phenomena  Scientific vocabulary, terminologies and conventions  Scientific and mathematical instruments and safety aspects  Scientific and technological applications with their sociological, economic and environmental implications.
It is widely believed that the contents of the curricula share a lot in common with the present syllabi now being examined by most examination bodies in the United Kingdom.
The implementation of the science curricula is predicated on  High calibre of cognitive; talented students from the JSS level  Availability of academically competent, professionally sound and enduringly committed teachers  Provision of moderately equipped laboratories and libraries  Reasonable teacher-pupil ratio and  Well trained laboratory technicians Activity 20.3: Enumerate what you will consider as the prior knowledge of your Senior Secondary School One (SSS 1) student in science subjects 20.3The Science Curricula and the Problems of Implementation The content of the primary school science curriculum has been modified in line with the societal changes over the years.
But the salient fact is that the development of science was brought about as a result of external influence.
128Particularly that of United States of America.
Bajah (1982) refers to this as “conceptual imposition”.
Adesoji (1994) was of the view that, “the language of western education including the knowledge provided by western science is different from that of the Nigerians and Africans in general”.
Okeke and Inomiesa (1986) argued that for science to be well related to the pupils environment, pupils should be made to observe and explore such environment, otherwise, the study of science will be abstract and thus becomes difficult for pupils.
In order to bring science closer to pupils in Nigeria, the first step is by introducing its teaching in the indigenous languages.
This is necessary in view of the fact that many of our primary school students have shallow background in the use of English, which is currently the medium of instruction.
Ironically, primary school teachers at times, resort to interpreting whatever they teach in English in indigenous languages such as Yoruba, Igbo and Hausa.
Activity 20.4: Briefly explain what is meant by conceptual imposition in the context of science curriculum.
Fafunwa (1982) is of the opinion that the products of primary schools are neither proficient in English nor in their mother tongue.
He further states that no other nation in the world, except most of the ex-colonies or those countries still under colonial rule, prepare their children for adult undertakings in languages foreign to them.
The curriculum should therefore be based on local languages and locally available materials in order to make its implementation by the teachers an easy one.
The problem of integrated science range from misinterpretation of the concept of “integration” to the problem of implementation.
If the aim of integrated science is to produce students who will be scientifically literate in terms of the unity of science then, the subject boundaries should be fully broken and the curriculum should be based on the concepts, which would then be explained from the knowledge of the different areas of science.
Some of the textbooks of integrated science focus attention on different topics according to the different areas of science.
This should not be the right approach.
From the studies of researchers including those of Olanrewaju (1982) and Okebukola and Adeniji (1982), the major constraints in the implementation of integrated science curriculum are those of material resources and the quality and quantity of teachers of the subjects.
The additional advanced level topics in the senior secondary science curricula are not only difficult for students but also difficult to some of the teachers.
Adeyegbe (1993) writes that, “some research studies have indicated the inability of some teachers to teach genetics in biology, chemical calculations in chemistry, nuclear physics in physic” etc 129Activity 20.5: List five constraints in the implementation of Integrated Science curriculum in Nigeria.
20.4Conclusion In this unit, you have been introduced to some of current issues in science education namely science curriculum development and NPE as well as the problems of implementation of the science curricula.
In the next unit, you will be exposed to some other important issues that have impact on science education.
20.5Summary In this unit, you learn that:  The NPE laid emphasizes on science curriculum development right from primary school level to tertiary level.
 The NPE recommended the teaching of Integrated science in Junior Secondary level  The curricula on other science subjects were jointly developed by STAN, CESAC, WAEC etc.
 Some problems encountered during implementation of science curricula are language, misinterpretation of concept of integration, difficulties of advanced level topic added to the senior secondary curricula which are difficult for both the students and the teachers.
20.6Tutor-Marked Assignment As a science teacher, discuss what you will recommend as a permanent solution to the problems you encountered in implementation of senior secondary science curricula in Nigeria.
20.7References Adeyegbe, S. O.
(1993) The senior secondary school science curricula and Candidates performance: An Appraisal of the first cycle of operation.
JSTAN, 28(2), 3 – 12.
Bajah, S. T. (1982) Two decade of Primary science in Nigeria.
A critical evaluation: 23rd Annual Conference Proceedings of the STAN, 19 - 25 130UNIT 21 CURRENT ISSUES ON SCIENCE EDUCATION IN NIGERIA II 21.0Introduction This unit is a continuation of Unit 20 in terms of discussion on current issues in science education.
But in this unit, you will be exposed to the following:  The learner and the science curricula implementation  The learners performance in the sciences 21.1 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss the involvement of learners in science curricula implementation  List five elements that determine students’ rates of learning  Discuss the causes of underachievement and low enrolment in science subjects in Nigeria  Mention some of the factors proposed by science educators as a way out of the poor achievement in science subjects 21.2The Learner and the Science Curricula Implementation The curriculum is externally imposed on the learner and its implementation is the function of the teacher who makes use of “appropriate” method.
The fact of the situation is that no amount of direction and teaching can force a child to learn.
Learning is a function of the child.
If a child wants to learn he does so.
According to an American Psychologist, Jerome Brunner who is a leading proponent of social constructivism, children do not invent or discover how to adapt their thinking and act intelligently in new situations by themselves.
These processes are developed by negotiation and interacting with more mature peers and teachers.
A learner will have to process information before permanent learning or changes in behaviour can occur.
Cognitive processes are those that liberate the organisms’ behaviour from the immediate dictates of the environment.
The disparity in the ways we process information is brought about by individual differences.
For a learner to be proficient in problem solving (characteristics of all aspects of science), he has to be able to process information in a diverse form.
Activity 21.1: What do you understand by curriculum implementation?
131The situation in our schools today as to the way instructions are planned does not appreciate differences in the way students learn.
Schemes of work are planned in such a way that topics are arranged on weekly basis.
The planner does not realize that some students would master the material quickly and easily, but others would progress only slowly and incompletely.
In some cases, teachers would need to provide extra instruction and practice opportunities to slower students.
Caroll (1963) argued that differences in mastery levels were produced not by inherent differences in learning potentials but by differences in the time needed to learn (some students may take longer to master the material, but they will master it if given enough time).
Degree of learning = time actually spent time needed This model implies that all students can master the curriculum if given enough time to do so.
Caroll suggested that five elements determine students’ rates of learning.
These are, aptitude, ability to understand instruction, task perseverance (student engaged time on the task), opportunity to learn (allocated instructional time) and quality of instruction.
Activity 21.2: Briefly explain how you will handle the slow learners when teaching any of the science subjects in your school.
21.3The Learners Performance in the Sciences Research literature reported that students in Nigeria do not perform well in the sciences (Ogunleye, 1985; Okpala and Onocha, 1995 and Adeoye, 2000).
The problem of underachievement and low enrolment in sciences are not limited to Nigeria.
The same problems have been reported particularly in physics and chemistry by scholars (Crawley & Black, 1990; Albanese and Mitchell, 1993).
The question we may want to ask is, ‘why our students are performing woefully in the sciences’?
The following factors are recognised through empirical researches  Lack of motivation from examination results (Nwagwu, 1981)  Lack of qualified science personnel and equipment (Abdullahi, 1982)  Teacher related factors such as poor teaching methods (Bakare, 1986)  Learner related factors such as misconception of some scientific concepts (Marek, 1986)  Home factors such as, negative attitude of parents (Dunmoye, 1989)  Adverse effect of foreign language as a medium of instruction (Babalola, 1991)  Frequent closure of schools (Ideye, 1992) 132 School environment factors such as undesirable classroom environment (Jegede, 1992); in appropriate medium of instruction (STAN, 1992), overloaded curriculum (Adeyegbe, 1993) and admission of unqualified students (Igwe, 1994)  Lack of training and retraining of personnel (Ivowi, 1993)  Poor classroom management (Pwol, 1993) According to Raimi (2002), despite the fact that the present science curricula recommended the teaching and acquisition of science process skills, most secondary school teachers often pay little attention to practical work.
He further reported that from personal observation, when practical lessons are held by teachers, they are usually held too close to the final examination period, especially SSCE.
Activity 21.3: List the factors which you consider are responsible for learners underachievement in science subjects.
In order to bail our students out of the poor achievement in science, new methods of instruction have been advocated.
These include cooperative learning (Bolaji, 2002), process approach (Raimi, 2002), problem solving technique (Adesoji, 1991), framing and team-assisted instruction (Igwe, 2002), peer tutoring and explicit teaching (Ajila, 2002) and many others.
Other learner characteristics such as ability and gender have also been investigated and found to affect the learning of science.
The interest in gender may be as a result of the concept of egalitarianism in the National Policy on Education.
Beside, gender equity in the learning of science is now the order of the day.
But it is of interest to note that few females are still found in science and technology (Iroegbu, 1998).
We may then ask ourselves, is this due to lack of interest in science or that, girls find it difficult to process information?
At present, the number of females who proceed beyond secondary school level is less than 30%.
Activity 21.4: What in your own opinion do you think can be done to enhance the presence of more female in the learning of sciences?
Of this few, the number who pursue career or studies in science or mathematics related courses are extremely low (Oyedeji, 1996).
Effect of gender on students’ learning outcome in mathematics and sciences is still a major point or debate among educators.
This is due to the conflicting nature of results from researches.
For instance, Okpala and Onocha (1988); Raimi and Akinyemi (1997) have found significant gender group differences (in favour of boys).
Studies such as that of Iroegbu (1998) did not establish such differences.
But, Adeoye (2000) which found significant gender group differences reported that female achieved better than male when test items are 133based on science concepts that require learners of medium numerical ability while the reverse was the case when the test was based on concepts that require high numerical ability.
Activity 21.5: When do you think the female students canout perform their male counterparts in the sciences?
21.4Conclusion In this unit, you have been introduced to how science teachers implement science curricula in school differently with some taking into cognizance the nature of the learners and some equating the learners as same.
It also discuss the learners performance in science with emphasizes on some research findings.
21.5Summary In this unit, you learn about how to enhance the implementation of science curricula and performance of our students in the sciences.
21.6Tutor-Marked Assignment  Discuss the problems which implementation of science curricula may face in a country that relies on importation of science and technology.
21.7References Adesoji, F. A (1991).
A comparative analysis of problem solving and self- learning techniques in teaching electrolysis.
Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife.
Adeyegbe, S. O.
(1993) The senior secondary school science curricula and Candidates Performance: An Appraisal of the first cycle of operation.
JSTAN, 28(2), 3 – 12.
Carroll, J.
(1963).
A model of school learning.
Teachers College Record, 64, 722 – 733.
Raimi, S.M.
(2002).
Problem solving technique and laboratory skills as supplements to laboratory teaching in senior secondary school students’ learning of volumetric analysis.
Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Ibadan.
134
