 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: INR 142 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION COURSE GUIDE INR 142 INR 142 Introduction to Public Administration Course Team Emmanuel .A.
Shom (Developer/Writer) -UM Sylvester Iorliam PhD.
(Editor) - BSU Terhemba Ambe – Uva (Coordinator)-NOUN .
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii COURSE GUIDE INR 142 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………………..
Course Aims………………………………………………..
Course Objectives…………………………………………..
Working through the Course……………………………….
Course Materials…………………………………………... Study Units………………………………………………… Textbooks and References………………………………… Assessment………………………………………………… Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………………… Final Examination and Grading…………………………… Course Marking Scheme…………………………………..
Course Overview/Presentation…………………………….. What you will learn in this Course ………………………… What you will need in this Course………………………….
Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….. Conclusion………………………………………………… Summary…………………………………………………... iiiCOURSE GUIDE INR 142 Introduction Welcome to INR 142: Introduction to Public Administration!
This is a two credit unit course available for students in the undergraduate International Relations at the two hundred level.
The course provides an opportunity for students to acquire a detailed knowledge and understanding of theory and practice of public administration.
Administration is a word that has a variety of meanings.
To administer means to combine efforts and perform a piece of work that cannot be performed by one person for the attainment of defined objectives.
In looking at public administration, the public administrators have engaged in, we have both the theory and practical aspects.
Students who have gone through this course would be able to apply different approaches in public administration to the implementation of public policies.
Students would also be expected to know the mainstream literature in public administration and their discussion, and be able to apply approaches to case studies.
An interesting concern of the course is to introduce students to the distinction between public administration and private administration.
While both of them provide services, public administration has multiple goals to achieve and private administration has only one goal, which is profit making.
This course guide provides you with the necessary information about the contents of the course and the materials you will need to be familiar with for a proper understanding of the subject matter.
It is designed to help you to get the best of the course by enabling you to think productively about the principles underlying the issues you study and the projects you execute in the course of your study and thereafter.
It also provides some guidance on the way to approach your tutor-marked assignments (TMA).
You will of course receive on-the-spot guidance from your tutorial classes, which you are advised to approach with all seriousness.
Overall, this module will fill an important vacuum in the study of Public Administration, especially as it is interested in knowing how the machinery of administration works, how policies are formulated and implemented and how the bureaucracy works.
Students will acquire an understanding of and the skills to overcome the problems of policy implementation and bureaucratic bottlenecks.
They will also be able to apply administrative approaches to real world events at all levels of government.
4 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Course Aims The course aims of this course are to: (i) Explicate the concept of public administration (ii) Present an overview of approaches in to the study of public administration (iii) Distinguish between public and private administrations (iv) Understand the distinction between public administration and politics.
(v) Apply different approaches in public administration at various levels of government.
Course Objectives At the end of this course, you should be able to: (i) Define administration in general and public administration in particular (ii) Differentiate between classical and behavioural approaches (iii) Identify and explain various approaches in administrative inquiry (iv) Describe various theories in public administration (v) Apply public administration approaches to real administration in public sectors (vi) Identify and discuss types of policies (vii) Elucidate the major distinctions in dominant approaches in public administration Working through the Course I would advise you to carefully study each unit, beginning with this study guide, especially since this course provides an opportunity for you to understand the major approaches in public administration.
Also make a habit of noting down any question you have for tutorials.
In addition, please try your hand at formulating or identifying theories relevant to, and that can be applied to administrative inquiry.
Course Materials 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment file 5 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 5.
Presentation schedule.
Study Units There are three modules in this course, and each module made up of four units.
Overall therefore, you will find a total of twelve units in this course.
Some units may be longer and/or more in depth than others, depending on the scope of the course that is in focus.
The three modules in the course are as follows: Module 1 Public Administration: An Introduction Unit 1 Definitions of Public Administration Unit 2 General Introduction to the Studies of Public Administration Unit 3 Importance of Public Administration Unit 4 Scope of Public Administration Module 2 Basic practices of Public administration Unit 1 Functioning in Public Administration Unit 2 Methods of inquiry in Public Administration Unit 3 Civil Service Unit 4 Development Administration Module 3 Issues in Public Administration Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Public Administration Unit 2 Public issues in Administration Unit 3 Practical issues in our society in Nigeria Unit 4 Practical issues in the world Each module is preceded with a listing of the units contained in it, and a table of contents, an introduction, a list of objectives and the main content in turn precedes each unit, including Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs).
At the end of each unit, you will find one or more Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are expected to work on and submit for marking.
6 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Textbooks and References At the end of each unit, you will find a list of relevant reference materials which you may yourself wish to consult as the need arises, even though I have made efforts to provide you with the most important information you need to pass this course.
However, I would encourage you, as a second year student to cultivate the habit of consulting as many relevant materials as you are able to within the time available to you.
In particular, make sure you consult whatever material you are advised to consult before attempting any exercise.
Assessment Two types of assessment are involved in the course: the Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs), and the Tutor-Marked Assessment (TMA) questions.
Your answers to the SAEs are not meant to be submitted, but they are also important since they give you an opportunity to assess your own understanding of course content.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA) on the other hand are to be carefully answered and kept in your assignment file for submission and marking.
This will count for 30% of your total score in the course.
Tutor Marked Assignment At the end of every unit, you will find a Tutor-Marked Assignment which you should answer as instructed and put in your assignment file for submission.
However, this Course Guide does not contain any Tutor- Marked Assignment question.
The Tutor-Marked Assignment questions are provided from Unit 1 of Module 1 to Unit 4 of Module 3.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for INR 222 will take two hours and carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination questions will reflect the SAEs and TMAs that you have already worked on.
I advise you to spend the time between your completion of the last unit and the examination revising the 7 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 entire course.
You will certainly find it helpful to also review both your SAEs and TMAs before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The following table sets out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Four assignments (the best four of Four assignments, each marked out all the assignments submitted for of 10%, but highest scoring three marking).
selected, thus totalling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score.
Total 100% of course score.
Course Overview Presentation Scheme Week Assignment Units Title of Work Activity (End-of-Unit) Course Guide Module 1 Public Administration: An Introduction Unit 1 Definitions of Public Administration Week 1 Assignment General Introduction to the Studies of Public Unit 2 Week 1 Assignment Administration Unit 3 Importance of Public Administration Week 2 Assignment TMA 1 to be Unit 4 Scope of Public Administration Week 3 submitted Module 2 Basic practices of Public administration Unit 1 Functioning in Public Administration Week 3 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Methods of inquiry in public Administration Week 4 Assignment 1 Unit 3 Civil Service Week 4 Assignment 1 TMA 2 to be Unit 4 Development Administration Week 5 submitted 8 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Week Assignment Units Title of Work Activity (End-of-Unit) Module 3 Issues in Public Administration Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Public Administration Week 6 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Public issues in Administration Week 7 Assignment 1 Unit 3 Practical issues in our society in Nigeria Week 8 Assignment 1 TMA 3 to be Unit 4 Practical issues in the world Week 9 submitted Revision Week 10 Examination Week 11 Total 11Weeks What You Will Learn In the Course Introduction to public administration provides you with the opportunity to gain a mastery and an in -depth understanding of approaches in Public Administration.
The first module provides you with in-depth understanding of the concept of public administration, scope and importance of the concept.
The second module will provide you with an understanding of basic practices of administration.
The remaining Module will also introduce you basic contemporary issues in public administration both within Nigeria and the rest of the world.
What You Will Need for the Course You may need to purchase one or two texts recommended as important for your mastery of the course content.
You need quality time in a study-friendly environment every week.
If you are computer-literate (which ideally you should be), you should be prepared to visit recommended websites.
You should also cultivate the habit of visiting reputable physical libraries accessible to you.
Tutors and Tutorials There are fifteen (15) hours of tutorials provided in support of the course.
You will be notified of the dates and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor as soon as you are allocated 9 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, and keep a close watch on your progress.
Be sure to send in your tutor- marked assignments promptly, and feel free to contact your tutor in case of any difficulty with your self-assessment exercise, tutor-marked assignment or the grading of an assignment.
In any case, I advise you to attend the tutorials regularly and punctually.
Always take a list of such prepared questions to the tutorials and participate actively in the discussions.
Conclusion In conclusion, all the features of this course guide have been designed to facilitate your learning in order that you achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
They include the aims and objectives, course summary, course overview, Self Assessment Exercises and study questions.
You should ensure that you make maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
Summary INR 142: Introduction to Public Administration provides a theoretical foundation upon which you will develop mastery in public administration.
It is aimed at equipping you with analytical skills for the understanding of theoretical approaches in public administration.
Administration is a word that has a variety of meanings.
To administer means to combine efforts to perform a task for the achievement of a defined goal.
Upon completing this course you should be able to explain the various approaches employed in public administration, including their weaknesses and strengths.
You will also be able to apply these approaches to real life administrative phenomena.
This course assumes your prior level of understanding.
I wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful!
10 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Course Code: INR 142 Course Title: Introduction to Public Administration Course Developer: Emmanuel Aondoaver Shom Department of Political Science University of Mkar, Mkar Course Writer Emmanuel Aondoaver Shom Department of Political Science University of Mkar, Mkar Gboko Course Editor Sylvester Iorliam PhD Benue State University, Makurdi Course Coordinator Terhemba Ambe-Uva National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 11 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Vitoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e – mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2011 12 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 TABLE OF CONTENT Module 1 Public Administration: An Introduction Unit 1 Definitions of Public Administration Unit 2 General Introduction to the Studies of Public Administration Unit 3 Importance of Public Administration Unit 4 Scope of Public Administration Module 2 Basic Practices of Public Administration Unit 1 Functions Performed by Public Administration Unit 2 Methods of inquiry in Public Administration Unit 3 Civil Service Unit 4 Development Administration Module 3 Issues in Public Administration Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Public Administration Unit 2 Public issues in Administration Unit 3 Practical issues in our society, Nigeria Unit 4 Practical issues in the world 13 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 MODULE 1 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION: AN INTRODUCTION Unit 1 Definitions of Public Administration Unit 2 General Introduction to the Studies of Public Administration Unit 3 Importance of Public Administration Unit 4 Scope of Public Administration 14 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Administration 3.2 Basic Administrative Principles 3.3 Administrative Theories 3.4 Definitions of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration may be considered both as a field of action and a field of study.
As a field of action, public administration refers to the mechanics and structures through which government policies are implemented.
As a field of study or a discipline, public administration refers to the academic discipline which studies the mechanics and structures through which government implements its programs.
This later sense, as a field of study, may also be referred to as a principle or a philosophy.
The specific issues that will be examined in this unit include the definition of administration, administrative principles, administrative theories, and public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is expected that by the end of this unit, students should endeavor to: 15 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Define and discuss the history of Administration h Explain administrative principles h Discuss administrative theories h Define and list basic elements in public administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Administration Administration is a universal concept and is also of universal importance.
According to Simon (1950), it is said to commence immediately two people agree to co-operate to undertake a task, for instance, to move a stone which none of them can move alone.
Also Nwosu (1985:3), noted that Administration is inevitable in any given situation where a piece of work has to be done, and this piece of work requires the effort of more than one person to accomplish it.
We are involved in administrative behavior when we co-operate with other people to accomplish such objectives as erecting a community town hall, constructing and managing schools, churches, hospitals, vehicles, assembly plants.
Thus, Onuoha (1999) explains further that administration exists whenever people cooperate to achieve the goals of their groups, and such achievements require planning, organization, command, cooperation and control.
It involves the mobilization, deployment and direction of human and material resources to attain the specified objectives.
When viewed from this perspective, certainly administration is rightly considered a very old and global phenomenon, which exists, even in the most basic human group.
We may therefore define administration as a capacity to coordinate and execute many and often conflicting social demands in a single organism so perfectly that they should all operate as a unit (Fayol, 1949).
Increasingly, those definitions and explanations, among 16 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 others, point to the fact that administration is both public and private.
Administration has a long history which dates back to the beginning of the history of mankind, with research revealing administrative tasks and practices since recorded history.
Researches carried out by archaeologists and translators have revealed that going back to the time of ancient Egyptian dynasties, the ancient Chinese Empire, the ancient Greek city – states and Roman Empire, there is abundant evidence of impressive analysis with contemporary administrative tasks, merely by way of illustration, also the early Christian Church also played a remarkable role in the emergence of administrative practices.
A Chinese administrative expert writing in 500 BC remarked that: Whoever pursues a business in this world must have a system.
A business which has attained success without a system does not exist.
From Ministers and Generals down to the hundreds of craftsmen, every one of them has a system.
Now, if we govern the empire or a large state without a system, we are not even less intelligent than a common craft man (Adebayo, 2004).
In our modern societies, various groups of people from all walks of life are woven together in a complicated process to achieve the objectives of the organization.
In both public and private establishments, large numbers of employees have to be supervised, coordinated and controlled.
Thousands of workers have to be brought together and distributed for work among the various departments of which the various organizations are composed.
Workers are graded in different levels of authority, from directors and managers at the top to messengers and laborers at the bottom.
Everyone has to be assigned his specific function and the contribution of each must be towards the objectives of the whole.
17 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 What is Administration?
Discuss the history of administration.
3.2 Basic characteristic of administration Administrative practice is based on some known characteristics namely: Hierarchy: Organization form a chain of superiors ranging from the highest ranking to the lowest – ranking manager Unity of command: Employees receive orders from one superior Chain of command: organizations are divided into various but functional sections, units, departments etc.
Span of Control: Employees are given authority and responsibility that commensurate with their offices, which should not be more or less.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.2 Explain four basic principles of administration 3.3 Administrative Theories Administrative theories are postulated to establish how resources of organizations can best be managed.
Administrative approaches are broadly divided into Administrative Management, Scientific Management, Bureaucratic Management and Human Relations.
Administrative Management This theory was first formulated by Henry Fayol, and later Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick.
The theory concentrates on attempts to 18 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 develop principles of administration which can be applied everywhere.
According to them, any administrative principle once developed, should logically work in any kind of administrative institution.
Gulick and Urwick gave the discipline of public administration, the acronym POSDCORD which means planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
According to Gulick and Urwick, POSDCORD constitutes the key duties and functions of any administrator in an organization.
The acronym is criticized of having over –simplified the work of an administrator.
On their own part, still under Administrative Management theory, James D. Mooney and Allan C. Reilay formulated the four principles of organization which are: the coordinative principle; the scalar principle (hierarchical structure); functional principle (division of labour); and the staff/line principle (Onuaha, 1999).
Scientific Management This theory was propounded by Frederick Taylor.
The key tenet of scientific management is that human beings are adjunct to the machine, thus the workers should be made as efficient as the machine they operated in order to achieve optimum productivity and efficiency.
But human beings as adjunct of the machine can only be applied to the lower echelon of the organization.
The weakness of the technique lies in the fact that human beings are not machine, and do not become activated like machines.
Workers are human beings with values which require that they be differently treated in an organization.
Bureaucratic Management Bureaucratic theory was one of the earliest theories of organization.
It was formulated by Max Weber, who is fondly referred to as the father of bureaucracy and bureaucratic theory.
According to Weber, bureaucracy is hierarchical, and promotion based on professional 19 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 merit and skill.
Bureaucracy is characterized by career service, which relies on and adopts rules and regulations for its operations.
The career professionals are guided by impersonal relationship among them, and between them and their clientele.
Weber is interested in learning how bureaucracy functions, why it functions the way it does, and its possible effect on the whole society.
Max Weber’s thesis is that to understand organization one needs to understand the procedures and activities of the bureaucracy, since bureaucracy gives meaning to organization.
Human Relations Human relations theory is another method of studying organizations.
The theory is reputed as being a reaction against person as machine concept of the scientific management school.
The human relations theory of organization examines the informal work group at the assembly, that is, the line level.
It tries to find out what makes these groups of workers work or refuse to work.
The theory tries to establish what relationship exists between motivation and job satisfaction, and how these affect efficiency and productivity in the organization.
The formulation of the theory began with the efforts of Elton Mayo in 1927.
The study focused on relationship between workers and managers, and among workers themselves.
The development of the theory continued with the efforts of Abraham H. Maslow, in what is today known as Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs.
Maslow perceived human desire to be based first on psychological needs which provide the foundation for the next greatest need, which is security.
These are followed by love or belonginess, self esteem, and finally self actualization.
According to him, all these human needs collectively determine productivity in any organization.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 Discuss four different approaches to the study of Administration 20 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.4 Definition of Public Administration Having understood the concept of administration, its characteristics, and theories, it can be noted that when the concept of administration is qualified with the word ‘public’ it simply means the practice of administration in a particular segment of the society, that of the public sector.
Public administration is therefore governmental administration and operates in the particular sphere of government.
It is the machinery for implementing government policy.
Public administration is concerned with the study of how a country’s administration is organized and how it functions.
Since it is the machinery for implementing government policy, it follows that its study must lead to the study of the most efficient ways of organizing the executive branch of government, its institutions and its procedures.
Public administration is the machinery, as well as the integral processes through which the government performs its functions.
It is a network of human relationships and associated activities extending from the government to the lowest paid and powerless individual charged with keeping in daily touch with all resources, natural and human, and all other aspects of the life of the society with which the government is concerned.
It is a system of roles and role relationships that defines in as clear and practicable terms as possible and in as much details as possible the intentions and programmes of government; the means available internally and externally to accomplish them; and finally, it is a system that causes these intentions and programs to be realized in real life.
It is a pattern of routinized activities, involving decision – making, planning, advising, coordination, negotiation, conciliation, arbitration, command and data gathering, through which the government carries out its responsibilities (Nnoli, 2003).
The significant elements in these definitions are: 21 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 1.
Cooperative group effort in public setting 2.
It involves all the branches of government 3.
There must be defined goals and objectives 4.
There should be public policy 5.
It distinguishes public administration from the private administration Self Assessment Exercise 3.4 Define and list the basic elements of Public Administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have explained that public administration is a governmental administration or machinery for implementing public policy.
Some basic texts of renowned authorities are used as sources for the exercise.
These sources coupled with ideas of cerebrated administrative theorists have made our discussions much clearer.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with the meaning and theories of public administration by looking at the following aspects; definition, principles, theories, and structure of public administration.
We learned that public administration is the machinery as well as the internal process through which the government performs its functions.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What is public administration?
22 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 2.
List and explain the major limitations of three of the theories of Administration.
3.
State and explain two ways through which public Administration is organized.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Simon, H. Smithburg, D. and Thompson, V (1950) Public Administration.
In Adebayo, A.
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley.
Nwosu, H.N.
(1983) “The Universality of Administration” In, Nwosu, H. N (ed.)
Problems of Nigerian Government, Enugu: Fourth Dimension Onuaha, B.
(1999) “Public Administration: Basic Principles, Techniques and Process.
In Adebayo, Augustus (ed.)
Elements of Politics, Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited.
Fayol, H. (1984) Industrial and General Administration quoted in Adebayo, A.
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Adebayo, (2004) Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Nnoli, O.
(2003) Introduction to Politics Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research on Peace and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) 23 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 2 GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDIES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The History of Public Administration 3.2 Public and Private Administration: Their differences 3.3 Public and Private Administration: Their similarities 3.4 Qualities of a Public Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration is a broad discipline that covers a variety of issues which touches on maximizing the use of scarce resources to satisfy human needs.
The various issues that will be examined in this unit include; introduce to you the studies of public administration; the history of public administration; the distinction between public administration and private administration, similarities between public and private administrations, and qualities of a public administrator.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit students are required to: h Discuss the history of public administration h State the differences between private and public administration 24 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Mention the similarities between private and public administration h List the qualities of a public administrator 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The History of Public Administration Public administration is not a creation of modern times.
It has its roots in history and dates back to the times of the ancient civilizations.
It is on record that: h Dating back to 462 B. C. Pericles, a renowned leader in ancient Greece, introduced a scheme for the compensation of officials, thus facilitating the continued participation in public administration by citizens who had to work daily for their living (Bury, n d).
h The ancient Chinese Empire during the Han Dynasty, 202 BC, recognized the need to have a permanent body of officials to implement government decisions.
h Again about the year 120BC, the Chinese Prime Minister, Kung – sun Hung, in a memorandum addressed to the throne, observed that the edicts and laws which were written in elegant classical style were often not understood by the officers whose duty it was to explain and interpret them to the people.
He therefore recommended that examinations be held for the selection of men and that those who had shown the best knowledge should have the first preference in appointments to office requiring the use of the written language.
His recommendation was adopted and marked the beginning of the civil service examination.
h It is also of interest to note that in AD 219 the ancient Chinese had worked out a system of classifying men into 25 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 nine grades according to their ability, knowledge, experience, and character.
This system was called Chung Cheng, that is, Impartial Judge, a forerunner of our present day civil service commission (Shih, 1941) Self Assessment Exercise 3.1 Discuss the history of public administration in the world 3.2 Differences between Public and Private Administrations In order to clearly discuss and understand the subject matter of public administration and the basic issues involved in it, it is important to identify the differences between public administration and business or private administration.
Thus public and private administrations differ concretely in a number of respects.
1.
The goals that both are expected to serve are different.
Since their activities are guided by the nature of these goals the nature and organizational framework of these activities are bound to differ.
Clearly the maximization of profit is the overriding goals of private administration.
All efforts must be channeled in this direction, and all obstacles to its accomplishment must be removed.
The situation is quite different with public administration in which the goal, in concrete terms, is not as clear – cut and single minded.
Profit, social welfare, national prestige and political advantage are all to be accomplished simultaneously.
The public administrator must integrate them with a lot less emphasis going to the profit motive than in private administration.
As a result of this mixing of goals the public administrator must be more cautious and take less risk than his private counterpart.
He must be more diplomatic and less single – minded than the private administrator.
He must conciliate more, negotiate more and consult more than in private administration before arriving at a decision.
26 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 2.
Related to this difference in goals is the difference in the assessment of the performance of these two administrations.
In much of the work of public administration, it is difficult, if not impossible, to quantify the output or evaluate precisely the activities of the administrators.
For example, it is difficult to quantify the performance of those engaged in diplomatic activities, and the implementation of educational and health service programs.
The situation is quite different with private administration.
Here all inputs and outputs are evaluated in monetary terms, particularly their relationship to the profit or loss of the enterprise.
This inability to compare performance lies at the heart of the incomparability of public and private administrations.
3.
There is also a difference between the two types of administrations with respect to the span of activities with which they deal.
The activity of the private enterprise is one of a narrow focus, of the concentration of attention and resources on one line of activity.
Such activities are usually economic in character, and concern only one specialized or specific aspect of economic life.
Public administration concerns itself with at once social, economic, cultural and political activities.
The resultant diffuseness of attention adversely affects not only the time that can be devoted to an in – depth examination of the various aspects of the implementation of public programs, it also hampers a clear definition of the programs themselves.
4.
Unlike administrators in private administration, civil servants are accountable to the public for every aspect of their official activities.
They are subjected by the public to a detailed scrutiny of their use of resources and the nature of performance of their jobs.
They face scrutiny by the press, legislature, taxpayers, the traditional surveillance of the courts, and by interest groups and political parties.
Although private administrators are influenced 27 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 by their public contacts, are subject to government regulations and maintain a vast public relations activity, their activities are still in general private in character.
Their internal operations are to a large extent their own business, closed to the public gaze.
The demands for public consultation and participation in the activities of public administration are growing all the time due to the increase in the number of pressure groups and agencies that demand attention and the right to be consulted.
All these demands impose constraints on the public administrator in terms of his/her originality, initiative and use of discretion in the exercise of his/her judgment.
They also slow down the process of public administration because of the time involved in these consultations.
Caution becomes an important value.
Risk taking is banished.
And flexibility or adaptability is difficult to attain.
5.
Both administrations differ in their structure of decision – making.
In private administration the ultimate decision – making group is very small, limited to the board of directors of the enterprise.
In addition, members of this group have a direct personal and concrete stake in the output of the business.
Thus, the smallness of size enables decisions to be directed strictly to the output, and for a result – oriented decision to be emphasized.
The ultimate decision – making group in the public administration, the cabinet, is much larger than in the private sector.
It is, therefore, more unwieldy as a machinery for quick action.
Furthermore, its members are not personal owners of the public enterprise and, therefore, can be more easily distracted from the objectives of their decision – process.
6.
The structure for the implementation of decisions in public administration is much more decentralized than in private administration.
It consists of the various ministries of the civil service.
Therefore, much more than in private administration efficiency and effectiveness of the civil service depends to a 28 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 greater extent on the effectiveness of the mechanism for coordinating the activities of these decentralized units.
This need for coordination is much less compelling in private administration where centralization prevails.
Thus, in public administration, the lateral organization of activities around functions is an important aspect of the overall structure of the system.
In private administration this lateral organization is absent.
All these functions are performed within one and the same structure.
This centralized arrangement encourages unity of command, greater flexibility in the allocation of resources and faster adaptation to changing conditions.
7.
In public administration, officials are employed until retirement, are promoted largely by seniority, and remunerated at standards rates within fixed pay scales and promotion grades.
Such conditions of service sometimes do not bear much relationship to performance since no matter how inefficient the official turns out to be he is already in a particular grade and can hang on until retirement.
In other words, he enjoys job security.
By contrast, in private administration an official can be relieved of his job anytime his performance is deemed inadequate.
The salary and fringe benefits are usually high but job security is absent.
The consequence of this difference is that the private administrator is under greater pressure to keep his job than the civil servant.
He is, therefore, likely to be more highly motivated than the latter.
Thus, public administration is much slower and more inefficient than private administration because of its poor work habits and ethics.
8.
The hiring and firing of workers in private administration is swift and merciless.
In public administration, it is slow and humane.
Consequently, private administration can move faster in the organization of its activities than public administration.
It can quickly add or drop staff, as it deems necessary to achieve its 29 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 objectives.
Public administration does not enjoy this kind of flexibility.
9.
Discipline is much harsher in private than in public administration.
This is essentially because the private sector thrives on the exploitation of man by man.
Profit takes precedence over human values.
Although the conditions of work are usually better than in the public they are much more exploitative, considering what the worker produces in relation to what he gets as wages and social security.
Thus, the public administrator is under much less pressure from the enterprise than his private counterpart.
He/she is, therefore, more relaxed with his/her work, and more likely to develop a positive non – mercenary attitude to his/her work.
Public service cultivates feelings of patriotism that are vital for the overall success of the society.
The public servant develops a sense of participation in the history of his people in a very direct way.
This positive attitude is an asset to public administration that is denied to private administration (Nnoli, 2003) Self Assessment Exercise 3.2 State the differences between public and private administrations 3.3 Public and Private Administration: Their similarities Public and private administrations have the same essence.
There are therefore, similar in fundamental terms.
1.
They are both designed to help those who wish to implement their programs but are too few to do so.
For public administration government is helped, whereas in private administration the owners of the enterprise, the board of directors, receive the aid.
30 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Both administrations are guided by the goals that their employers seek to achieve.
2.
In their performance of their tasks both are hierarchically organized and operate with clearly spelt out procedures regarding command, obedience, promotions, discipline and work ethics.
3.
Both administrations perform similar functions of data gathering, provision of advice on alternative policy options, recruitment of personnel, resource management, the advertizing of their activities, interest articulation and aggregation, and the negotiation, conciliation, arbitration and settlement of disputes.
4.
They are both a similar form of organization of men in the performance of these tasks and functions (Nnoli, 2003).
Self Assessment Exercise 3.3 Mention the similarities between public and private administrations 3.4 Qualities of a Public Administrator A good administrator must possess the following qualities: 1.
Tact: He must be tactful in dealing with his political bosses.
The President or Governor, Minister or Commissioner, as the case may be.
An administrator must be efficient and brilliant and yet there may be clamor for him to be moved somewhere else on the grounds that he usually puts up the backs of those working with him.
When dealing with political bosses and members of the public, a top administrator should avoid being arrogant, pompous, or pedantic.
This is equally important in minuting, in submission in the file, in correspondence, and in discussion.
31 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 2.
Modesty: Administrators have a duty to brief their bosses, both when they are alone together and when they are in the public at some meeting or conference.
Such briefing, especially the ones carried out in public, should be done as unobtrusively as possible.
3.
Sense of Judgment: Another quality most essential in an administrator is a fine sense of judgment.
Every moment of the day an administrator is engaged on assignments which require evaluation, weighing of evidence, assessing degrees of urgency on various public issues, and assessing the mood and temper of those sections of the public which are clients of the department, and which the department has to consult or take into consideration before arriving at decisions and formulating policies.
4.
Foresight: The Administrator should be able to forecast based on his knowledge and experience, the probable consequences of measures proposed for policy.
He should, in addition, be able to think of likely developments that may arise over the next year or two.
From his knowledge and accumulated experience, he should have the skill to deduce likely developments, given a set of factors and circumstances.
5.
Ability to Delegate: Another essential quality necessary in an administrator is the ability to delegate work to his subordinates.
It is a mark of poor administration for a top administrator to seek to handle by himself all the essential assignments in the department.
In the process, he will create a bottleneck which will cause endless delays, and he will ruin his own health.
Self Assessment Exercise 3.4 List the qualities of a public administrator 32 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 4.0 CONCLUSION We have given a general introduction to the study of public administration where key issues in the discipline are discussed.
The understanding of these key issues will equip you to undertake further analysis of critical areas of administrative issues.
We sourced our materials from reputable works of experienced administrators and renowned scholars.
5.0 SUMMARY Here, we have discussed key issues in public administration with emphasis on the following; the History of Public Administration, differences between public and private administration, their similarities, and qualities of a public administrator.
Even though public and private administrations are comparatively different, yet, they share some commonalities.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
How did public administration emerge?
2.
What are the qualities of a public administrator?
Discuss three of them.
3.
Discuss three differences and similarities of Public Administration and private administration.
7.0 REFERENCES Bury, J.
B.
(n.d), A History of Greece, New York: Random House, Inc., Modern Library Edition Shih, H. (1941), Historical Foundations for a Democratic China, 33 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Edmund J. James Lectures on Government 2nd series, Illinois: University of Illinois Press Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) Adebayo, (2004), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Weber, M. (1946), Essays in Sociology (Translated by H. H. Gerth and C. W. Mills, New York: Oxford University Press Weber, M. (1947), The Theory of Social and Economic Organization (Translated by A. M. Henderson and T. Parsons, New York: Oxford University Press, 34 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 3 IMPORTANCE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Absorbing the work of governments.
3.2 Meeting the challenges of Government activities 3.3 Implementing government decisions 3.4 Detaching political activities from administrative work 3.5 Negotiation, Conciliation, and Arbitration 3.6 Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration is a distinct field of administration, which is very important for the success of any government.
This peculiarity arises out of the fact that public administration is an action part of government, the means by which the purposes and goals of government are realized.
Specific issues to be covered here are: absorption of the work of government, meeting the challenges of government activities, implementation of government decisions, detaching of political activities from administrative work, negotiation, conciliation and arbitration and communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is intended that by the end of this unit, you should be able to: h Explain how public administration absorbs the bulk of work of government that covers various aspects of the society’ life.
35 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Discuss the role of public administration in meeting the challenges of continuous growth in size and complexity of Government activities h State how administration implement government decisions h Describe how public administration detaches political activities from administrative work h Explain how public administration negotiate, conciliate and arbitrate conflicting interests in the society.
h Mention the importance of communication in public administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Absorbing the work of governments One of the identified importance of Public Administration is its ability to absorb the work of governments.
There is noticeable increase in the activities of government all over the world.
They deal with: 1.
Foreign governments at the same time as they must oversee internal and external trade.
2.
The industrial and agricultural growth of the country; this involves embarking on measures that will create a conducive environment for both foreign and local investors 3.
The health of the population by establishing specialists and general hospitals as well as clinics for tertiary, secondary and primary health care delivery and maintenance of facilities therein 4.
Educational development through setting up of primary, secondary, and tertiary as well as Universities across the nation, most significant is also the servicing of these institutions.
5.
Provision of power: governments across the world have a demanding task of power generation which is the life wire of all the economic and social activities 36 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 6.
Defense: the task of ensuring both internal and external security remains one of the topmost activities of government, security challenges have increased over the years 7.
Management of finance: aware of the vast needs of the public and the lean resources always at the disposal of governments, governments have the responsibilities of employing effective measures for management of state resources 8.
Encouragement of development in science and technology: governments embark on measures aimed at encouraging scientific and technological innovations 9.
Promotion of sporting activities: Various sporting activities are encouraged by the government to keep her citizens healthy and entertain the populace (Nnoli, 2003) It is not possible for a few ministers, chief executive and his political advisers, the legislator and the judges and magistrates who make up the three arms of government to be able to do all these.
Even if they have the competence, they do not have enough time and energy to take care of all these activities within the time necessary to satisfy the population.
They need the additional hands found in the civil service or public administration.
Self Assessment Exercise 3.1 Explain five areas in which public administration assists in running the government?
3.2 Meeting the challenges of Government activities Government activities have not only grown in size, they have also grown in complexity.
And such a complexity demands different kinds of expertise for various activities.
Therefore, even if individuals in government have the time and energy to carry out all their functions they will not have among themselves alone the necessary expertise to go round their specialized activities.
Thus, 37 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 they need the variety of experts found in the public administration such as: h Teachers for managing educational institutions and impacting knowledge into students and pupil in such institutions h Doctors whose responsibilities are to save lives through preventive and curative measures using the equipments in the hospitals and clinics established by the government h Industrialists for sustaining the industries established h Accountants, whose task is to keep proper records of financial dealings of governments in addition to working out strategies of generating revenue for financing the activities of government h Engineers that invent, operate and maintain equipments and machines procured to serve various purposes in all departments of government h Soldiers whose responsibility is to maintain both internal and external security etc.
Members of government do not know everything; and they do not necessarily know more than everybody in their own area of expertise.
They need the help of experts and better minds.
Self Assessment Exercise 3.2 Discuss five key areas through which public administration help in meeting up with the challenges of continuous growth in size and complexity of government activities?
3.3 Implementation of government decisions So many processes are involved in the making and implementation of government decisions that apart from the problem of high level 38 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 expertise there is the problem of an intricate division of labour that must be solved.
1.
There is the need for a clerk to file the letters, 2.
Others to gather information, 3.
Still others to ensure that the conditions of work are agreeable to the civil servants, 4.
Some to post letters, keep documents, write memoranda, gather statistics, negotiate with individuals and groups, and so on and so forth.
It is not efficient for one individual to perform many of these functions at the same time.
Experience has shown that more is produced or achieved under conditions of a division of labor than under conditions where no such division of labor exists.
Therefore, the demands of increased productivity, performance or achievement require a complex division of labor in which many more people are involved than those in government.
Self Assessment Exercise 3.3 State the ways through which division of labor can lead to increase in productivity in public administration?
3.4 Detaching political activities from administrative work Those in government are usually politicians who have proved themselves as experts in the manipulation of political forces.
1.
Yet they have constantly to respond to political pressures in their effort to remain in power.
2.
To fend off the challenges of political rivals.
3.
Reward political friends.
4.
Form new alliances and consolidate existing ones.
39 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Under these conditions they need to be assisted by others who will emphasize the management of natural and other non – political resources, and ensure that the government’s management of the political resources does not severely damage the management of these other resources.
Public administration enables the government to manage its non – political resources and activities, an area in which the politician is in any case less technically qualified, leaving him/her free to attend to his/her expert profession of political manipulation and intrigue, and to be rest assured that his/her socio – economic programs that are often crucial for his political survival will not suffer.
Self Assessment Exercise 3.4 Describe how public administration detaches political activities from administrative functions.
3.5 Negotiation, Conciliation, and Arbitration For a government to protect persons and property against violence, to collect taxes, and control traffic and health hazards, it must make regulations.
In order to settle disputes between parties, it must conciliate and negotiate.
In order to arrive at a just decision when faced with conflicting demands from opposing interests and functions in the community, a government must be continually engaged in balancing.
This balancing involves consultations, negotiation, and compromise.
Then, of course, there is the equally important obligation on the part of a government to provide services.
From the foregoing, one can see certain uses and process from the bedrock of the responsibilities of a government.
These include regulating, conciliating, balancing, compromise, service – providing.
Regulatory functions involve the making of rules and regulations 40 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 and the issuing of policy directives.
For the rational and effective performance of these roles there must be prior planning, and gathering of information and data.
It will also be necessary to hold consultations with representatives of sectional groups and to reconcile conflicting interests and points of view.
All these tasks rest on public administration.
It is after these essential preliminaries have been carried out that rules and regulations, and directives are issued by government.
Self Assessment Exercise 3.5 Explain the importance of public administration in resolving the conflicting interest of groups and individuals in a nation.
3.6 Communication In public service, administrative officials perform a considerable portion of their task through communication which could either be in oral or in written forms.
One of the hallmarks of an administrator is to develop the habit of communication by discussion – telephone discussion, meetings and conferences, interviews with members of the public and clients of the department.
A good deal is achieved through face – to – face discussion.
In spite of the obvious advantages of oral communication and personal contact, it is inevitable that senior officials have to communicate frequently through the written word.
They have to write minutes in files, prepare memoranda and draft speeches for their chief executives – the President, Governor, Ministers, State Commissioners, and Chairmen of statutory bodies and agencies.
h Minutes are views, opinions, advice, information, or directives expressed in writing during the course of day – to – day work in the office.
They are usually enclosed in paper jackets known as files.
Each file bears a reference number by 41 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 which it is easily identified.
For the purpose of tidy arrangement and easy reference, each file is devoted to a single specific subject.
h The decision to prepare the memorandum in a department may originate directly from the Minister/ Commissioners who are the political heads of departments or the permanent secretary.
A matter may have been subject of consideration in the department and on which the Minister and his officials have exchanged minutes in the file, each one expressing his own views as a result of the data and information assembled on the issue.
Matters may reach a stage at which the Minister is convinced that it is necessary to consult, inform or seek approval of the Executive Council.
At this stage, the Minister will direct his permanent secretary to prepare a memo.
Alternatively, the process may be the reverse.
The Permanent Secretary and his subordinates may have been examining a particular issue through the exchange of minutes in the file.
A point may be reached at which an important issue of policy calls for determination and as he may prepare a memo.
h Public officials in the civil service, in the universities, local government service, statutory corporations, etc.
very often have to write speeches for their chief executives.
The chief executive may be the President of the nation, the Governor of a state, the Vice Chancellor of a University, a Minister of State, a State Commissioner or the Chairman of a statutory corporation or any governmental agency.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.6 Mention the procedures through which senior officials communicate through written communication in an organization.
42 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 4.0 CONCLUSION It has been ascertained that public administration is the hub through which social, political and economic development takes place within a state.
Indications are apt that through professionalism, administrative duties lean more towards national interest than individual interest.
Textbooks are the main source for the exercise; ideas from various scholars have been employed.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the importance of public administration.
An important role of public administration is sustaining government’s work.
Some of the areas highlighted in this unit include; meeting the challenges of continuous growth in size and complexity of government activities; implementation of government decisions; negotiation, conciliation and arbitration; and detaching political activities from administrative work.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Explain how public administration supports government activities.
2.
Discuss the ways through which public administration meet the challenges of continuous growth in size and complexity of governments activities 3.
Describe the procedure through which public administration detach political activities from administrative duties.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) 43 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 4 SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organization 3.2 Efficiency 3.3 Politics and Administration Dichotomy 3.4 Interdisciplinary 3.5 The Environment of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration has evolved over time, it has played a key role in the organization of the structures of government and its usefulness to other disciplines cannot be overemphasized.
This unit attempts to identify the critical areas that are the concern of public administration.
These include; organization of countries’ structure of government, promotion of efficiency in the running of the various structures of government, public administration and politics, the interdisciplinary nature, and its environment.
2.0 Objectives At the successful completion of this unit, you are expected to: h Describe the organization of nations administrative systems 44 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Discuss the concept of efficiency with respect to public administration h State the dichotomy between Politics and Administration h Examine Public Administration as an interdisciplinary field of study h Describe the Environment of Public Administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organization The study of public administration grew out of awareness that the machinery of government especially the executive branch, its institutions and its procedures has to be organized in the most efficient way.
Thus, in the study of public administration, policy and administration go hand in hand.
(cid:1) Policy is concerned with decisions as to what to do; (cid:1) It lays down the broad objectives of what is to be done.
(cid:1) It is concerned with the most efficient way of implementing policy decided by the policy makers (cid:1) At the same time administration is also concerned with serving and assisting the policy – making process.
(cid:1) Policy is concerned with ends while administration is concerned with means.
But very often means do influence ends.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Describe the organization of public administration 3.2 Efficiency It is sometimes assumed that public administration is mere conveyor belt which mechanically executes the instructions passed to it by the policy – makers.
This view may have been likely more especially in 45 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 the early days when the tasks of government were few and the machinery required was simple.
As late as the mid – nineteenth century, Andrew Jackson, President of the United States, asserted that the tasks of government were sufficiently simple that any person of intelligence could perform them without preparation or training.
Even in modern times when the responsibility of government for social and economic development has assumed great magnitude and demands exacting standards of efficiency, the impression still persists that the functions of public administration are not to be taken too seriously.
This erroneous impression is particularly true of countries like Nigeria which, for the most part of their political existence, had been under foreign guidance, the generality of the public regarded work in the public service as hard work in the service of foreign overlords.
Public administration therefore grew out of awareness that the machinery of government was inadequate and sometimes totally unsuitable to perform the functions of modernizing government.
Notable among the policy makers who were quick to notice the deficiencies in the government administration of their day and to urge the need to improve the system was Woodrow Wilson.
In 1887, when he was the Professor of Political Science at Yale in the USA, he stressed the importance of studying the administrative institutions of government.
Woodrow Wilson stressed that the task of public administration was to: 1.
Strengthen the paths of government 2.
Make its business less un – business – like 3.
Strengthen and purify its organization 4.
To crown its duties with dutifulness Since Wilson’s time, many writers on public administration, first in the USA and in recent times in Britain and Europe, have sought to 46 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 emphasize the importance of the concept of efficiency in the functions and processes of governmental administration (Adebayo, 2004).
Self - Assessment Exercise 3.2 Discuss the various levels of efficiency in public administration 3.3 Politics and Administration Dichotomy The relationship between politics and administration is often viewed from two perspectives.
1.
As being dichotomous 2.
Both areas are not clearly distinct but interconnected.
Perhaps the most notable exponent of the dichotomy thesis was Woodrow Wilson.
In an article written in 1887, he argued that; the policy of government … will have no taint of officialdom about it.
It will not be the creation of permanent officials but of statesmen whose responsibility to public opinion will be direct and inevitable (Anifowose and Enemuo, 1999).
According to Leonard White, whose book is reputed to be the first devoted entirely to public administration, the general thrust of the field of public administration maintains that: h Politics should not intrude on administration; h Management lends itself to scientific study; h Public administration is capable of becoming a value free science in its own right; h The mission of administration is economy and efficiency However, there are other scholars who hold the opposite viewpoint and have argued that there is no rigid distinction between politics and administration.
One of the exponents of this position, Paul Appleby has remarked that, public administration is policy making – 47 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 public administration is one of the numbers of basic political processes by which people achieve and control government (Appleby, n d).
Since the beginning of the debate, some scholars have gone on to suggest that public administration is more part of management science than political science.
Those scholars present strong theoretical reasons for choosing management with emphasis on organization theory as the paradigm of public administration.
Examples of scholars who advanced this viewpoint are K. M. Henderson, J.G Marchand, and Herbert Simon, and J. D. Thomson.
The entire trend of thought contained in the debate has been well presented by one author who categorized the viewpoints into four competing paradigms which began about 1900.
According to the author, the shifts began from about 1900 with the first phase of school of thought ending at about 1926, during which date the dichotomy between politics and administration was upheld.
The second paradigm 1927 – 1937 was the high noon of orthodoxy and prestige of public administration which was marked by the thoughts of Henri Fayol and Frederick Taylor.
This was the high point of the administrative management school.
The debate at this time insisted on the existence of certain scientific principle of administration which could be discovered, and administrators would be experts in their work if they learnt how to apply those principles.
It was at this stage that PODCORB was introduced and popularized (Nicholas, 1986).
This period was followed closely by a third school of thought which produced scholars like Herbert Simon, Robert Dahl and Dwight Waldo.
These scholars argued that it was not feasible to develop a universal principle of administration; there should be a more human process of decision – making (Nicholas, 1986).
The third school of thought coincided with the behavioral period in political science, 1950 – 1970, when public administration focused 48 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 on what became comparative and development administration.
Another name for this approach was cross – cultural public administration.
According to Fred Riggs, one of the prominent authors at the time, the aim of comparative administration was to use that field to strengthen public administration theory (Nicholas, 1986).
Close to the same period as comparative public administration, another paradigm evolved, 1956 – 1970, which shifted attention towards management science or administrative science.
This approach of looking at public administration offered techniques, at times highly sophisticated, requiring expertise and specialization.
At this time it was argued that instead of being part of political science, public administration should remain in the area of management science.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 State the dichotomy between politics and administration 3.4 Interdisciplinary From public administration as management, the discipline moved to what may be considered the present state of the discipline – the new public administration – 1970 to the present which emphasized that public administration should be studied along with science and society.
The new public administration reflects the new interest in the relationship between knowledge and power, bureaucracy and democracy, technology and management and technology and bureaucracy.
Also the period is witnessing interdisciplinary programmes in science, technology and public policy.
Emphasis has shifted away from the traditional concern for efficiency, effectiveness, budgeting and administrative techniques to a new public administration much aware of normative theory, philosophy and activism; thus the new questions it raises are on ethics, the 49 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 development of the individual members in the organization, the relation of the client with the bureaucracy, and the broad problem of urban growth, technology and violence (Nicholas, 1986) In sum therefore, political science and management are the major influences on the present stage of development of public administration.
The present stage pays extra attention to areas of organization theory and information science, emphasizing areas like the state, local government, executive management, administrative law, and all those questions which seek to explain what the public interest is in democracy and under a highly bureaucratic set up that is confronted by high technology.
Accordingly, core areas of the present state of the study are: (a) Environment of public administration (ecology) (b) Quantitative methods, public budgeting and financial management; (c) Personnel administration (d) Public policy environment Self – Assessment Exercise Examine the interdisciplinary posture of public administration 3.5 The Environment of Public Administration Public administration exists in a peculiar socio – economic and political environment that affects its behavior and performance 1.
It operates in an intense and pervasive political atmosphere.
This is natural since public administration is part and parcel of the political process.
Although politicians in government tend to absorb much of the political pressures on government, enough still filters through to the public administration to significantly affect its work.
For example, public administrators cannot take account of only the technical and professional factors in their work.
They must integrate 50 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 them with political considerations that are often unpredictable on a day – to – day basis.
Political considerations may cause an industrial project to be embarked upon against all technical and professional wisdom.
Yet, at the same time the government expects the administrator to use resources judiciously and to apply professional expertise in the solution of national problems.
2.
There is a widespread expectation of benefits from public administration at little or no cost to the citizen.
This is particularly the case in the ex – colonial countries of Africa and Asia where there is a strong heritage of government involvement in many welfare functions.
A consequence of this great expectation is that the populace is not eager to calculate or make allowances for the cost of providing these amenities.
Thus, public administrators must walk the tight rope of satisfying these popular demands with little or no resources at their disposal.
3.
The resources needed by public administration are so diffuse and dispersed that there is a serious problem of coordination.
The spatial division of labour in the system is designed to help out but it creates its own problems of coordination.
4.
Associated with this diffuseness of resources is the diffuseness of roles necessary for public administration.
Unlike a private economic enterprise where there is a single minded focus on one project, the objectives of even the ministries cannot be precisely defined and, therefore, neither can the roles necessary to accomplish them be precisely defined.
5.
Public administration takes place in the full glare of the public eye.
It is in a sense everyone’s business, and what is more, some people outside the civil service take this business seriously.
They are ever ready to proffer suggestions on how to perform better, to call for more action, to criticize and identify weaknesses and failures, and to 51 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 make political capital out of such failures.
Thus public administrators are under constant public pressure; their attention is divided; and they are distracted.
Under such conditions efficiency suffers.
But this is a necessary sacrifice for the values of freedom and democracy.
It is unthinkable that public administration should be a secret affair of the civil servants (Nnoli, 2003).
Self Assessment Exercise 3.5 Describe the environment of public administration 4.0 CONCLUSION Attention has been drawn on the scope of public administration where diverse areas have been identified with the concept.
Different views of seasoned administrators and academics in the area have been explored; this provides the major source of information for our discussion on the subject matter.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed in this unit, the organization of public administration, public administration and efficiency, politics and administration dichotomy, the interdisciplinary posture of public administration and the environment of public administration.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 How would you explain the relationship between policy and administration in your study of public administration?
2.
Why is public administration considered as an interdisciplinary field of study?
3 How would you describe the environment of public administration?
52 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, A.
(1984), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Appleby, P. (1949) Policy and Administration, Alabama: University of Alabama Press Nicholas, H. L. (1986), Public Administration and Public Affairs 3rd ed., New Jersey: Prentice – Hall Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) 53 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 MODULE 2 BASIC PRACTICES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1 Functions Performed by Public Administration Unit 2 Methods of Inquiry in Public Administration Unit 3 Civil Service Unit 4 Development Administration 54 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 1 FUNCTIONS PERFORMED BY PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sustaining the incumbent government in power 3.2 Provision of Employment 3.3 Identification and Management of Resources 3.4 Provision of social welfare services to the populace 3.5 Conducting Foreign Affairs 3.6 Negotiation, Conciliation, and Arbitration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration performs a variety of functions which complement the activities of the various branches of government.
This unit therefore will discuss the various functions performed by public administration.
Among the roles highlighted in unit are (a) sustaining incumbent governments in power (b) provision of employment (c) identification and management of resources (d) provision of social welfare services to the populace (e) conducting foreign affairs, and negotiation, conciliation and arbitration of conflicting interest in the state.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the successful completion of this unit, you will be able to: h Describe how public administration sustains the incumbent government in power h Explain how public administration provides employment opportunities 55 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h State the position of public administration in the identification and management of state resources h List the responsibilities of public administration in the provision of social welfare services to the populace h Mention how public administration conduct foreign affairs h Discuss the role of public administration in negotiating, conciliating, and arbitrating the conflicting interest in the society.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sustaining the incumbent government in power The most fundamental and important function of public administration is to maintain the incumbent government in power.
This involves certain measures: h Generating goodwill for the government from the majority of the population h Maintaining the ruling class in control of state power.
These primary and fundamental functions guide all other functions.
They include: h Advising the government on how best to implement programs: On the bases of its long tradition and experiences in handling resources and its store of data on every aspect of life of a society, public administration is in a very good position to advise the government on possible alternative courses of actions and their implications for the government and society.
h Public administration also performs the function of informing the public at large about government programs and 56 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 what progress is being made to realize them.
The goal here is to avoid any conflict between the people and the government arising from the people’s ignorance of what the government is doing, as well as to help generate support and goodwill for the government.
The ministry of information usually performs this function.
A complementary function of public administration is that of informing the government about the attitudes of the people, including various groups in the society, towards government policies and programs.
Such information is often necessary to enable the government to order or reorder its priorities.
The various field agencies of government ministries and departments often provide it.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Describe how public administration sustains an incumbent government in power 3.2 Provision of employment An important function of public administration is the provision of employment for the population.
This function can be quite crucial in the ex – colonial societies of Asia and Africa where the government is often the largest employer of labor.
Most, if not all, of those thus employed work within the public administration.
Such employment opportunities include: h National and Regional Ministries like education, health, science and technology, finance, information, sports, defense, external affairs, interior, agriculture, industry etc.
h Public enterprises, such as agro – allied industries, petrochemical companies, power generating companies, transport companies, mining industries, communication companies, etc.
57 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Government agencies which include financial regulatory agencies, import and export promotion bodies, anti graft, agencies, human rights bodies etc.
h Educational and health institutions at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels h Local government departments etc.
In this way the civil service is a source of the means of livelihood, in the form of wages and salaries, for thousands, if not millions, of the population.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.2 Explain the ways through which public administration provides employment opportunities.
3.3 Identification and Management of Resources Another function of public administration is that of identifying all the resources available to the government from within its territory, and managing these resources adequately.
It is the government’s bureaucracy that is responsible for conducting or supervising surveys to assess the existence of: (cid:1) Various minerals within the country (cid:1) The unused agricultural potential of the nation (cid:1) Resource endowment with respect to the organization of industrial enterprises (cid:1) The availability of the various categories of labor force and (cid:1) The various resources that can be procured from external sources, as well as the prices for their procurement.
58 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 The government bureaucracy not only identifies all these resources, it also organizes the most profitable and useful way of bringing them into productive activity to the benefit of the ruling class in particular and the population in general.
Such resource management has as its goal the task of ensuring that government programs are tailored to the resources available to the government, and to eliminate all waste in harnessing these resources to the relevant government programs.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 State three areas where public administration can identify and effectively manage the resources of the state 3.4 Provision of social welfare services to the populace Public administration is also very crucial in the organization and provision of social welfare services to the population.
h It is responsible in many countries for ensuring constant and adequate supply of water, electricity, health care and educational facilities.
h It is responsible for public works such as urban and other road constructions.
h The dredging of rivers, the building of port facilities, irrigation facilities, the organization of famine relief when necessary.
h sanitation, drainage facilities, the control of erosion and other natural disasters.
h the payment of pension and other labor benefits 59 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h In some countries it organizes the provision of housing, day care facilities for pre – school children and public transportation.
In this way public administration influences directly the standard of living and the life style of the people.
Other functions include h The planning of the nation’s economic life in both the short term and the long term, h Taking care of the finances of the society, especially the balance – of – payment function or the foreign exchange task.
h It must gather and store all possible information on every aspect of national life and preserve important documents for future use and scrutiny.
h The practical details and the equitable and fair use of the instrument of justice, as well as law and order, are also the responsibility of public administration.
Public administration must ensure that the courts function smoothly and are not overloaded, that the prisons are not congested or run inhumanly, and that the law enforcement agencies do not act arbitrarily.
h In addition, the civil service must co ordinate all the multifarious activities of its various departments and agencies to ensure that they are not working at cross – purposes.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.4 List five welfare services that can be provided by public administration to the general public.
3.5 Conducting Foreign Affairs 60 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 In the field of international affairs, public administration must win friends and influence peoples and nations for the country.
To do this: (cid:1) It must portray the country in as favorable light as possible, learn as much as possible about other countries, negotiate with them for the best possible advantage for the country in the procurement of external resources, and the procurement of the country’s domestic resources by foreign countries (cid:1) It must operate to increase the number of the nation’s friends and reduce the number and strength of its enemies.
(cid:1) It must act in such a way that the nation is not subject to foreign invasion, and if such an attack becomes inevitable that is has enough strength and foreign friends to help ward it off.
(cid:1) In the performance of this task it may have to negotiate, threaten, conciliate, arbitrate and settle disputes.
And by liaising with the ministry of defense, the ministry of external affairs has the duty of protecting the independence and territorial integrity of the country.
The ministry of defense additionally ensures that the internal challenges to the power and authority of the ruling class are crushed.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Mention five areas where public administration can conduct the foreign affairs of a nation 3.6 Negotiation, Conciliation, and Arbitration In the course of its duties public administration must of necessity come into contact with various interest groups and political parties with competing interests and programs that they wish the government to respond to.
In some cases these interests conflict with one another.
61 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 In its formulation and execution of public policy the government bureaucracy may not necessarily confine itself to these expressed and organized interests.
It may articulate and aggregate interests on its own initiative in important areas where no interest groups or political parties have shown any interest, or even where they have shown interest.
Of course, its function in this regard is not limited to the articulation and aggregation of interests.
It goes ahead to convert these interests into policies in conformity with government programs.
But before this can be done public administration may first be involved with interested groups and parties in a protracted process of negotiation, conciliation, arbitration and settlement of disputes.
This is a dramatic process when conflicts over conditions of service of the various sections of the working population are concerned, or when the government wishes, for example, to control the prices of foodstuffs.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.6 Discuss two procedures that can be used by public administration in articulating and aggregating the interests of individuals and groups in a state without rancor.
4.0 CONCLUSION Public administration is seen here as a veritable tool for social, political and economic development of a state.
Some important areas are then put in perspective for discussion so as to ascertain the level to which public administration functions.
Public administration has continued to play a critical role in sustaining the government in power and providing essential public goods to the citizenry.
While different countries have different public administration, the basic functions of public administration are performed by all states.
62 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 5.0 SUMMARY In summary, this unit has highlighted the various functions performed by public administration.
Although not exhausted, we have looked at the following functions: Sustenance of the incumbent government in power, Provision of Employment, Identification and Management of Resources, Provision of social welfare services to the populace, Conducting Foreign Affairs, Negotiation, Conciliation, and Arbitration.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED 1.
Explain how public administration can be used to generate employment opportunities by governments 2.
List and explain four major ways of identifying and managing resources through administrative setting.
3.
State four processes through which administrative structures reconcile conflicting interest of groups and individuals in embarking on development projects.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) 63 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 2 METHODS OF INQUIRY IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Method of inquiry in public administration 3.2 Descriptive Method of inquiry in public administration 3.3 Experimental Method of inquiry in public administration 3.4 Survey Method of inquiry in public administration 3.5 Case study Method of inquiry in public administration 3.6 The Institutional Method of inquiry in public administration 3.7 Comparative Method of inquiry in public administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration has evolved and developed over time, this has been possible because of relentless investigations into issues bothering on the improvement of the discipline.
Major methods of inquiry into the discipline that will be discussed here are historical method, descriptive method, experimental method, survey method and case study method.
At the successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: h Explain Historical Method h Examine Descriptive Method h Describe Experimental Method 64 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Discuss Survey Method h State Case study Method h Define Institutional Approach h Explain Comparative Approach MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Historical Method of Inquiry in Public Administration Historical sources may be classified into two major categories, namely, documents and relics.
Documents are usually written whereas relics are generally archaeological or geological remains such as tools and utensils.
Relics are not written.
For instance, a letter written by President Goodluck Jonathan would be a document from the standpoint of the information it contains but would be a relic from the standpoint of spelling errors or other aspects which are not part of what Jonathan intended to transmit.
Among the various documentary sources are: 1.
Official records, minutes of meetings, committee reports and legal documents 2.
Institutional records, attendance rolls, university bulletins 3.
Memoirs, biographies, diaries, personal letters, books on the philosophy of a known scholar, and so on.
Historical sources can further be classified into primary and secondary sources; h Primary sources are data provided by actual witness to the incident in question.
h Secondary sources of data come from a middleman who acts between the original witness and the present consumer.
Secondary data are subject to an inherent danger of inaccuracy.
Whenever evidence is transmitted form one individual to another, it 65 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 tends to become distorted.
Occasionally secondary sources have been so carelessly compiled that they are in a category of unverified hearsay or rumor.
For this reason, reliable historians rely as much as possible on primary sources, using secondary sources only as hypotheses to bridge the gaps between the various pieces of primary data, and at times the historian may have to rely on secondary sources.
He must bear in mind the limitations of such data.
In the event that numerous gaps in the primary source cause his over – reliance on secondary source, he should refrain from attempting the study at all.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Explain historical method of inquiry in public administration 3.2 Descriptive Method Descriptive method is concerned with the collection of data for the purpose of describing and interpreting existing conditions, prevailing practices, beliefs, attitudes and ongoing process.
Descriptive inquiry is that investigation which specifies the nature of given phenomena.
The specification can be simple or it can be complicated.
The importance of descriptive inquiry in public administration as well as other fields of educational endeavor clearly implies complexity of phenomena.
The need for systematic ways of telling what a situation is, means that the situation is no longer simple.
It can no longer be understood directly and without synthesis.
Descriptive inquiry gives a picture of a situation or a population.
Any consideration of phenomena generally begins with a full understanding of the phenomena.
Accurate descriptions are imperative for making a wide range of policy decisions.
For example the Nigerian department of labour makes detailed surveys of unemployment; these attempt to describe unemployment in the Nigerian economy for the purpose of knowing what the situation is.
66 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Such surveys provide the basis for eliciting possible policies considered and those ultimately accepted as a result of the inquiry, represent value decisions.
While the research findings may have been useful, it cannot be concluded that the policies were determined scientifically.
Descriptive inquiry is basic for all types of research in assessing the situation as a prerequisite to inferences and generalizations.
While descriptive inquiry is a prerequisite for finding answers to questions, it is not in itself sufficiently comprehensive to provide answers.
Descriptive inquiry cannot establish cause and effect relationships.
From description the investigator cannot deduce conclusively the cause of the phenomena or predict what the future phenomena will be.
Descriptive inquiry using the same design done at specified periods of time can, indeed, show trends in description from which hypotheses can be gleaned and later tested under controlled experimental conditions.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.2 Explain the basic assumptions of the descriptive methods of inquiry in public administration.
3.3 Experimental method The steps of experimental method are essentially those of the scientific method.
They may be outlined as follows: 1.
Selecting and defining the problem: The problems amenable to experimentation generally should be converted into a hypothesis.
This hypothesis can be verified or refuted by the experimental data.
The variables to be investigated should be defined in operational terms.
2.
Reviewing the related literature: This shows how the present research fits into the scheme of things.
It surveys the research previously done on the problem and evaluates what this 67 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 research has and has not accomplished in solving the problem currently under study.
Thus in this review, the research should point out very carefully the similarities and, more importantly, the differences between that research and his current study.
In order to do this effectively, the researcher must do more than consider the findings as they are reported.
He must examine the findings critically in light of the research methodology, the specific procedure employed, the control, the sampling and the measuring instruments used.
3.
Drawing up the experimental design: This section should place primary emphasis on the question of control, randomization, and replication and should include a clarification of such basic aspects of the design as the place and duration of the experiment.
It is generally advisable to conduct a pilot study because of the complexity of an experiment in order to ensure the adequacy of the design.
4.
Defining the population: It is important to define the population precisely so that there can be no question about the population to which the conclusions are to apply.
5.
Conducting the study: It is important here to insist on close adherence to plans, especially as they relate to the factors of control, randomization, and replication.
The duration of the experiment should be such that the variable under investigation is given adequate time to promote changes that can be evaluated and to insulate the influence of such extraneous factors as novelty.
6.
Assessing the outcomes: Careful consideration must be given to the selection of the criterion on the basis of which the results are to be assessed, for the efficiency of the experiment depends largely on the fairness of the criterion used.
7.
Analyzing and interpreting the results: The researcher is concerned with the operation of the factors under investigation.
He must be especially sensitive to the possibility that the results of his/her study arose through the 68 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 operation of uncontrolled extraneous factors.
The researcher must further insulate at a given probability level the possibility that the experimental findings are simply the results of chance.
In no other area of research is the need for competence in statistical procedures so clearly indicated as in the analysis of experimental data as the basis for their valid interpretation.
8.
Drawing up conclusions: the conclusions of the study must be based on the findings of the study.
Care must be taken not to over – generalize the results obtained.
The results also pertain only to the conditions under which they were derived, and, since control may have distorted the natural situation, care must be taken to restrict the conclusions to the conditions actually present in the experiment.
9.
Reporting the result: The study must be reported in sufficient detail so that the reader can make an intelligent judgment as to its validity (Fisher, 1957) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 Describe experimental research 3.4 Survey Method The survey method is interested in the accurate assessment of the characteristics of whole populations of people.
Only rarely, however, do survey researchers study whole population; they normally study samples drawn from populations.
From these samples, the researcher infers the characteristics of the defined population or universe.
The study of sample from which inferences about population can be drawn is needed because of the difficulties of attempting to study whole populations.
Random samples often furnish the same information as a census at much less cost, with greater efficiency sometimes, greater accuracy.
69 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Sample surveys attempt to determine the incidence, distribution, and interrelations among sociological and psychological variables.
Survey research focuses on people, the vital facts of people, and their beliefs, opinions, attitudes, motivations and behavior.
Surveys are particularly versatile and practical, especially for the administrator, in that they indentify present conditions and point to present needs.
Surveys do not make the decisions for the administrator, but they can provide him with information on which to base sound decisions.
Surveys can be conveniently classified by the following methods of obtaining information: personal interview, mail questionnaire, panel, telephone and controlled observation.
Of these, the personal interview far overshadows the others as the most powerful and useful tool of social scientific survey research (Osuala, 2005) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.4 Discuss survey research 3.5 Case Study Method Case study has a long history in social science research and has been used extensively in public administration more especially in the area of motivation.
For example both Freud and Piagnet typically used case studies to develop their theories.
Criticism of their techniques damaged the case study approach, but the increased acceptance of qualitative research and in particular, participant observation has, as corollary, revived the acceptability of the case study.
The case study can either be quantitative or qualitative, or even a combination of both due to the constraints of a sample of one or a single unit being studied.
With the restrictions that brings for statistical inference, most case studies lie within the realm of qualitative methodology.
Case study is used to gain in – depth 70 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 understanding replete with meaning for the subject, focusing on process rather than outcome, on discovery rather than confirmation.
Case study must involve the collection of very extensive data to produce an understanding of the entity being studied.
Shallow studies will not make any contribution to administrative knowledge (Osuala, 2005).
Self Assessment Exercise 3.5 State the importance of case study as one of the methods of inquiry in public administration.
3.6 Institutional Approach This is the earliest approach to the study of governmental administration.
It was largely based on the legal rights and obligations of government.
The approach tended to emphasize formal relationships and separation of powers among the three tiers of government – legislature, executive and judiciary.
Under this approach, generalizations were often based upon analysis of formal organization practices and the constitutional delegation of authority and responsibility to the three arms of government.
Policy and administration were often dichotomized, with the assumption that the role of administrators was almost entirely confined to merely carrying out policy designed by the formal political arms of government (Onah, 2005).
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.6 What is the basis of analysis under institutional approach?
3.7 Comparative Approach 71 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 This approach owns its development to comparative politics.
The Second World War marked the development of comparative approach among academic studies of public administration.
This development was as a result of the following: h The creation of several new international organizations h The United States volunteered to assist in promoting economic recovery programmes in Europe and the Far East h Western countries led by USA developed programmes of aid and technical assistance to benefit the Asian and African countries that became independent from the late 1940s through the 1950s and 1960s.
h The concern of some public administration scholars with the search for a science of public administration As a result of the reasons stated above, many American public administrators and some academic experts of the discipline were sent to foreign countries in the late 1950s either to assist in administering economic programmes or as technical experts to strengthen the public administration institutions of some of the newly independent countries.
From their concrete experiences this experts discovered that the existing assumptions of public administration elaborated in USA were inapplicable to the realities of the foreign countries.
The first efforts by some of these experts to compare notes on the subject took place at the conference on comparative public administration held at Princeton in 1952.
This conference therefore gave birth to the comparative approach to the study of public administration (Adamolekun, 1983).
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.7 Explain the basic issues that were responsibility for the development comparative approach to public administration 72 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has outlined and discussed the various methods of inquires used in public administration.
The discussions show that the success in the administrative work depends to a large extent on the efficient method of gathering and applying the information at various levels.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit considered the following approaches for discussion; Historical Method, Descriptive Method, Experimental Method, Survey Method, Case study Method, The Institutional Approach, and Comparative Approach.
It discussed their theoretical assumptions, usefulness and weaknesses as a mode of inquiry in public administration.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Differentiate between institutional and comparative approaches.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adamolekun, L. (1983) Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Perspective, New York, Longman Ltd. Fisher, R. A (1957) The Designs of Experiments, London: Oliver and Boyd Jones, T. (1971) Conducting Political Research, New York: Harper and Row Publishers Onah, R. C (2005) Public Administration, Nsukka: Great AP Express Publishers Ltd. Osuala, E. C (2005) Introduction to Research Methodology; The 73 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Millennium Edition, Enugu: Cheston Agency Ltd 74 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 3 CIVIL SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition and Functions 3.2 Principles of Civil Service 3.3 Control of the Civil Service 3.4 The Colonial / First Republic Civil Service 3.5 The New Civil Service in Nigeria 3.6 Civil Service in Nigeria, 1980 to 1988 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION An understanding of the nature of Civil Service in a society is very vital for the study of the administrative practices of such place.
Civil Service is the hub through which public administrative work centers on.
Important areas considered for discussion here are the definition and functions, principles, control of civil service, the new civil service in Nigeria and civil service in Nigeria, 1980 to 1988.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is intended that by the end of this unit, you should be able to: h Define and list the functions of Civil Service h Mention various principles of civil service h Describe the control of civil service h Examine the colonial/First Republic Civil Service in Nigeria h Discuss New Civil Service in Nigeria h Examine Civil Service in Nigeria, 1980 to 1988 75 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Examine civil service reform under Obasanjo 1999 – 2007 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Functions Civil service is the body that normally functions with the executive arm of government comprising of men and women who constitute the permanent staff of the departments of government.
They are professional administrators.
Sometimes they are generally refered to as public service.
Functions of the Civil Service i.
Conversion of policies that have been formulated by the cabinet into action ii.
Enforcement of laws enacted by the legislature iii.
Provision of expert advice on either positive or negative implications of policies intended to be formulated by government iv.
Planning, organization and supervision v. Advice on measures of improving the quality of life of citizens and making government more efficient vi.
Ensuring continuity of government in spite of changes Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Define and state the functions of the Civil Service?
3.2 Principles of Civil Service Civil service has some guiding principles in discharging its duties, these principles include: 76 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 i.
Political Neutrality: The first principle guiding the performance of the public service is political neutrality.
By this we mean that a public officer does not become involved in partisan politics.
He serves the government of the day with dedication.
If that government is replaced by another one, he serves the new government with the same degree of loyalty and dedication.
He does not allow his personal views to interfere with his performance of his functions.
ii.
Impartiality: Similar to political neutrality, the civil servant serves all members of the public to the best of his ability.
He does not favour anyone.
He does not belong to any political party or faction, at least, not openly.
iii.
Anonymity: In an effort to protect the neutrality and impartiality of civil servants, they are made to operate behind the glare of publicity.
They advise their ministers and political executives but they do not make open or partisan speeches.
The ministers and politicians make such public statements and defend programmes.
Anonymity extends to the actual operations of the service.
Decisions taken are regarded as the decision of all.
Everybody is responsible for it.
This is the principle of collective responsibility which also ensures the neutrality of any particular individual.
iv.
Permanence: Governments come and go but the civil service remains.
Public officers are not changed each time there is a change in government.
As long as they do their work properly and do not commit any crime, their tenure of office is guaranteed.
v. Merit and Achievement: Another principle of the civil service is that recruitment into the service is based on merit.
This means that certain standards and educational qualifications are set, and only those who satisfy them are considered for 77 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 employment.
This is different from some traditional systems where sons succeed their fathers automatically.
In addition, under civil service rules, promotions are based on merit and achievement and not on patronage or favor by a godfather (Leo and Oyewole, 1988) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.2 Mention the principles of civil service 3.3 Control of the Civil Service Any organization where people operate without laws controlling their actions will be vulnerable to anarchy.
To avoid this, an elaborate network of rules and regulations govern the behavior of civil servants.
These are divisible into internal and external controls: The internal control includes: h The general orders: These are the body of regulations which outline the conditions of service and responsibilities of public officers.
Closely related to this is the Financial Instructions which prescribes the procedures for the collection of spending of public funds.
It is important to note that civil servants are expected to pass examinations on the General Orders as part of their knowledge and experience h Control by the Ministry of Establishments: This Ministry deals largely with all matters affecting the conditions of service of public officers.
Its regulations affect all other ministries, and thus it can guarantee uniform standard in matters such as grading incremental credits and so on.
h Control within the Hierarchy: Each Ministry is hierarchically structured with the Permanent Secretary being the overall 78 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 supervisor of the ministry.
He can discipline those under him in many ways.
For minor offences, the officer may be cautioned.
In more serious cases, a query may be issued and in the most serious cases, a disciplinary committee may be set up, or the matter may be sent to the Public Service Commission for investigation and necessary punishment.
The external control of civil service There are other mechanisms outside the civil service which exercise some control on the service: h Control by parliament: The Legislature authorizes funds for various ministries and departments.
Through this power of the purse, it could review the performance of the officers to see whether or not they have carried out government policies.
If a department has failed to perform satisfactorily, the budget for it may be cut.
h Control by administrative courts: Tribunals or Public Complaints Commission.
By whatever names they are called, these are institutions set up to ensure that public officers are above board in the performance of their duties.
Citizens who feel that an officer has not performed well can approach a tribunal or complaints commission for redress.
Such complaints are investigated and recommendations made.
As the public becomes more aware, the kind of control exercise by tribunals and public complaints commission will become more important.
h Control by the Court: In case of gross abuse of office, an officer will be handed over to the court for necessary disciplinary action.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 Describe the ways through which civil servants can be controlled 79 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.4 The Colonial / First Republic Civil Service in Nigeria The civil service in Nigeria during the colonial era and the first republic was organized along the lines of the British Civil Service with four main classes – the Administrative, the Executive, Clerical and Manipulative Classes.
These four classes used to operate as if there were watertight compartments.
It was difficult for a civil servant to move from one class to a higher one.
The Administrative class was the highest and most prestigious and people used to call them the senior service.
People in this class worked closely with the politicians in advisory capacity.
The members of the administrative class were university graduates with good degrees who in addition passed the entrance examinations and interviews.
The entry qualifications for the other levels were lower, so are the salaries and benefits.
These classes provide needed supporting services to the Administrative class.
Self - Assessment Exercise 3.4 Examine the colonial/ First Republic Civil service in Nigeria 3.5 The New Civil Service in Nigeria The new civil service in Nigeria marked a departure of the old rigid system to a more flexible and result oriented system.
For example, following the Udoji Commission Report of 1974, the Federal Government of Nigeria decided to abolish the four classes.
In its place a unified grading system was introduced.
Instead of having classes, the jobs in the public service were graded from level 1 to 17.
The highest positions were 17 while the lowest were 1.
All public officers and jobs were fitted into this unified system.
The merit of this new system is that a good officer who starts his/her career on level 1 can move up to any level his ability can carry him.
80 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 This was an improvement over the old system under which it was impossible to move from the Clerical to the Administrative level.
The new system enables everybody to be in the same unified structure and merit and efficiency can carry one to the highest levels (Adebayo, 2004).
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.5 Discuss the new Civil Service in Nigeria 3.6 Civil Service in Nigeria, 1980 to 1988 In Nigeria, during the four years of the Second Republic, we seem to have adopted an amalgam of the American and the British Systems.
Even though we operated a presidential system of government, we had Permanent Secretaries whose positions were in fact recognized by the Constitution.
Indeed, the Constitution described them as Chief Executives in the Ministries or Departments in addition to other departmental heads in a ministry.
The fusion led to some degree of uncertainty, as to what the relative roles were between the Minister/ Commissioner and his Permanent Secretary and this in turn led to conflicts in the departments.
In some of the governments in the federation, there were sharp disagreements between Ministers/Commissioners and their Permanent Secretaries.
The Ministers/ Commissioners, on assuming office, approached their task with the assumption that since Nigeria had embraced the presidential system of government, there were the Chief Executives of the departments in every respect.
It is a sound and reasonable assumption.
The permanent secretaries, on the other hand were trained to operate on laid – down rules and regulations, and until these were changed or modified, the Permanent Secretaries went by such regulations.
Thus the existing Civil Service Commission Regulations delegated to Permanent Secretaries certain 81 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 powers of appointment, promotion and discipline up to a certain level in the Civil Service.
The Financial Instructions and Public Administrative Law made the Permanent Secretary the Accounting officer of his Ministry and the General Orders gave the Permanent Secretary, as Head of Department, responsible over a great number of personnel matters, for example approval of vocation leave and matters relating to discipline, promotion and development of staff in the department.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.6 Examine the Nigerian civil service from 1980 to 1988 3.7 Civil Service Reforms under Obasanjo 1999 to 2007 Obansanjo’s reforms centered on the following aspects: 1.
Anti – Corruption, Transparency and Accountability: Corruption remained an intractable problem that constrained development efforts in Nigeria.
On assumption of office, Chief Olusegun Obansanjo, observed that the time – tested approach in conducting government business had degenerated to such an extent that the Public Service were abandoned either due to sheer ignorance or for selfish reasons (Ekpenkhio, 2003).
The President emphasized that transparency in Government Procedures was necessary to usher in a great and dynamic economy to ensure a just and egalitarian society.
The reform programme focuses on specific measures to curb corruption, improve transparency, and accountability in the conduct of government business.
2.
Monetization of Fringe Benefits: As part of its efforts to reduce the cost of governance and ensure efficiency in resource allocation, the Federal government decided to monetize the fringe benefits of public servants.
The fringe benefits to be monetized where residential accommodation, furniture 82 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 allowance, utility allowance, domestic servant allowance, motor vehicle loan, medical allowance and entertainment allowance.
3.
The Pension Reform Act 2004: The Pension Reform Act came into existence in 2004 the main objectives of the Act were to: a) Ensure that every pensioner who worked in either the Public Service of the Federation, Federal Capital Territory and the Private Sector receives his retirement benefits as and when due; b) Assists improvident individuals by ensuring that they save in order to cater for their livelihood during old age and; c) Establish a uniform set of rules/regulations and standards to the administration and payments of retirement benefits for the public service of the federation, Federal Capital Territory and the Private Sector (Ezeani, 2005) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.7 Examine Civil Service Reform under Obasanjo1999 - 2007 4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed civil service in Nigeria.
We explained how civil service is a veritable factor for the development of the country.
The civil service has witnessed various reforms from the Colonial/First Republic to the reforms during Obasanjo’s civil rule, the essence has been to reposition and equip the civil service for efficient service delivery.
5.0 SUMMARY We have in this unit treated definition of public administration, functions of Civil Service, principles of civil service, the control of civil service, the colonial/First Republic Civil Service in Nigeria, 83 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 New Civil Service in Nigeria and Civil Service in Nigeria, 1980 to 1988.
6.0 TUTOR –MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What is civil service?
2.
List the principles of civil service 3.
Describe the New Civil Service in Nigeria, 1980 to 1988 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, (2004), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Dare, L and Oyewole (1988), A/L Government Textbook for West Africa, Ibadan: Onibonoje Press & Book Industries (Nigeria Limited) Ezeani, O. E (2005), Administrative Reforms in a Post – Colonial State: An Appraisal of Nigeria’s Experience under Obasanjo Regime (1999 – 2005) in, University of Nigeria Journal of Political Economy, 1 (1) 84 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Theories 3.3 Traditional and New Public Administration 3.4 Obstacles of Development Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since its inception, traditional public administration has been characterized by insurmountable problems which amount to bureaucratic bottlenecks.
This situation does not augur well for development.
Of course, the worst hit is the Developing Nations who are still grappling with providing the basic necessities of life.
Development administration is therefore a new concept designed to overcome these obstacles.
This unit therefore will focus on the definition of development administration, theories and traditional and new public administration 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to: h Define development administration h State the theories of development administration h Examine traditional and new public administration h Mention the obstacles of development administration 85 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION Development administration is concerned with plans, policies, programmes and projects which focus on nation building and socio- economic development.
It aims to achieve socio-economic goals through the talents and expertise of bureaucrats.
Development administration focuses on the results to be achieved rather than the traditionalist view of strict adherence to rules and hierarchy.
Strict adherence to rules creates rigidness, delay and procrastination.
1.
Development per se is oriented towards change in a destined direction.
Thus, development administration is change oriented and rejects status quo.
2.
Every development functions have a goal to be achieved.
i.e.
economic development has the goal to improve the quality of life such as better literacy rate, life expectancy and reduction in poverty 3.
For the goals to be achieved, to relate the means to ends, planning and temporal dimension is a salient feature.
Planning aids in deciding the resources required for the goal, the time in which it needs to achieve.
4.
Development administration has an innovative dimension; it is flexible enough to design new methods, procedures, policies which would save time, increase effectiveness and quality.
5.
Administrators under this concept are required to be committed to the policies, plans and programmes.
The commitment is not necessarily to the political parties, who enacts the policies but to the values that an administrator should upheld in his/her profession.
6.
Development is ultimately aimed to the people, hence it should accord primacy to the public the administration should be client oriented.
7.
For the development functions to be effective and for it to be people oriented, participation of people is emphasized in 86 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 formulating plans, implementation and sharing the benefits derived.
Thus Development administration should focus on "planning with people" rather than "planning for people".
It should be people centered rather than production centered.
i.e.
not in maximizing production, goods and services but to address the needs of people, empower people.
Development administration has two concepts administration of development and administrative development.
Administrative development is increasing and improving the capabilities of administrative system.
It involves modernization of administrative structure, capabilities of personnel, attitudinal and behavioral changes among the administrators.
Self – assessment exercise 3.1 What is Development Administration?
3.2 THEORIES New Public Administration is particularly relevant to the developing nations where qualitative transformation of public administration is needed.
1.
Public Choice Theory Vincent Ostrom, an advocate of Public Choice Theory, viewed bureaucrats as preferring self-interest to public interest.
Public Choice School views the citizen as the ultimate source of administrative power because he/she is considered as a rational consumer of public goods and services.
Public Choice School developed the “Theory of Administrative Egoism”, according to which bureaucrats, in general, are self-aggrandized and whose interests are antithetical to public interest.
2.
System Theory 87 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Biographical and autobiographical writings on administrators and reminiscences of former administrators are closely related to the ‘historical approach’ to the study of Public Administration.
The chief contributor of the System Analysis is Herbert Simon.
The systems analysis identifies the basic unit of the system to be the ‘individual’ (not the sub-system) Sub-systems are ‘dynamic’ in the sense that they undergo continuous change as a result of interaction with other sub-systems within the system.
The term ‘administrative lag’ connotes the imbalance between aspirations and performance of administration.
This is a major obstacle for development in the third world nations.
3 Fusion Approach The Scientific Management Theory of Frederick W. Taylor emphasized ‘standardization’ and ‘cooperation’.
However, according to Taylor, the duty of enforcing the adoption of standards and of enforcing the cooperation rests with the management alone.
In Fusion Approach – the interests of organization is fused with those of the workers.
Individual workers are considered as important as the organization itself.
Classical theory and the Human Relations theory are considered anti-polar.
But, the goals of both the theories are same, and thus concerned with economy, efficiency and use of scientific methods in organization (Rodman, n.d) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.2 State the various theories of Development Administration 3.3 TRADITIONAL AND NEW PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Herbert Simon widened the scope of Public Administration by relating it to psychology, sociology, economics and political science.
There are basically four problems confronting public Administration, viz: 1.
Inadequate funds 2.
Uncertainty and confusion over the status of the discipline 88 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.
Institutional shortcomings; and 4.
Lack of interaction between scholars and administrators.
New Public Administration emphasised four factors: relevance, values, change and social equity.
Under the traditional Public Administration, there was a mismatch between the supply of public administration and the demand of the people.
Though the Public Administration functioned well, it failed to solve the contemporary problems.
Hence, the New Public Administration demanded that there should be relevance between Public Administration and the contemporary social problems.
Traditional Public Administration emphasized value-neutrality.
For example, both rich and poor will be treated equally without any favour for one side.
However, New Public Administration championed the cause of the disadvantaged sections in society and openly sided with them.
Thus, it emphasized value factor in administration.
New Public Administration specifically emphasized that the basic function of administration is to distribute the resources in such a way as to reduce the economic and social inequalities.
This is to maintain social equity.
New Public Administration has attacked the traditional concept of maintaining status quo (same status) and advocated innovation and change.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 What are the differences between the traditional and new public administration?
3.4 Obstacles to Development Administration The obstacles to development administration are many and varied and interconnected, but we might usefully discuss them under four headings: (1) shortages of skills and tools (2) difficulties of organization and structure (3) political difficulties and (4) cultural and attitude barriers.
1.
Shortages of skills and tools a) There is a shortage of trained personnel, which is the most obvious and widely noted difficulty in development 89 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 administration.
The shortage generally affects all levels of administration, but is particularly acute with regard to 'support administration', i.е.
middle- and lower-echelon personnel, and local administrators.
One expert has stated that ten people are needed for 'support administration for every one person at the top.
b) An additional problem is that the emerging nations' interest in foreign affairs absorbs many of their skilled people, and this further reduces the number available for development tasks, Secondly, there is a great waste of the limited talent that is available for administration.
There are often large numbers of skilled people in administration, but with the wrong skills., e.g, people who studied liberal arts or law (The tradition of the amateur 'generalist' dies hard,) These subjects have prestige but little usefulness., and thus many new administrators are in effect untrained.
Much of the right kind of training is wasted because trainees seek other work or get no chance to use their skill.
New schools and institutes for the teaching of public administration are often provided, for both students and teachers, for those people who can be spared from their work, i, e, the least useful.
c) Another aspect or consequence of the shortage of personnel is the rapid turnover in individual positions, as skilled men are shifted around from one position to another.
Some of it is voluntary, and due to the lack of uniform systems of pay, classification, and advancement.
But most of it is a relic of by gone days of the generalist administrator, when one administrative job was not basically different from any other, and when frequent rotation could broaden the generalist's outlook.
"But today, when specialized experience takes time to acquire, frequent transfers or transfers to positions where there is no opportunity to use scarce skills, tend to aggravate the acute shortage of experienced managerial leadership, 90 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Moreover, because of frequent shifts in, or lack of, staff, it has not been unusual to find projects languishing or even abandoned."
d) The skill lacking is not merely advanced economic or administrative expertise, but simple office skills: filing systems, internal communications, trained stenographers, clerks, accountants, etc.
Without the ability to preserve and organize internal records, an administration is more or less amnesiac.
Yet training institutions often teach advanced concepts and techniques borrowed from advanced countries - philosophical bases of administration, human relations, computer technology etc., and neglect the 'nuts and bolts'.
e) Elementary statistical data are often unreliable, fragmentary, or non-existent.
2.
Difficulties of organization and structure There are problems involved in the location of the central planning agency in the over-all governmental structure.
Each of the several possible arrangements has its own hazards; all planning responsibilities can be concentrated in a cabinet-level ministry of planning.
Planning units can be established in the Ministry of Finance or in the Ministry of Economic Affairs.
An independent planning commission can be established, perhaps, as in Pakistan, located in and responsible to the Office of the President or the Commission may constitute a cabinet committee composed of the interested ministers (finance, economic affairs, labour, education, agriculture, etc.).
The essential problem is co-ordination., In Jamaica, the Department of Housing was planning a housing project on the same land which the Ministry of Agriculture was preparing to flood for an irrigation project.
In Madagascar, the Ministry charged with repairing a highway after the Ministry of Telecommunications 91 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 had placed telephone cables underground, repaired the highway before the Ministry of Telecommunications had laid the cables: Co-ordination has at least two major aspects: co-ordination of the several departmental objectives in one over-all, balanced plan, and co-ordination of planning, financing, and execution.
One source of problems is that these two requirements are to some extent incompatible.
On the one hand, coordination of departmental objectives seems to require a planning unit independent of any particular ministry.
3.
Political difficulties The vulnerability of developing administrations to political vicissitudes is due to the fact that these bureaucracies politically engage themselves to a far greater degree than are their counterparts in advanced countries.
That is, the bureaucracy may not merely be an arm of the executive, but the executive - in-fact.
It may be the only body in the society capable of formulating clear social and political goals.
If the legislature is feeble (as is often the case), the bureaucracy may be the arena of political struggle among interest groups, or may become an interest group itself, allying itself with the ruling oligarchy.
In fact (to look at this from another point of view), it is usually desired that the bureaucracy go beyond its specialized mechanical functions and become an active promoter of the political goal of change.
4.
Cultural and attitude barriers Because of the bureaucracy's significant political role in developing societies, the bureaucracy's adjustment to the tasks of development is crucial.
The ingrained conservatism of most of these bureaucracies thus becomes a major obstacle.
Development requires an administration mobilized for transformation not for mere 'administering'.
But bureaucracies, like any established institutions, tend to prefer stability and continuity; staff colleges tend to imbue a 92 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 code of behaviour that emphasizes rules and routines.
Universities, though more autonomous than staff colleges may be even more stubbornly resistant to change in their approaches to training.
Cultural factors can be among the most deep-rooted barriers to modernization and they have their particularly administrative manifestations, Plans may fail to be implemented or to take root because the new institutions or patterns of behaviour are incompatible with tradition.
For example, mass education violates the tenets of a caste system.
Resistance to change will be formidable whether the incompatibility is real or imagined (Waterston, 1964; Riggs, 1956; Stone, 1964) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.4 Mention the various obstacles of Development Administration 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, Development Administration has been seen as an attempt to fashion out administrative system that will meet the development needs of the third world nations devoid of the rigidity of traditional administrative practices.
Development Administration places more emphasis on results rather than rigid procedures.
However, this mode of administration has inherent weaknesses such as shortages of skills and tools; difficulties of organization and structure; political difficulties and; cultural and attitude barriers.
5.0 SUMMARY The relevance of the traditional public administration to the developing nations facing socio – economic challenges and development challenges has been disputed.
Development administration, because of its flexibility and focus on nation building, and socio – economic development is better suited for the 93 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 developing nations.
Development administration focuses more on the result to be achieved than on the roles and procedures.
Essentially, it is change – oriented, people – centered, goal – centered, innovative, participatory based and committed.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.
What is Development Administration?
Explain the main elements in the definition.
2.
State and examine the various theories of Development Administration 3.
What would you consider as the main obstacles of Development Administration?
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Donald C. Stone, D. C (1965), ‘Government Machinery Necessary for Development', in Martin Driesberg, ed, Public Administration in Developing Countries, Riggs, F. W (1956), 'Public Administration: A neglected Factor in Economic Development', Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, vol, 305 May Waterston, Albert (1964), 'Administrative Obstacles to Planning’, Economía Latinoamericana, vol.
1, №3, July 94 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 MODULE 3 ISSUES IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Unit 1 Basic concepts of Public Administration Unit 2 Public issues in Administration Unit 3 Practical issues in our society, Nigeria Unit 4 Practical issues in the world 95 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 1 BASIC CONCEPTS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Bureaucracy 3.2 Organization 3.3 Chief Executive 3.4 The Environment of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Like other disciplines in social sciences, public administration has some peculiar concepts which are often employed for analytical purposes.
Some of the concepts that will be discussed in this unit are bureaucracy, organization, chief executive and the environment of public administration 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you are expected to: h Define bureaucracy and list its features h Discuss the concept of organization h Explain the responsibilities of chief executive h Describe the environment of public administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Bureaucracy 96 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 The term bureaucracy is often heard and used in connection with the conduct of public affairs and the activities of public officials in particular.
What exactly is the meaning of the term?
No clear definition has been given of bureaucracy than that of the eminent German sociologist, Max Weber, according to him: The fully developed bureaucratic mechanism compares with other organizations exactly as does the machines with the non – mechanical modes of production.
Precision, speed, unambiguity, knowledge of the files, continuity, discretion, unity, strict subordination, reduction of friction and of material and personal costs – these are raised to the optimum point in the strictly bureaucratic administration … Its specific nature develops the more perfectly the more bureaucracy is dehumanized the more completely it succeeds in eliminating from official business, love, hatred, and all purely personal irrational and emotional elements which escape calculation (Weber, 1947).
In order to qualify as a bureaucratic organization, Max Weber specifies the following eight requirements which an organization must meet: 1.
The regular activities required for the purpose of the bureaucratically governed structure are distributed in a fixed way as official duties.
2.
A specified sphere of competence has been marked off as part of a systematic division of labor.
3.
The official is subject to strict and systematic discipline and control in the conduct of his office.
4.
All operations are governed by a consistent system of abstract rules … and consist in the application of these rules to particular cases.
97 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 5.
The organization of offices follows the principles of hierarchy; that is, each lower office is under the control and supervision of a higher one.
6.
Officials are subject to authority only with respect to their impersonal official obligations.
7.
Candidates are selected on the basis of technical qualifications.
In the most rational case, this is tested by examinations or guaranteed by diplomas certifying technical training or both.
They are appointed, not selected.
8.
Being a bureaucratic official constitute a career.
There is a system of promotions according to seniority or to achievement or both (Weber, 1947).
In conclusion, it is important to note that while bureaucracy has inherent elements that make its processes often cumbersome and distasteful to its public clients, yet it is indispensable and indeed an instrument for the achievement of efficiency in all large organizations.
It is concerned with the most efficient means of planning and control, and the fact that these processes are often misused and abused by inefficient, corrupt, and stubborn officials is not a case for the total condemnation of bureaucracy (Adebayo, 2004) Self Assessment Exercise 3.5 Define bureaucracy and list characteristics of a bureaucratic organization 3.2 Organization Organization is defined in many ways and each definition tries to reflect a particular perspective which scholars adopt about organizations.
One of such definitions views organization as a highly rationalized and impersonal integration of a large number of 98 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 specialists cooperating to achieve some announce specific objectives.
Another definition sees organization as a system of consciously coordinated personal activities or forces of two or more persons.
The various definitions help to identify some common characteristics of organizations.
1.
Organizations are purposeful, complex human collectives 2.
They are characterized by secondary (or impersonal) relationship; 3.
They have specialized limited goals 4.
They are characterized by sustained cooperative activity; 5.
They are integrated within a larger social system; 6.
They provide services and products to their environment; 7.
They are dependent on exchanges with their environment; 8.
In relation to public organizations, they draw their resources (taxes and legitimacy) from the polity and are meditated by the institutions of the state If we carefully examine these characteristics, they jointly reproduce what may be referred to as working universal principles of organizations.
They are three in number: 1.
There must be division of labor 2.
There must be identification of the services of the authority 3.
There must be establishment of relationships.
Self – Assessment Exercise3.2 Discuss organization 99 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.3 Chief Executive In developing his fourteen principles of management, Henri Fayol identified Unity of Command as one of his principles.
To him, that principle simply means one man one superior, Fayol explained in another principle, the principle of Authority that one man will have the right to give orders.
He further warned that authority should not be considered without reference to responsibility.
He noted again under his Unity of Direction the one man as superior head will have one plan for a group of activities with the same objectives.
The principles have been widely applied to administration at various forms of modern organization.
In modern organizations, the one man with authority and responsibilities of all the activities in an organization is referred to as the chief executive.
Explaining more about the chief executive, Corson and Harris noted that the chief executive should be responsible for decision – making, planning of work to be done, formulating objectives and goals establishing and reviewing organization’s policies and programs, directing and supervising employees, exercising control on other important activities of an organization.
The functions of chief executives vary from organization and from time to time; but essentially the same list of managerial duties is performed by executives at all levels of administrative responsibility.
Every administrator or chief executive spends considerable portion of his time in conversations, correspondence, conferences and interviews.
The task of a chief executive have been viewed by many as sets of functions only performed in a rare field atmosphere and on a grandiose scale, as mainly complex and most intricate activities requiring great intellectual capacity.
It can however be denied that the task of administration requires only qualities and attributes of the highest order, it is therefore important to recognize the fact that administration does not comprise solely 100 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 actions of great magnitude.
It is the simple as well as difficult, every day decision and acts which in the aggregate become administration.
The efficient executives are those who realize that they must relieve themselves of the less important work and devote more time to such administrative functions as planning and coordination which they cannot afford to delegate.
As has been popularly known, constructive thinking is most likely to occur when the executive has mastered the art of unhurried management (Adebayo, 2004) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 Explain the concept of Chief Executive 3.4 The Environment of Public Administration Public administration exists in a particular socio – economic and political environment that affects its behavior and performance.
1.
It operates in an intense and pervasive political atmosphere.
This is natural since public administration is part and parcel of the political process.
Although politicians in government tend to absorb much of the political pressures on government, enough still filters through to the public administration to significantly affect its work.
For example, public administrators cannot take account of only the technical and professional factors in their work.
They must integrate them with political considerations that are often unpredictable on a day – to – day basis.
Political considerations may cause an industrial project to be embarked upon against all technical and professional wisdom.
Yet, at the same time the government expects the administrator to use resources judiciously and to apply professional expertise in the solution of national problems.
2.
There is a widespread expectation of benefits from public administration at little or no cost to the citizen.
This is particularly the case in the ex – colonial countries of Africa and Asia where there is a strong heritage of government involvement in many welfare 101 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 functions.
A consequence of this great expectation is that the populace is not eager to calculate or make allowances for the cost of providing these amenities.
Thus, public administrators must walk the tight rope of satisfying these popular demands with little or no resources at their disposal.
3.
The resources needed by public administration are so diffuse and dispersed that there is a serious problem of coordination.
The spatial division of labour in the system is designed to help out but it creates its own problems of coordination 4.
Associated with this diffuseness of resources is the diffuseness of roles necessary for public administration.
Unlike a private economic enterprise where there is a single minded focus on one project, the objectives of even the ministries cannot be precisely defined and, therefore, neither can the roles necessary to accomplish them be precisely defined.
5.
All of these problems of the diffuseness of resources and roles are the consequence of the very wide attention span which public administration must maintain.
It is involved in so many areas of the life of a society and in so many activities that an overlap of several areas of these activities is inevitable.
But such an overlap leads to a blurring of roles with negative consequences for efficiency, for example, through the wastage of resources due to duplication.
6.
Public administration takes place in the full glare of the public eye.
It is in a sense everyone’s business, and what is more, some people outside the civil service take this business seriously.
They are ever ready to proffer suggestions on how to perform better, to call for more action, to criticize and identify weaknesses and failures, and to make political capital out of such failures.
Thus public administrators are under constant public pressure; their attention is divided; and they are distracted.
Under such conditions efficiency suffers.
But this is a necessary sacrifice for the values of freedom and democracy.
It is unthinkable that public administration should be a secret affair of the civil servants.
102 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 7.
Public administration, however, takes place under conditions of job security for the civil servants.
In the light of their constant exposure to contact with the public and the consequent public criticism, this job security has some positive effect on the continuity of policy.
It prevents precipitous actions from being taken against civil servants on the basis of public complaints some of which may be politically motivated and many of which may be the result of a lack of understanding of the various government regulations.
On the other hand job security may enable incompetent civil servants to continue in office to the detriment of the effectiveness of public administration.
8.
Finally, public administration may easily be compared out of context with private administration.
For example, very often the various private administrations of banks, commercial houses, industrial and other enterprises compete for personnel with public administration.
They are usually in a position to pay much higher wages and salaries and to offer more attractive fringe benefits.
They are thus able to attract good personnel away from public administration.
This is not all.
Workers in the civil service often compare their standard of living very unfavorably with that of their counterparts in private administration.
The net consequence of this comparison is low worker morale in the public sector.
Truancy prevails; sometimes the civil servant feels that he/she must engage in some private business of his own at the same time as he maintains his civil service job.
Worse still he/she may feel the need to augment his/her income by indulging in corrupt practices such as the inflation of contract sums in order to increase his/her commission from the award of such contract to those he/she sponsors.
Such practices not only breed waste and inefficiency in the management of scare public resources, they damage the moral fabric of the nation and, therefore, the long – term survival of the government and the ruling class.
These practices cause more havoc in African and other poor countries of the world where the wages are generally quite low and where wastage of 103 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 public resources is most intolerable than they do in other countries of the world (Nnoli, 2004) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.4 Describe the environment of public administration 4.0 CONCLUSION Every discipline has its own terminologies.
These concepts are the defining features of a discipline.
In this unit, attention has been focused at understanding the basic concepts in public administration.
While such concepts are numerous, we were interested in looking at bureaucracy, organization, Chie Executive and the environment of public administration.
5.0 SUMMARY We have treated the basic concepts in public administration in this unit by explaining Bureaucracy, Organization, Chief Executive and the Environment of Public Administration 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Define Bureaucracy and mention its basic features 2.
State and Explain the responsibilities of the chief executive 3.
Discuss the environment of public administration 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, (2004), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) 104 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Weber, M. (1947), The Theory of Social and Economic Organization (Translated by A. M. Henderson and T. Parsons, New York: Oxford University Press, 105 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 2 PUBLIC ISSUES IN ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Public policy 3.2 Implications for the concept of public policy 3.3 Stages of the policy process 3.4 Politics and policy 3.5 The Public Service 3.6 The importance of public service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References /Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration is a system of administration that operates in government settings as such it involves a variety of public issues.
The particular issues that will be examined here are public policy, implications for the concept of public policy, stages of the policy process, politics and policy, the public service and the importance of public service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit will enable you to: h Define Public policy h List the implications for the concept of public policy h mention the stages of policy process h Examine the link between politics and policy h Explain public service h Mention the importance of public service 106 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public policy Public policy may be defined as a proposed course of action of a person, group or government within a given environment providing obstacles and opportunities which the policy was proposed to utilize and overcome in an effort to reach a goal or realize an objective as a purpose.
According to James Anderson, public policy is a purposive course of action followed by an actor or set of actors in dealing with a problem or matter of concern (Anderson, 1979).
Examples of such public policies are: Industrial Policy of Nigeria (1988) Agricultural Policy of Nigeria (1988), Indigenization Policy (1972), Commercialization and Privatization Policy (1988), Health for All Policy, Universal Basic Education etc.
Thus public policy is the policy developed or formulated by government bodies or officials for the interest of all the people.
It is the government bodies and officials who have the authority in any political system to make policies.
Examples of these bodies are elders, paramount chiefs or traditional chiefs, executives, legislators, judges, administrators, councilors or Monarchs.
All these people perform one role or the other on behalf of government, and in such processes, and capacities they make and implement public policy.
However, other bodies, actors, or individuals can, and do indeed influence public policy formulation e.g.
political parties, the mass media, interest groups and individual citizens.
Self – Assessment Exercise3.1 What is public policy?
Give three examples of public policy.
107 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.2 Implications for the concept of public policy - Public policy is directed towards a purpose, it is a goal – oriented action.
It is not a random or chance behavior.
Public policy does not just happen.
- Public policy consists of courses or patterns of action by governmental officials.
It is not their separate individual or discrete decisions.
E.g.
A policy will include not only the decision to make a law about environment, but also subsequent decision relating to the enforcement of the environmental law.
- Public policy is what governments actually do in regulating trade, controlling inflation, drugs, and promoting health and public housing, etc.
public policy is not what governments intend to do or say they are going to do.
- Public policy may be positive or negative.
For example, a government may decide to do something or may decide to do nothing about a particular matter.
Public policy is based on law, therefore it is authoritative.
Accordingly, it must be obeyed.
Failure to obey the law on that policy will attract sanctions like imprisonment or fine.
So far as it is observed in practice, the commonest practitioners of bureaucratic method of administration, and the greatest formulators and implementers of public policies are members of the public service of any public organization.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 List and explain four implications of public policy?
3.3 Stages of the Policy Process Policy making has increasingly become a crucial aspect of the function of government.
The formulation of public policies and the 108 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 translation of these policies into specific programmes and projects may be seen as a series of disparate activities which makes up a never ending whole.
Dunn (1981) therefore aptly observes that the whole complex of policy formulation and implementation is best taken as a process.
Let us now consider a list of the stages in policy process.
In this regard, Jones (1984) identifies the following set of five activities: problem identification, policy formulation, legitimation, application or implementation, and policy evaluation.
h Problem Identification: This stage involves demands (or pressure) from interest groups and political parties on the legislature for action to resolve a public problem (i.e.
human needs, deprivation or dissatisfaction).
Issues become part of the public agenda when there is a shared perception that a problem must be shelved or an issue resolved.
Thus, at this stage the task of articulating and aggregating the interests of the people is accomplished through organized pressure groups which ensure that their demands are ultimately represented on the policy agenda of the government.
h Policy formulation: this is a stage where government decides on what is to be done and how it is to be achieved.
The formulation of policy proposal is usually the responsibility of the executive arm of government.
h Legitimation/Authorization: This primarily involves legislative action, to accord the proposed policy authority and legitimacy.
What happens to the policy proposal, whether or not it gets adopted, depends to a great deal on the preferences and values of the dominant group (or coalition) in the legislature.
If the policy is authorized by the legislative body, it means that appropriate or requisite resource allocation is also made for its implementation.
109 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 h Application or implementation: This state involves translation of goals and objectives of policy into concrete achievements through varied programmes.
This is the stage at which the implementing agency grapples with reality; hence it is the most difficult stage in the policy process.
h Evaluation: This is the final stage in the policy process.
Three sets of activities are involved in the evaluation of policies viz: measuring outputs (performance measurement); comparing output performance against the desired results; and correcting any deviations or inadequacies (Adamolekun, 1983).
It is necessary at this point to draw attention to the fact that evaluation exercise should not be limited to quantifiable costs and benefits.
The unquantifiable and intangible aspects must be taken into account.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 Mention four stages of policy process 3.4 Politics and policy There is a considerable relationship between politics and policy.
The concern of politics is with what David Easton (1965) refers to as the authoritative allocation of values Easton’s definition of politics is very instructive because it points to the critical elements in the linkage between politics and public policy.
First, is the issue of values; values are the things that people desire and pursue with a fair amount of intensity.
Values are not only many, but they vary with individuals.
What is at issue here is the scarcity of resources relative to the many and varied values of individuals.
Allocation therefore, becomes an imperative function of politics because of the obvious lag between societal resources and the many and conflicting claims that people make.
It bears emphasizing that 110 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 the allocation function is reserved exclusively for what is called an authority, the reason being that were allocation to be left free for all, society will, in all probability, return to the anarchy of the state of nature.
It is sufficient to note that it is authority which legitimizes the political process by which values are allocated.
Significantly, authorities properly so –called are responsible for resolving the conflict of interests which necessarily arises out of the competing demands which people make.
There is a paradoxical aspect to politics which is evident from this discussion, namely, that the political process is at once a conflict generating and a conflict resolution process.
As authorities seek to allocate values, they make judgmental decisions which are favorable to some and unfavorable to others.
The cumulative decisions which authorities make are what we generally refer to as public policies.
This is another way of saying public policy is the output of the political process of value allocation.
The linkage between politics and public policy should by now be fairly obvious.
Public policy is what authorities do when they are seized with the political process of sharing societal resources among competing values.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.2 Examine the relationship between politics and public policy?
3.5 The Public Service The public service represents the employees of government.
They are those responsible for the functioning of government through the implementation of government policies.
Such policies include welfare services rendered to the citizens.
111 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 The public service is therefore made up of workers in government ministries, parastatals and agencies.
Workers in the Ministry of Education, Central Bank of Nigeria, Power Holding Company of Nigeria, NITEL, Nigerian Railway, etc.
are all members of the public service.
Within the public service, we have the civil service, which constitute the inner core, or the heart of the public service.
From the period of Nigerian independence in 1960 to 1967, there were five public services (the Federal Public Service, the Public Service of Eastern Region, Northern Region, Mid – Western Region and Western Region).
At the end of Nigerian civil war in 1970 a Public Service Review Commission (The Udoji Commission) was set up to among other things harmonize the structure and organization of the public service of Nigeria (Public Service Review Commission Main Report, 1974).
In 1974 the Udoji Commission came out with a recommendation for results oriented and unified structure of public service for the whole country.
This implies that recruitment, appointment, promotion, remuneration, retirement, discipline, dismissal became governed by the same conditions all over the country.
In 1988, there was another review, the Philips Civil Service Review Panel (The Nigerian Federal Civil Service in the Mid 80s and Beyond) which according to the government was aimed at streamlining the public service along the lines of the presidential system of government, with the purpose of making the public service responsive to the Structural Adjustment Program (Federal Civil Service Review Panel, n d).
One of the recommendations of the review was that heads of ministries be called Directors Generals instead of Permanent Secretaries.
The review also recommended specialization in the ministry where the officer found himself/herself.
The appointment of the Director Generals became political and the Director Generals were required to retire with the president who appoints them.
112 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Another review of the civil service was undertaken by the Allison Ayida Panel of Civil Service Reform which submitted its report in July, 1995.
The Panel examined the 1988 reform and suggested far – reaching changes.
Based on the panel’s recommendation, the Provisional Ruling Council, PRC, directed that the post of Director – General should revert back to the status of Permanent Secretary and accounting officer of the Ministry (Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1997).
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.4 Explain the Nigerian Public Service 3.6 The importance of Public Service The relevance or importance and centrality of the public service to public administration cannot be over – emphasized.
a) It is the public administration that ensures the continuity of government b) Public service acts as custodian and protector of the public interest and public treasury against violation by the ruling class c) The public service particularly the civil service is supposed to be politically neutral and d) It is also supposed to faithfully serve any political master in office e) The public service enjoys security of tenure of office and anonymity in the performance of their duties.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.5 Mention five importance of public service to public administration 113 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 4.0 CONCLUSION We have described many public issues that are involved in public administration.
This is critical for proper handling of resources in a political entity.
Contributions of renowned authors through classified texts and journals are found very useful for this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In our discussions in this unit we have dealt with public issues in administration by looking at the following aspects; Public policy, Implications for the concept of public policy, Stages of the Policy Process, Politics and Policy, Public Service and The Importance of Public Service 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What is public policy?
2.
List and explain the stages of policy process 3.
Mention four importance of public service 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Adamolekun L. (1983), Public Administration: A Nigerian and Comparative Perspective, New York: Longman Inc. Anderson, J.
(1979), Public Policy Making, New York: Thomas Nelson and Son Ltd. Easton, D (1965), Dunn, W. N. (1981), Public Policy Analysis: An Introduction, New Jersey: Prentice – Hall Jones, C. (1984), An Introduction to the Study of Public Policy, California: Brooks/Cole Publishing Co. 114 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Federal Civil Service Review Pannel (n.d) Federal Republic of Nigeria, (1997) Public Service Review Commission, Main Report, 1974 115 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 3 PRACTICAL ISSUES IN NIGERIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Development 3.2 Public Service Review Commissions 3.3 Structures of Public Administration 3.4 Decision Making Process in Nigerian Public Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigerian public administration touches on practical issues of development.
Historically, it has passed through various stages.
The main issues that will be examined in this unit are: Historical development of public administration in Nigeria, Wage Review Commissions, the Structures of Public Administration and Decision making process in Nigerian public service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: h trace the major historical development of public administration in Nigeria h discuss the Wage Review Commissions h describe the structures of Nigerian Civil Service h discuss decision making process in Nigerian public service 3.1 Historical Development The growth and development of public administration in Nigeria is influenced by the following factors: 116 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 1.
British Colonialism: The fact that Britain colonized Nigeria and established British public service structure and procedures in the administration of the colonial territory, influenced the growth and development of public administration in Nigeria.
Indeed, it was the colonial public administration which managed the colonial territory (Nigeria) from about 1861 to 1954 when regional governments were created, and made the territory to operate a federal structure.
Thus, the public services of the then regional governments from 1954 to 1960, and up to 1966, were direct offshoots of the early British colonial public service administrative structure in terms of ethics and values, culture and tradition, training procedures and espirit de corp associated with the public service.
Nigeria’s social–cultural conditions or the social settings made up of very many ethnic and cultural groups, and many languages also have affected the growth and development of public administration in Nigeria.
Those factors have created problems of balancing management and control in the public service.
In fact they are partly responsible for the problem of nepotism and tribalism often associated with the management of the public service in Nigeria.
2.
Another influence on the public administration closely related to social setting, is Nigeria’s federal structure adopted in the 1954 Lyttleton constitution.
That constitution was largely responsible for the regionally oriented development of the public service administrative structure.
The federal structure enabled the creation of federal and regional services, and also the regional outlook and consciousness of the services, particularly from 1960 to 1966.
3.
The civil war of 1967 to 1970 was another significant influence on public administration in Nigeria.
The impact of the war was felt in all segments of the Nigerian society.
At the end of the war the military apparently had such power and authority in the federation which could not be easily challenged by any of the 117 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 constituents of the federation.
That enabled the military to establish what was called a result – oriented and unified grade structure public service for the entire country through the recommendations of the 1974 Public Service Review Commission (Udoji Commission) (Public Service Review Commission, Main Report, 1974).
That public service reform has continued to influence the structure and procedures of public administration in Nigeria till date.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 List and explain the major historical developments in Nigerian public service 3.2 Public Service Review Commissions In Nigeria and other erstwhile colonial countries whose civil service system has been influenced by the British pattern, the problem is to find a means of using administrative talent and experience and also specialist skill and expertise at top management level in such a way as to ensure maximum utilization of available manpower and at the same time promote harmony in the public service.
The Public Service Review Commission in Nigeria, over time has set up the following commissions for purposes of reforms in the public service: Tudo Davis 1945, Harragin 1946, Miller 1947, Gosuch 1955, Mbanefo 1959, Morgan 1963, Adebo 1970, Udoji 1974, etc.
The commissions thus invite memoranda from all concerned deliberately publish and submit reports to the state.
The Government study the reports, reject, and accept certain aspect of the report as it sees fit.
After such a study of the report, a white paper is released which effect appropriate reforms.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.2 Mention major Public Service Review Commission in Nigeria.
3.3 Structures of Public Administration in Nigeria 118 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Public administration is organized in two ways: laterally and vertically.
Laterally, the government creates ministries or governmental departments on the basis of different areas of interests of its activities.
Usually, such ministries as those of defense, external and home affairs, and finance are part of this structure.
Others may be split up into smaller units or combined into larger units as the government sees fit on the basis of its view of how best to carry out its programs and the available funds for this purpose.
The chief executive and, therefore, head of government is charged with the task of delineating the various ministries and appointing the ministers who head them.
Among other ministries usually associated with government are: Communication, Agriculture, Industry, Information, Establishment, Labor and Productivity, Justice, etc.
It is these ministries that collectively form the civil service or public administration.
This ministerial organization is based on a lateral division of labor in the performance of government activities.
Thus, for example, the ministry of information takes responsibility for the dissemination of news about government; the finance ministry coordinates all the financial transactions of the government; the ministry of defense uses armed forces to protect the society from external attack and the ruling class from external and internal attack and displacement; the external affairs ministry conducts the nation’s foreign policy; and the ministry of the interior looks after internal security through such institutions as the police, prison, customs, and immigration control and civil defense.
In addition to the ministries, public administration includes some permanent governmental agencies that perform vital specific tasks.
These agencies vary from country to country.
In some countries but not in others some of them may attain the status of a ministry.
Among them is the bureau of statistics whose function is data gathering and analysis on all aspects of a nation’s life; others are the 119 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 census bureau, and the public service commission that recruits the senior level personnel of the public administration.
For purposes of coordination of their activities with those of the other departments of the administration, certain parent ministries supervise them.
For example, the ministry of economic development and planning often looks after the bureau of statistics.
The lateral organization of governmental institutions makes the coordination of the activities of these various ministries and agencies an important aspect of public administration.
Such coordination is often evident at the time of budgeting and when preparing national development plans.
Therefore, budgeting and development planning are mechanisms for inter – ministerial coordination.
Their goal is to ensure that all the lateral units of the government are working harmoniously in the pursuit of all their various programs.
However, on a more regular basis, coordination is achieved by the activities and the decisions of the cabinet.
Here most of the heads of the ministries are represented and discuss the implementation of government programs under the chairmanship of the chief executive of the state.
Since the ministers are the official political heads of the ministries their presence at the cabinet meetings ensures that the views and interests of the ministries are represented.
However, not all ministers are of cabinet rank and so not all of them attend cabinet meetings all the time.
But when matters directly affecting a ministry are concerned its minister will attend even though he/she is not of cabinet rank.
Otherwise, another minister of cabinet rank looks after its interests in the cabinet.
Thus the cabinet, through its periodic review of the activities of the various ministries, is able to coordinate the ministries and government agencies.
On a day- to – day basis, coordination of the activities of the various lateral sections of the civil service is done by a section of the public administration known as the cabinet office.
In Nigeria Executive Office of the President under the headship of the 120 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Secretary to the Government performs this function.
On a lesser scale it is also performed by the office of the Head of the Public Service that deals with the more technical questions of the efficiency and smooth working of the bureaucratic machinery of government.
Needless to say, effective coordination of the various arms of the public administration is the wheel around which its efficiency and effectiveness revolve.
In addition to the lateral organization of the public administration into ministries, there is also a vertical organization of each ministry as a hierarchy of authority roles in which command flows downwards and obedience flows upwards.
Thus, public administration is a command structure with those at the higher level commanding and those at the lower level obeying.
The higher the level of authority the greater the degree of responsibility of the role occupant within the system, at the top of this hierarchy is the minister who is the political head of the ministry.
He takes responsibility for the performance of his ministry, taking the credit for success and the blame for failure.
A serious failure by his ministry may cost him his job as minister and may even send him into political disgrace.
Therefore, he must maintain a tight control over the other members of his ministry in the performance of their duties.
In this task, he has the aid of a tightly knit set of rules, regulations, norms and procedures to which the civil servants must conform strictly.
However, apart from the function of laying down the broad policy outlines for his ministry, the job of the minister is essentially one of supervision of the activities of his subordinates.
(Nnoli, 1984) Self – Assessment Exercise 3.3 Describe the structures of public administration 121 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.4 Decision Making Process in Nigerian Public Administration Lucy (1991) describes decision – making as an integral part of organization’s management which occurs in everyday function and at all levels.
According to her, decisions in Nigerian Organizations are taken at three levels: 1.
Top management or Executive: These are decisions leading to ends rather than means.
Decisions taken at this level are directed towards the attainment of the goals of the organization.
Goals are statements that describe desired future conditions worthy of organizational effort and commitment.
Goals consist of the following attributes: i.
They reflect an organization’s basic purposes ii.
They focus on results, not just the performance of the task.
iii.
They call for a major commitment of human and material resources for their attainment.
2.
Middle level management: This breaks the broad goals into specific ends or objectives.
While goals are broad in character and describe desired future conditions, objectives are more specific and spell out actions to be carried out towards goals attainment.
3.
The operatives or rank and file: They are concerned with making decisions that effectively implement the policy directives received from the above.
The immediate action to achieve the objectives is taken at the lower level.
For example, in the University System, the lecturers are regarded as the operatives because they direct teaching and research which lead to the production of high level manpower (University Graduates).
If wrong decision is made at the level of the operatives, the entire goal of the organization will flop.
Consequently, decision at this level of delegation of duty is, as a matter of course, very important 122 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 In addition to the above types of decision making, other types of decision making include: h Group Decision Making: this ensures efficient and effective utilization of people within the organization and its environs, to make use of their intellectual abilities for the growth of the organization.
Decisions are expected to be made in a social environment where each participant contributes his ideas towards the realization of the set objectives.
No idea is useless no matter how stupid it sounds.
Group decision calls for varied views which when properly articulate, lead to improved decision.
h Committee Decision: This is a form of group decision that is increasingly being used as effective administrative process.
Committees are formed for various reasons: i.
Sometimes, large deliberative, legislative, executive and administrative bodies may have a variety of business to attend to and therefore lack the time and conducive atmosphere to effectively investigate and discuss in appropriate details the matters before them.
Committees are then set up to attend to some of the issues.
ii.
Technical issues that require the knowledge / expertise of a special category of persons demand the information of committees.
iii.
The use of committees is a form of delegation of authority in administration which makes the detailed and thorough handling of different aspects of an organization’s activities possible.
They may be standing (permanent) or ad hoc (temporary) 123 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Self – Assessment Exercise 3.4 Discuss decision making process in Nigerian Public Administration 4.0 CONCLUSION The practical issues in public administration in Nigeria have been explained here.
It is important to note that public administration has peculiarities upon which it operates.
The nature of public administration in any society depends to a large extent on its background and mode of decision making.
5.0 SUMMARY Areas covered in this unit include: Historical Development of Public Administration in Nigeria, Provisions of Public Service Review Commission, Structures of Public Administration, and Decision Making Process in Nigerian Public Service.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss three reasons why committees are formed for purposes of decision making.
2.
Explain four (4) historical events in Nigerian Public Service 3.
Describe the structures of Decision – making in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, (2004), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley 124 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Lucy, T. (1991), Management Information System 6th Edition, London: Education Low Prices Books a Scheme Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) Public Service Review Commission, Main Report 1974 125 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 UNIT 4 PRACTICAL ISSUES IN THE WORLD CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public Administration and African Experience 3.2 French Administrative Practice 3.3 The United States of America 3.4 British Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration is a very interesting area of study and it has its peculiarities in various parts of the world.
We will therefore consider selected nations in this unit for discussion.
Those to be considered include African nations (which are assumed to share similar experience), France, America and Britain.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you are expected to: h Describe Public Administration in Africa h Discuss administrative practice in France h Explain the practice of Public Administration in the United States of America h Discuss the British Administrative System 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 126 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 3.1 Public Administration and African Experience African countries are characterized by an attempt to use the apparatus of government to hasten socio – economic development, and overcome their backwardness.
Their success in this regard is reflected in the improvements in their educational and health standards, the development in their road and transport systems, the modernization of their communications systems, and their self – assertion in international affairs.
All these achievements, and many more, have been made possible, in part, by the activities of their public administrations.
Nevertheless much still remains to be accomplished.
The living standard of the African people is far from being enviable.
And part of the constraints in further improving the situation may be traced to the inadequacies of the African public administrations.
The general underdevelopment of the African countries is the most pervasive constraint on the effectiveness of African public administration.
Most importantly, it is reflected in the poverty of the essential material resources which they control and which can be used for development projects.
Although Africa is rich as a continent many of its countries are clearly destitute of resources.
Those countries such as Congo (DRC), Garbon and Nigeria that have very valuable natural resources do not exercise effective control over them.
Under these circumstances public administration is unable to undertake important socio – economic and cultural projects.
All government programms need material resources for their implementation, and unless these materials are available not much can be done to implement them.
Similarly, the shortage of skilled manpower in African countries adversely affects their public administration.
Public administration needs such personnel as specialist doctors, highly trained teachers, telecommunications’ experts, engineers of different specializations, agronomists, veterinary doctors and myriad of other professionals 127 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 for the effective execution of government programs.
Most of these are not available in most of the African nations which, furthermore, have very little means of importing all the manpower they need from outside their countries.
The net effect of this shortage is low level of performance of African public administrations.
This shortage of skilled personnel exists side by side with a general overloading of the staff positions of African public administrations.
At the lower ranks and non – technical levels there are usually more staff than necessary.
This situation has arisen because of the key positions that the civil service occupies in the African employment markets.
It is by far the secondary and post secondary school leavers.
This often expands the staff size of African public administration.
As a result, most African civil service institutions tend to be unwieldy and difficult to manage.
Truancy and under – utilization of personnel prevail to the detriment of personnel co – ordination and performance.
Similarly, there is a general overloading of the African public administration with services.
Although most African states are organized along capitalist lines there has developed a heritage of state participation in a wider range of activities than is usual with a capitalist system.
This heritage is traceable to the colonial origin of the states and its functions of organizing a capitalist system of production initially without local capitalists, and holding down a conquered population.
Over the years great expectations have been developed by Africans with respect to the provision of all manner of amenities and benefits by the government.
However, the governments usually do not have the capacity to satisfy these expectations.
The net effect is a pervasive crisis of confidence within the public administration that adversely affects its performance.
At the same time that African public bureaucracies were overloaded with services because of their colonial background, they are also the objects of negative and sometimes hostile attitudes and feelings, 128 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 again because of their colonial past.
They are associated in the minds of the people with the arbitrariness, brutality and injustices of the pacification measures, the forced labour policies, and the wickedness of the tax collectors.
Consequently, while the people expect to receive benefits from the administration they are unwilling, and in fact are sometimes opposed to giving it support.
Without such support the public administration cannot perform well.
African public administrations have not had a long bureaucratic tradition.
Most of them date from the beginning of colonialism.
And since then their functions have expanded very rapidly.
This means that many of the problems they have to solve are presenting themselves for the first time.
There is very little in terms of precedents and institutional experiences that they can rely on in solving these problems.
Their difficulties are compounded by their imitative character.
They tend to be modeled rigidly after their counterparts in the former metropole.
Thus, they are unable to react effectively to some indigenous problems and circumstances.
And unfortunately, the system has not been innovative enough to attempt some changes geared towards adapting the administration to local conditions.
Part of the ineffectiveness of African public administration arises from excessive bureaucratic politics within them.
Officials devote proportionately more time than is reasonable to the serious business of promotion and moving ahead within the system in which very little emphasis is placed on merit and performance.
Relatively little time is, consequently, left for the tasks that administrators are expected to perform.
In this struggle for personal advantage within African public administrations, the ethnic factor often intrudes and is cleverly manipulated.
Unable to trust himself under the system of promotion by merit, the African bureaucrat invokes the myth of ethnic hurdles and detractors, and manipulates ethnic sentiments in order to be 129 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 promoted.
In the process, subjectivism replaces objectivism in the performance of administrative duties.
Political factors loom much larger than necessary in administration, with technical competence being relegated to the very background of bureaucratic priorities.
With administrative mediocre in charge because of the political dominance of their ethnic groups, effectiveness in the discharge of institutional responsibilities becomes a matter of little significance.
Meanwhile, the growth of ethnic sentiments and conflicts generally in the society is thus promoted.
Similarly, intergenerational conflicts within African public administrations adversely affect their performance.
With the attainment of national independence and the consequent indigenization of the civil service, coupled with the exodus of foreign public administrators, the African civil service was quickly filled with African officials most of whom did not have the requisite qualifications and were young in age.
Sooner than later a new generation of African civil servants was recruited with better qualifications but forced to take subordinate positions under these earlier groups whose competence they disdained.
The consequences was an inter – generational conflict within the institution and this inevitably hampers its effectiveness.
African public administrations are also adversely hampered by poor work ethics within them.
Civil servants do not take their public assignments as seriously as their private responsibilities.
This in the result of the foreign origin of the African governments in colonialism, they were alienated from the population at large and could, therefore, not inspire commitment and fervor in public officials.
Although these governments are now African – controlled they are still plagued by the hangovers of this colonial past.
African public administrators tend to be inflexible in the performance of their tasks.
Consequently, they are unable to adapt easily to changing circumstances.
This inflexibility arises from the 130 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 personal insecurity of the administrators.
Hastily promoted because of the need to Africanize the institution or to replace departing foreigners they are not confident of their ability to make the correct decisions.
They find refuge in bureaucratic norms, procedures, rules, and regulations, and follow them religiously.
And as they become quagmired in them they are unable to build up the requisite experience in innovative decision – making and execution and to develop the necessary confidence.
They are threatened by younger and more daring colleagues and may spend most of their official time and energy trying to make their positions secure from these younger and more flexible challenges.
African public administrators are plagued by role confusion.
There is very little understanding by public administrators of what their responsibilities entails and how it is distinguished from similar and related responsibilities.
The consequence is the perennial phenomenon of passing the buck.
Hardly anyone is willing to commit oneself to a decision for fear that one would exceed one’s official bounds or make the wrong decision.
Under these circumstances, it is difficult to get anything accomplished.
This role confusion is the result of the limited education of the administrators, their personal insecurity, and the amorphous or imprecise character of their assignments.
The problem of role confusion in African public administration is reinforced by inadequate co – ordination of its various activities.
For example, the ministry of commerce in Nigeria often issued import licenses without clearing with the Central Bank that there was enough foreign exchange to support those licenses.
The result was confusion within the system that obviously damaged its effectiveness.
The budget and development plan that are supposed to improve co – ordination end up as checklist of projects by various departments for which funds are voted.
Their mutual consequences for one another are hardly explored.
131 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 The political instability of African governments also adversely affects African public administration.
The denunciation of the policies and programs of the previous government often accompany the frequent changes of government on the continent.
Under the circumstances, it is difficult to create a strong bureaucratic tradition on the basis of continuity of activities and experiences.
In addition, a great degree of uncertainty and confusion is introduced into the administrative process to the detriment of efficiency and effectiveness.
Finally, African public administration tends to be excessively oriented to the distribution rather than the production of goods and services.
The disease of their respective governments equally affects them.
These petty – bourgeois regimes are incapable of the discipline necessary for productive activity.
They must depend for their benefits from society on their sharing of the national cake.
Their public administration must help in this task.
It is not an accident that production has continued to deteriorate all over Africa (Nnoli, 2003).
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Describe the African Experience of Public Administration and state four obstacles confronted by the African Public Administration.
3.2 French Administrative Practice In France the political and administrative roles are blurred.
There is what has been termed political marginal politicization of the civil service by the political system.
French top civil servants often play political roles as mayors or councilors.
Moreover, they are entitled to stand for election to Parliament and, if elected, they keep their civil service rights in cold storage and later return to their posts in the civil service.
This is strictly true in theory; in actual practice, few civil servants who turn politician ever return to the civil service.
In most cases they embark on a full – time political career.
132 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 The French system leans very heavily towards the specialized forms of administrative education, for not only does it include lengthy training courses specially designed for the main groups of administrators, but their prior University education is also heavily dominated by the requirements of the system.
Also the general do not form a single class as in Britain, while the highest administrative corps specialized in various aspects of technical management.
In this way the British system of polarization between generalists and specialists, which has been inherited by Nigeria, is avoided, and members of both leading corps receive broad training in general management as well as in specialized skills.
Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Discuss the relationship between politics and administration in the French Administrative system 3.3 The United States of America In the USA the trend has been a steady movement away from patronage towards the merit system, that is, a civil service based mainly on recruitment by merit for career officials.
Even then, it is estimated that there are a reasonable number of political appointments at the top of the American civil service and governmental agencies.
These appointments are excluded from the normal civil service recruitment and promotion procedure.
The appointees hold political loyalty only to the government which appoints them.
They are not therefore strictly bound by the civil service convention of political neutrality.
Their tenure of office is invariably limited to the period that the government which appointed them stays in power.
To this extent, this category of civil servants cannot be truthfully described as standing for the continuity of policy or corrective of party government.
133 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Explain the concept of continuity in the American public administration?
3.4 British Administration The modern public administration in British witnessed a significant development through the establishment of Central Policy Review Staff – popularly called Think Tank in 1974.
It is involved in regular presentations to the government of synoptic views of government strategy and detailed analysis of selected particular issues (Goodnow, 1914).
Members of the Think Tank are not political appointees; half of them are civil servants and the remaining half are outside appointees, on short – term appointment, and recruited on a non – political basis.
They are subject to strict civil service rules and discipline.
The other body – the policy unit – are not civil servants.
They are a small group of political sympathizers appointed on a purely political basis to assist the Prime Minister with the political aspects of departmental work.
Their main function is to examine papers going before the Ministers, and draw attention to problems and difficulties having party political implications and look for land mines especially in politically sensitive areas.
The policy unit – and the corresponding appointments by departmental Ministers –was the result of the recommendations of the Fulton Report.
It was based on recruitment, in specific fields of government, of persons recognized as specialists in their particular disciplines.
They have clear political affinities to the political party of government and most of them had been advising the government when the party was in opposition.
They are the special advisers to government (Adebayo, 2004).
134 COURSE GUIDE INR 142 Self – Assessment Exercise 3.1 Discuss public administration in Britain.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been noticed that public administration is been practiced differently in various parts of the world.
Our studies therefore considered African nations, France, Britain and the United States of America where contributions of competent authorities have been found as useful sources.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed aspects of the African experience of public administration, French Administration, British Administration and the United States of America.
It identified the unique features of the African, French, Britain and American systems of public administration, bringing to fore their strengths and weaknesses.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Why is public administration in African not as effective as that of the Western Europe?
2.
How useful is the policy of specialized education to the success of public administration in the France?
3.
How does emphasis on merit ensure efficiency in the American Public Administration?
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Adebayo, (2004), Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria, Ibadan: Spectrum Books and John Wiley Nnoli, O.
(2003), Introduction to Politics, Revised Second Edition, Enugu: Pan African Center for Research and Conflict Resolution (PACREP) 135
