ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ISL132 COURSE TITLE: ZAKĀT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 1ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) COURS E GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE / TITLE : ISL132 ZAKĀT ( CHARITY IN ISLAM) COURSE DEVELOPER / WRITER: Adeniyi Omotope Zafaran C/O Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
COURSE EDITOR/ PROGRAMME LEADER: Prof. Asif F. Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island - Lagos 2ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2010 First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 3ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Introduction………………………………………….. 1 Course Aims………………………………………… 1 Working Through This Course……………………… 1 Course Materials…………………………………….. 2 Study Units………………………………………….. 2 Assessment………………………………………….. 2 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA)………………….
2 Text-books and References 3 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule....………… 4 How to get the most from this course……………….
4-5 Tutors and Tutorials………………………………….
5-6 Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs)………………….
7 Guideline for Writing Tutor-Marked Assignments 7 Final Examination and Grading 7 Conclusion …………………………………………... 8 Summary…………………………………………….
8 4ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Introduction Welcome!
ISL 132: Zakāt – Charity in Islam is a two-credit unit course for Islamic Studies undergraduate students.
The course textbook has been developed with Islam as a way of life in focus.
This course-guide is an overview of the entire course.
You will also read about how it is structured out as well as its requirements.
Course Aims This Course aims at helping you to understand Zakāt, as an important pillar of Islam, its current practice and ways of realizing its benefits to the maximum.
The discussions in this regard shall span across: • Introducing you to the meaning and significance of Zakāt • Acquainting you with the differences between Zakāt and other Islamic acts of charity • Presenting to you the zakatable items • highlighting modes of its collection • Discussing the early modes of operating Zakāt, the current 5ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) practices in its administration • And suggesting ways of disbursing it vis-à-vis modern challenges Course Objectives Towards achieving the above aims, there are overall objectives for ISL132.
This is in addition to specific objectives, which precedes every unit.
You are strongly advised to read them before venturing into the subject matters, as it will prepare your mind for better grasping of the message.
Having completed this course you should be able to: • Explain the literal and technical meanings of Zakāt.
• Relate Zakāt with other pillars of Islam.
• Distinguish between Zakāt, Zakātu `l-fiţr and Şadaqat types of charity.
• Explain the Zakatable items.
• Enumerate the Zakāt Beneficiaries.
• Discuss the administration of Zakāt.
• Discuss Zakāt specifics on women • Relate spiritual, social and economic significance of Zakāt • Discuss challenges confronting Zakāt operation.
Working through This Course For you to complete this course, you must read and understand all the study units and all the related materials.
You will be required to submit written assignments at the end of each unit for the purpose of assessment.
You are also going to write a final examination at the end of the course.
Course Materials The following are the major materials you need for this course: • Course guide.
• Study Units.
• Assignment File.
• Relevant Textbooks including the ones listed in each unit.
6ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Study Units There are 14 units (of three modules) for this course.
They are: MODULE ONE Unit 1 Concept of Zakāt Unit 2 Significance of Zakāt Unit 3 Relationship between Zakāt and other Pillars of Islam Unit 4 Differences between Zakāt and Şadaqah Unit 5 Zakāt al –Fiţr MODULE 2 Unit 1 Zakāt on Minerals and Rikāz Unit 2 Zakāt on Livestock and Farm Produce Unit 3 Zakāt on Cash, Articles of Merchandise and other Modern Monetary Transactions Unit 4 Beneficiaries of Zakāt MODULE 3 Unit 1 Zakāt as a Socio-economic System Unit 2 Zakāt and Poverty Alleviation Unit 3 Women and Zakāt Unit 4 Administration of Zakāt Unit 5 Zakāt and Contemporary Challenges Assessment File You will be given an Assessment File and a marking scheme.
The assessment file will contain details of the works to be submitted to your tutor for marking.
You will be evaluated in two ways: the tutor marked assignments and the written examination.
Your final marks depend on what you score in these two.
You must submit your assignment to your tutor for formal assessment which necessarily followed the stipulated schedule and deadline.
Your submitted work for assessment will be 30% of your total score.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) You are expected to submit specified number of ‘TMAs’.
Each unit of this course has a TMA.
You will be assessed on only four but the best three will represent your 30% grading.
On completion of any assignment, you must send it with a TMA to your tutor.
Ensure that the assignment reaches your 7ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) tutor on or before the deadline for submissions.
In the event of any logistics for incompletion of any work to time, contact your tutor immediately for possible extension; for this shall not be granted after the due date unless for exceptional situations.
Textbooks and References Some books have been recommended for the course, they will assist you a lot if you can purchase some of them for further reading.
Abdullah, Shaykh Ahmad (1992), Zakat (Poor Due), A Misunderstood Pillar of Islam.
Lagos: Masaga Merchants and Printing Press.
Abdu `r-Raūf, Muhammad (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion.
Lagos, Islamic Publications Bureau.
Adeniyi, O.Z.
(1999).
Living By Şalāt.
Lagos: Al-Hikmah Communications Limited.
Al-Mundhirī, ‘Abd al- ‘Azīm (2004) Al-Targhīb wa `t- Tarhīb.
Cairo: Dār al-Bayān al –Arabī.
Al-Qarñāwī Y, (2000).
Fiqhu `z- Zakāh, A Comparative Study of Zakāh, Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’an and Sunnah, Vol.I & II, Saudi Arabia: Scientific Publishing Centre, King Abdu `l-‘Azīz University.
Al-Qarñāwī Y.(2007).
Poverty and its Solution in Islam.
New Delhi: Adam Publishers and Distributors.
Ibn Ismāil, M. (2002).
Subulu `s-Salām.
Dāru `l-Manār Publishers.
Mawdūdī, S.A.A.
(1985).
Let Us Be Muslims.
Leicester: The Islamic Foundation.
Mistu, Muhyid-Dīn (1994).
Al-Zakāt – Fiqhuhā wa Asrāruhā Beirut: Dāru Ibn Kathīr.
Muhyi `d-Dīn Mistu (1994).
Al-Zakāt - Fiqhuhā-Asrāruhā Beirut: Dāru Ibn Kathīr.
8ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Muhammad al-Musnad (n.d.).
trans.
Fatāwā (Islamic Legal Injunctions) Regarding Women, Saudi Arabia: Darussalam Publishers and Distributors, pp.138-144.
Muhammad Taqi ‘Usmān (1999).
An Introduction to Islamic Finance, n.p, Shāfī, M.M.
(1975) Distribution of Wealth in Islam.
Karachi: Begun Aisha Bawany Waqf.
M. A. Khamīs (2004).
trans.
Fiqhu `n-Nisā’ fi `l-‘Ibādāt.
Lagos: Islamic Heritage Foundation.
Sābiq, Sayyid (1983).
Fiqh`s-Sunnah, vol.1.
Beirut: Dār al- Fikr, 4th edit.
Course Overview and Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignment will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Below is an overview of the Course and schedule for the presentation of the assignments.
Unit Weeks Activity Assignments Title of Work Module 1 Unit 1 Concept of Zakāt Week 1 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Significance of Zakāt Week 2 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Relationship between Zakāt Week 3 Assignment 3 and other Pillars of Islam Unit 4 Differences between Zakāt Week 4 Assignment 4 and Sadaqah Unit 5 Zakāt al –Fitr Week 5 Assignment 5 Module 2 Unit 1 Zakāt on Minerals and Rikāz Week 6 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Zakāt on Livestock and Farm produce Week 7 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Zakāt on Cash, Merchandise and Week 8 Assignment 3 other Modern Monetary Transactions Unit 4 Beneficiaries of Zakāt Week 9 Assignment 4 Module 3 Unit 1 Zakāt as a socio-economic System Week 11 Assignment 1 9ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Unit 2 Zakāt and Poverty Alliviation Week 12 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Women and Zakāt Week 13 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Administration of Zakāt Week 14 Assignment 4 Unit 5 Zakāt and Contemporary Challenges Week 15 Assignment 5 Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 15 How to get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the Study Units replace the university lecturer.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the course materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Just as a lecturer might give you in- class exercise, your Study Units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times.
Each of the Study Units has common features which are designed to aid your learning.
The first feature is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
Self Assessment Exercises are interspersed throughout each study unit and answers are given at the end of the course.
These exercises are designed to help you recall what you have studied and to evaluate your learning by yourself.
You should do each Self Assessment Exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
The summary at the end of each unit also helps you to recall all the main topics discussed in the main content of each unit.
There are also tutor-marked questions at the end of each unit.
Working on these questions will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments which you will submit and the final examination.
It should take you about three hours to complete a study unit, the exercises and assignments.
When you have completed the first study unit take note of how long it took you and use this 10ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) information to draw up a timetable to guide your study for the rest of your course.
The wide margins on the left and right side of the pages of your course book are meant for you to make notes of main ideas or key points at which you can use when revising the course.
If you make use of all these features, you will significantly increase your chances of passing the course.
Course Delivery As an open and distance learner, you learn through several ways.
You learn when you interact with the content in your course material in the same way as a student interacts with the teacher in a conventional institution.
You also learn when you are guided through the course; however you are not taught the course.
Instead, your course material is your teacher, and as such you will not be able to get answers to any questions which may arise from your study of the material.
It is for this reason that, in addition to the course material which you have received, the delivery of this course is supported by tutorial, facilitation, and counseling support services.
Although these services are not compulsory, you are encouraged to take maximum advantage of them.
Tutors and Tutorial The total number of tutorial hours for this course is 8 hours.
Tutorial sessions form a part of your learning process as you have an opportunity to receive face to face contact with your tutorial facilitator and to receive answers to questions or clarifications which you may have.
Also you may contact your tutorial facilitator by phone or email.
On your part, you will be expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units, write your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from tutorial sessions.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Tutorial sessions are a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You will need to contact your study centre to arrange the time schedule for the sessions.
You will also need to obtain your tutorial facilitator’s phone number and email address.
Tutorial sessions are optional however, the benefits of participating in them provide you a forum for 11ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) interaction and peer group discussions which will minimize the isolation you may experience as a distance learner.
Facilitation Facilitation is learning that takes place both within and outside of tutorial sessions.
Your tutorial facilitator guides your learning by doing the following: • provide answers to your questions during tutorial sessions, on phone or by email; • coordinate group discussions; • provide feedback on your assignments; • pose questions to confirm learning outcomes; • coordinate, mark and record your assignment/examination score; and • monitor your progress.
The language of instruction for this course is in English.
The course material is available in print or CD formats, and also on the university website.
On your part, you will be expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units, write your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from facilitation.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Time of facilitation is a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You should contact your tutorial facilitator if: • you do not understand any part of the Study Units.
• you have difficulty with the Self Assessment Exercises.
• you have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutorial facilitator’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Counseling Counseling forms a part of your learning because it is provided to make your learning experience easier.
Counseling is available to you at two levels, academic and personal counseling.
Student counselors are available at the study 12ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) centre to provide guidance for personal issues that may affect your studies.
Your study centre manager and tutorial facilitators can assist you with questions on academic matters such as course materials, facilitation, grades and so on.
Make sure that you have the phone numbers and email addresses of your study centre and the various individuals.
Assessment There are three components of assessment for this course: Self Assessment Exercises, the Tutor-Marked Assignments at the end of each Unit; and a written examination.
In doing these assignments, you are expected to use the information gathered during your study of the course.
Below are detailed explanations on how to do each assignment.
Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs) There are Self Assessment Exercises spread out through your course material.
You should attempt each exercise immediately after reading the section that precedes it.
Possible answers to the exercises are provided at the end of the course book, however, you should check the answers ONLY AFTER you must have attempted the exercises.
The exercises are for you to evaluate your learning; they are not to be submitted.
There are also questions spread through each study unit.
You are required to attempt these questions after you have read a study unit.
Again, the questions are to help you assess your knowledge of the contents of the unit.
You are not required to submit the answers for SAEs.
Guidelines for Writing Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
On the cover page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMA 1, TMA 2.
), and date of submission, your name and matriculation number.
It should look like this: Course Code ________Course Title ____________________ Tutor- Marked Assignment ______Date of Submission_____ Name _____________________Matriculation Number ______ 2.
You should endeavour to be concise and to the point in your answers.
Your answer should be based on your course material, further readings and experience.
However, do not copy from any of these materials.
If 13ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) you do, you will be penalized.
Remember to give relevant examples and illustrations.
3.
Use ruled foolscap-sized paper for writing answers.
Make and keep a copy of your assignments.
4.
Your answers should be hand written by you.
Leave a margin of about 1.5 inches of the left side and about 5 lines before the answer to the next question for your tutorial facilitator’s comments.
5.
When you have completed each assignment, make sure that each assignment reaches your tutorial facilitator on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your study centre manager and tutorial facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for ISL 132 will be of two hours duration, and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of Self Assessment Exercises, and questions in the Tutor- Marked Assignments, which you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your answers to Self Assessment Exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments before the examination.
For you to be eligible to sit for the final examinations, you must have done the following: 1.
You should have submitted all the four Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course.
2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
The deadline for examination registration will be available at your study centre.
Failure to submit your assignments or to register for the examination (even if you sit for the examination) means that you will not have a score for the course.
Course Marking Scheme This table represents the layout for the actual course mark: 14ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Assessment Marks Best three Assignments 30% Final Examination 70% Total 100% CONCLUSION In conclusion, the Course ISL 132: Zakāt (Charity in Islam) will provide you with the detail knowledge and understanding of the institution as a pillar of Islam.
The Course prepares you to appreciate and discuss it not only from the spiritual and fiscal point of view but also as a humanitarian concern.
The Course will explain Zakāt from the literal and technical points of view, relate it to other pillars of Islam, discuss its significance and enumerate Zakatable items.
It distinguishes between Zakāt, Zakātu `l-fiţr and Şadaqat types of charity.
The Course will expose you to the defects in the various ways the institution is currently been implemented and the new ways to be charted for restoring its values.
SUMMARY All the features of this course guide have been designed to facilitate your learning in order that you achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
They include the aims and objectives, course summary, course overview, self assessment exercises and study questions.
You should ensure that you make maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
We wish you success.
15ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE / TITLE: ISL132 ZAKĀT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) COURSE DEVELOPER / WRITER: Adeniyi Omotope Zafaran C/O Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
COURSE EDITOR/ PROGRAMME LEADER: Prof. Asif F. Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island - Lagos 16ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2010 First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii 17ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) TABLE OF CONTENTS Content Page Title Page i Publisher ii Table of Contents iii MODULE ONE Unit 1 Concept of Zakāt 1- 6 Unit 2 Significance of Zakāt 7-12 Unit 3 Relationship between Zakāt and other Pillars of Islam 13-17 Unit 4 Differences between Zakāt and Şadaqah 18 - 24 Unit 5 Zakāt al –Fiţr 25 - 31 MODULE 2 Unit 1 Zakāt on Minerals and Rikāz 32 - 36 Unit 2 Zakāt on Livestock and Farm produce 37 - 42 Unit 3 Zakāt on Cash, Merchandise and other Modern Monettary Transaction 43 - 46 Unit 4 Beneficiaries of Zakāt 47 - 52 MODULE 3 Unit 1 Zakāt as a Socio-economic System 53 - 58 Unit 2 Zakāt and Poverty Alleviation 59 - 64 Unit 3 Women and Zakāt 65 - 69 Unit 4 Administration of Zakāt 70 - 74 Unit 5 Zakāt and Contemporary Challenges 75 - 80 18ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) iii 19ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) MODULE ONE Unit 1 Concept of Zakāt Unit 2 Significance of Zakāt Unit 3 Relationship between Zakāt and other Pillars of Islam Unit 4 Differences between Zakāt and Şadaqah Unit 5 Zakāt al –Fiţr UNIT 1 CONCEPT OF ZAKĀT AND CONSEQUENCES OF DEFULT IN GIVING IT.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Literal and Technical Meanings 3.2 References from the Qur’ān and Hadīth.
3.3 Consequences of Default in Giving Zakāt.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Islam as a way of life is not oblivious of welfare as a pillar for stability of society.
It regards fellow feeling as an actual demonstration of true humanity.
For this reason it makes Zakāt one of its pillars.
In this Unit we shall delve into the literal and technical meaning of Zakāt, its obligation and the implications of its non-payment.
References shall be made to the sacred sources of the facts that will be presented.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you will be able to: 1.
Define Zakāt literally and technically.
2.
Identify the relationship between the two.
3.
Give sources of of Zakāt specifics.
4.
Explain the implications of non-payment of Zakāt.
20ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Literal and Technical Meanings As with some other basic terminologies in Islam, the word Zakāt has literal and technical meaning.
Literally, it means an-Numuww (growth), al- Barakah (blessing) and increase in al-Khayr (goodness).
These three meanings have been used in different contexts for different significance.
It denotes the growth of a crop, blessing in respect of wealth and increase in doing of good for a person.
It is also used to mean tathīr (purification).
This finds support in the saying of the Prophet that Allah has made Zakāt compulsory to cleanse one’s remaining property.
It also refers to purity of soul (tazkiyah).
This is premised on the Quranic verse which says, “verily, he who purifies it is successful” (Q91:9) implying purification of the soul from sins like envy, arrogance, malice, hatred and all reproachable characters.
Its use in another portion of the Qur’ān cautions one from self- conceit.
It says, “Do not ‘purify yourself” (Q53:32).
This means do not feel that you are holy due to some deeds.
Technically, Zakāt means the conscious effort in obedience to Allah to uphold the third pillar of Islam by giving out a specific quantity of material to its due beneficiaries under specific conditions.
This sense of obligation starts in the second year of the hijrah after the obligation of Zakāt al-fitr.
This means sadaqah and Zakāt al-fitr predate the real Zakāt in their observance.
Hence, its proper meaning signifies four specifics: a.
Specific amount.
b.
Specific wealth.
c. Specific beneficiaries.
d. Specific conditions.
In finding English translation for the word Zakāt, the following has been used: minimum taxable limit, charity, poor due, poor rate, alms, alms- giving, wealth sharing tax and annual levy.
None of these really represents the true sense of Zakāt as they are either restrictive or defective.
However, we have to adopt one within the context of this Course.
Meanwhile, both the literal and technical senses are related.
Spiritually, the literal sense of Zakāt implies that it is only when man gives that his wealth will grow or increase.
In his narrow thinking, man feels that he has to plan for the future and thus he has to pile up enough material for that.
Any spending thereof, he feels it will decrease his much belaboured and amassed wealth.
Whereas, it is the spiritual concept in Islam that: “Man only has what he spends, whatever he withholds is not his.” So, giving out the Zakāt rather than decreasing it will make it grow in blessing and quantity.
21ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) In addition, man’s nature is such that he is prone to committing sins in one way or the other.
It could be with any part of his body or his resources.
Ther may be tendency that he might want to withhold or be miserly about God-given resources.
This, in the scale of Allah will be tantamount to ingratitude; which is a sin.
Hence, the technical sense of Zakāt signifies a required obligation through which the heart and wealth are purified from blemishes of diseases of the soul like stinginess, ingratitude and the filths that might have affected his resources.
It restores man’s true custodianship and regains his loyalty for his Lord.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 What is Zakāt?
Relate its literal and technical definitions.
3.2 References from the Qur’ān and Hadīth There are clear injunctions in the Qur’ān relating to Zakāt.
.
Its obligation is never shrouded in any ambiguity.
Besides, its specifics are clearly highlighted in the Holy Book.
These are among many others in respect of directives to pay Zakāt include Q2: 110, Q2:177 and its being an act of righteousness as contained in Q6:141.
Qur’ān 9:103 mentions the time for Zakāt of produce; its being a quality of believers is contained in Q23: 1-4; paying it from a pure source is the kernel of Q2: 267-268; the focus of Q9:60 are the beneficiaries; Q9:34-35 and Q3:180 warns of the consequences of its non-payment.
Also, there are several prophetic traditions on this subject matter.
Ibn ‘Umar relates that the Prophet says Islam is built on five pillars and he mentions Zakāt as one of them.
Abu Hurayrah also narrates how a Bedouin Arab came to the Prophet asking him to guide him to a specific deed that can make him enter paradise.
He replies “Worship Allah and do not associate anything with Him, observe Şalāt, give Zakāt, perform Ħajj and fast in Ramadan…”.
As narrated by Ibn Abbās, it was also one of the guidelines given to Mu‘ādh bn Jabal on his mission to Yemen.
He was to invite them to Islam gradually starting from the belief in the unity of Allah and prophethood of Muhammad, afterwards, he is to let them know that Şalāt has been enjoined on them.
Specifically, he was told that, “…if they obey you in those, then let them know that Allah has enjoined compulsory sadaqah in their wealth, which you should collect from the rich ones amongst them and return (distribute) to their poor ones…”.
There are specific traditions too which mention the kind of horrible fate which awaits those who refuse to pay their Zakāt and honour their obligations.
These references to the primary sources of Islamic principles have addressed different aspects of Zakāt among which are its obligation, timing, 22ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) source, recipients, consequence, status and the like which signifies the fact that Zakāt occupies a very vital position in Islam.
Besides, since it is one of its fundamental aspects designed to treat specific problems, lucid guidelines are provided for the givers, collectors and administrators.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Enumerate SEVEN specific issues on Zakāt as contained in the primary sources of Islam.
3.3 Implication of Default in Giving Zakāt The payment of Zakāt is a test of one’s loyalty to Allah with regards to wealth and possessions.
It is also a test of sacrifice to ascertain whether one is narrow-hearted or niggardly.
The Islamic state is duty-bound to collect Zakāt from them even if it has to use force.
It is possible, however, to have those who may believe in its obligation but decline to pay despite being qualified.
There could also be another group who may deny its being compulsory and thus refuse to pay.
As regards the first group, if they live in an Islamic state, it will be taken by force or compulsion.
This could resort to even waging war against them because it is a serious defiance of the law of Allah and His messenger.
This has support in the practice of Abu Bakr, the first caliph, when he waged war against the defaulters of Zakāt.
He declared that: ‘By Allah, I will fight one who separates between Şalāt and Zakāt; verily, Zakāt is a financial obligation…” (Muslim).
Some Companions like Umar, initially disagreed with him, but they later supported him when the true perception of Zakāt became clear to them.
As regards, the other group that does not believe in the obligation, they are regarded as unbelievers and apostate unless the knowledge of its obligation is obscure to them or they have no access to learn about the concept of Zakāt.
In such situations, avenues will be created to enlighten them.
One of the primary roles of Zakāt is to allow for circulation of wealth.
So, if one withholds it, it will deny the rightful recipients their entitlements.
This, if it gets to the extreme may lead to disruption of peace and order as the suffering class may decide to revolt against the affluent few.
Apart from this, the defaulter will be denied of the reward and blessing of payment.
In addition, it is also contained in the Hadīth that the gold or silver of the person who has them but fails to pay their Zakāt will be melted into slabs and heated in the hell fire.
Thereafter, his sides, forehead and back will be branded with them.
When the slabs become cool, they will be heated up again and branding will continue in proportion to his default.
In the same way, the owner of camels who does not discharge what is due in respect of them will be thrown on his face in a wide level plain to be trampled upon 23ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) by the camels.
These camels will be strong and fat.
They will trample on him and tear him apart with their teeth.
When the last of them would have passed over him, the first of them will begin the process all over again.
One who owns cows and goats but does not discharge his obligations in respect of them will be thrown on his face in a wide level plain when none of the animals will be missing and none will be without horns.
They will gore him with their horns and will trample on him and when one side has finished the other side will begin.
It is also said that snake will bite them in hell fire to the extent of the treasures they have kept and refused to pay.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Discuss the spiritual implications of non-giving of Zakāt.
4.0 CONCLUSION The meaning and profuse mention of Zakāt in the primary sources of Islam are clear indications that it is central to societal welfare and far from being of any direct or indirect benefit to Allah.
It is a divine design aimed at ameliorating the poverty of the poor masses and down trodden within Muslim society.
Understanding its significance and various meanings will definitely have psychological impact on the giver and the recipient.
Its underlying meaning of purity encapsulates the impact it is to create in the society.
Its spiritual significance includes that the Benefactor and the Beneficiaries would be cleansed from the evils of possession or otherwise and free the society from the evil consequence of both.
5.0 SUMMARY The object of this unit has been the literal and technical meanings of Zakāt.
The essence of both makes it have broad application and coverage.
The relationship between the two is explained to balance its meaning.
There are specific references in the Qur’ān and Hadīth on different aspects of Zakāt of which some are highlighted.
Thereafter, the implications for non- payment and the Sharī‘ah ruling are also discussed to further establish the importance of Zakāt as a great pillar of Islam.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss the meaning of Zakāt in its broad perspective.
2.
Explain the similarity between the legal ruling on Zakāt and the penalty for non-payment.
24ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdul-Rauf, Muhammad (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion.
Lagos, IPB.
Kidwai, Mohammed Asif (1979).
What Islam Is.
Lucknow: Academy of Islamic Research and Publications, p.21.
Mawdudi, S.A.A.
(1985), Let Us be Muslims.
Leicester: The Islamic Foundation, pp.217-222.
http:/www.hom.net/~hassan/Zakāt.htm http:/www.Zakāthouse.org/guide/index.htm http://www.realislam.com/zakat_in_detail.htm 25ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 2: Significance of Zakāt CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Inner dimension of Zakāt 3.2 Spiritual cum moral role 3.3 Socio - economic role 3.4 Political cum institutional role 4.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 6.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The significance of Zakāt to the Ummah cannot be underestimated.
A case in point is that it is fiscal devotion to God, which involves spending of money, and has direct concern for welfare of the Muslim society.
In this unit we shall unlock the inner dimensions, spiritual, social, moral, economic and political significance of this important pillar of Islam – A`z- Zakāt.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Discuss the significance of Zakāt.
b. Expatiate its inner and spiritual dimensions.
c. Identify its socio-moral impacts in the society.
d. Give a critical account of its economic cum political significance.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Inner Dimension of Zakāt It is pertinent to realize that the ruling on Zakāt further demonstrates the mercy of Allah.
As He does not require man to exhaust his meagre resources or all his wealth and property, a 2.5% is fixed.
This is only harmonious with the Islamic principle of moderation and middle course.
This is just like Şalāt, Şiyām and Ħajj where there are specifics with respect to time, place and quantity.
A Muslim is not asked to observe Şalāt for twenty-four hours, or fast for the whole year or perform Ħajj every month or year.
26ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Also, Zakāt intends to establish that Allah is the Owner of all resources and man His custodian.
It is thus the demand of the original owner that a fraction of this free bounty be given in His cause, not for His personal use but for that of other humans as a test of loyalty of being the custodian.
Deliberately, Allah does not create men equal as it also holds for all other creatures so that a balance could be maintained.
It should be noted that there is a deep wisdom behind inequality of the fingers.
It is a natural law in human society that no matter how much individuals strive; they can never attain or achieve resources in the same quantity and magnitude.
But when these fingers are bent, there is visible equality.
Analogically, if all fingers were created equal, then its function will be limited as many activities of men will be impaired.
Similarly, if all men are rich, it will definitely provide no room for some services to be rendered, it is even the position of the Qur’ān that men will become rebellious on earth but the fact that some control more resources make it easier to direct and employ those who will discharge some general assignments for which they are paid.
Therefore, one may say that it is a deliberate plan of Allah that there are blocs of the have and have-nots in the society.
Without the under privileged, there can never be a mutually supporting society.
Taking this reality into consideration, the Qur’ān is consistent in juxtaposing both Şalāt and Zakāt.
A negligence of one will defeat the other.
The major concern of both is to balance the human society which can only come to play with their simultaneous impact.
The natural differences in men make them achieve more than one another.
In his exposition, Khan (1991) has it that: “Men differ in intelligence and physical strength, hence in their capacities to earn and to save.
This makes them rich or poor, then haughty or meek.
To help the poor, therefore, the religion of God taught Alms-giving throughout ages.
Indeed, the two biggest themes of all religions have been prayer and Alms.” Self-Assessment Exercise Examine the inner dimensions of Zakāt in Islam?
3.2 Spiritual cum Moral Role of Zakāt Zakāt is not a mere charity or philanthropic exercise but a compulsory fiscal worship enjoined by Allah.
Farūqī buttresses this point where he says, “Payment of Zakāt brings about spiritual rehabilitation and economic empowerment to the society.
The dignity of the receiver is safeguarded by Allah as it is a right He personally recognizes from the wealth of the rich, thus what they collect is not charity but an entitlement or a kind of share of 27ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Allah’s bounty.” This implies that if one complies with the rulings guiding its payment one will be rewarded and if otherwise, there will be punishment.
There is the feeling of being fulfilled in the true worship because it implies obedience to the Creator.
The feeling of servant-hood and destitution to God is also there even while in affluence because He is the only self-sufficient.
This inner feeling serves as the greatest impetus that makes man constantly feel obliged to give Zakāt.
It makes him overcome the materialistic tendencies.
Being aware that Allah will not accept an unlawful wealth in His cause, he becomes cautious in purifying the source of his wealth.
This will prevent him from trampling on other people’s right as it will be self-contradictory to rob them of their dues and only return to lavish it on them as charity.
This spiritual feeling is the greatest significance of Zakāt – both the giver and recipient are in peace.
In addition, Zakāt helps to expunge sins, pushes away misfortune and brings mercy.
It is contained in the tradition of the Prophet that charity cleanses one from sins and that when it is given; it falls in the hand of Allah first before that of the recipient.
Considering the shades of meaning, it means any wealth sincerely given out for the sake of Allah will be blessed.
The supplication of the recipient will also increase the blessings.
Its giving will also cleanse the giver from sins and being accused of stinginess.
Such giver will be praised and prayed for by the collectors and beneficiaries.
They will also serve as witnesses for him on the last day as somebody who obeys Allah by giving out his wealth to help the society.
On the moral ground, Zakāt trains and develops sense of monetary sacrifice and sympathy.
It imbibes fellow feeling, love, kindness, gratitude and generosity and safeguards from fire of envy, rancour and stinginess.
The giver is purified from selfishness and greed and the recipient from resentment and envy.
The former is protected from stinginess which can kindle evil reaction from the less privilege if there is no proper moral education.
He is by obligation enjoined to part with a portion of his wealth.
It is only plausible then that the poor loves and appreciates the rich who has sacrificed his personal wealth for him.
At the long run, there will be mutual love from both parties as the giver gives and the receiver appreciates.
The aftermath of this will be security of life and property because there is no frustrated person due to penury to violently deal with the buoyant by disrupting his business or attacking his personality.
On the other hand, the poor is also safeguarded and cleansed from the fire of envy which not only devours good deeds as mentioned by the Prophet but also punishable in the 28ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) hereafter.
This is because it is an indirect hatred for Allah who bestows such favour on those who He likes.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Relate the spiritual and moral benefits of Zakāt.
3.3 Socio - Economic Role At the core of Islam is the promotion of social justice.
Its directive on Zakāt is based on specific stipulations, whereby the well-to-do pays it for onward distribution amongst the destitute, the poor and other beneficiaries.
This according to Al-Fārūqī is “a sort of social insurance whereby member of the society enjoy basic necessities of life…Becoming a millionaire in an Islamic society is not out of place so far the conditions for acquiring wealth and that of Zakāt are met.
This will be regarded as a special blessing of Allah on His servant who in turn is expected to show same on fellow men.” Zakāt also helps to promote the brotherhood spirit of Islam, which regards all believers as one family.
Giving it will bridge the gap between the poor and the rich.
Both will recognize their divinely placed status without resenting or blaming the other.
So, when the giver does so, it does not count himself as doing any favour to the beneficiary; rather he regards it as a social responsibility.
This spirit is more decent and protective of the dignity of the destitute than dolling out coins to them as charity while standing or moving around as beggars.
There is no way such society will not be socially balanced as the well –to-do carries out this as a trust.
In addition, Zakāt promotes cooperation, humanitarianism and welfare.
The society becomes a network whereby wealth is properly circulated.
This goes to the extent of the recipient at another end becoming givers.
It is purely helping others to prosper to reduce dependency.
This will eventually bring about equality in the society.
Economically, Zakāt is an instrument for social stability and empowerment.
Its various kinds provide an avenue for people to diversify their material pursuits.
By so doing, it prevents the society from over reliance on just one means of living.
It opens channel for agriculture, merchandise and other modern alternatives.
Its distribution strategies go a long way to promote equitable circulation of resources.
This also helps to cater for every sector of the economy as establishing a peaceful society is the goal of Islam.
This peace commences with individuals and then the society at large.
In addition, Islam lays emphasis on the purity or source.
Thus, people are 29ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) prevented from amassing wealth from illegal means like embezzlement, monopoly, hoarding and the like.
Another role Zakāt plays in this regard is that the centralisation of its collection will on one hand allow knowing the economic strength of the community and on the other hand it allows for proper distribution so that some will not be disadvantaged.
Aside, the state or the organization may identify people’s area of need and empower them accordingly.
Moreover, it helps to overcome the scourge of materialism, a sort of cancer, which manifests itself in aesthetic tastes and obsession.
Man has been created to be a combination of matter and spirit.
Allah has created abysmal desires in him to the extent that the entire earth may not be sufficient to satisfy his single desire.
Hence, we have the rich getting richer with the end justifying the means amidst fleet of cars, array of clothes and magnificent mansions; while the poor gets poorer and is consigned to hell of depression.
As a concept, it forecloses any deep, significant, transcendental consideration of the worldly affairs.
It breeds greed and avarice, narrow- mindedness and cruelty, selfishness and money worship, exploitation and monopoly, colonialism and unending strife and war.
It is thus the great role of Zakāt to cleanse man of this material tendency by giving him limitations.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Show how the socio-economic role of Zakāt is most significant.
3.4 Political cum institutional role Besides its other roles, the declaration of Zakāt as one of the state’s responsibility implies a political role.
This helps to ensure prompt collection and proper distribution.
By so doing, it places the task of attaining other roles of Zakāt through the state’s education for the populace.
The power granted the government to penalize the defaulters helps to checkmate them.
Also, the way Zakāt is institutionalized can assist in its management.
The stated rules guiding the payment, the collection and distribution help to state and protect the right of all the parties involved.
By so doing, it does not accommodate oppression in any form as each party knows what to do.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.4 What will you describe as the benefits of political role of Zakāt?
30ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 3.0 CONCLUSION We may conclude from the fore - going that Zakāt role varies from stabilizing the society and helping to unify its members.
As a spiritual exercise it is an impetus or a form of inner drive to make the Benefactor alive to his responsibility as a Custodian of divine provision for him or her.
Morally, it engenders expression of genuine mutual fellow feeling by both the Benefactor and the Beneficiary.
Thus one purifies his mind and heart from the arrogance of possession and the other from the fire of envy.
The socio-economic role is a practical demonstration of social justice as the buoyant is obligated to spend with the sense of due responsibility and the recipient is to collect with intention to improve his lot and become empowered.
The political role aims at sustaining the institution and its management.
4.0 SUMMARY This Unit discusses the various roles of Zakāt such as making individual to be conscious of its obligation, desirous of rewards and fearful of the penalty in this world and the punishment in the Hereafter.
The Unit also expounded moral impact of Zakat as emptying the heart of the well-to-do from stinginess, materialism and the like and that of the Poor from hatred and envy.
The unit also discussed how its socio-economic roles promote cooperation, stabilizes the society and empowers its members.
A discussion of political cum institutional role of the fiscal devotional duty concludes the Unit.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Identify and discuss the Zakāt role you consider as the most important.
2.
State the significance of any TWO roles of Zakāt and establish a logical link between them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdullah, Shaykh Ahmad (1992), Zakat (Poor Due), A Misunderstood Pillar of Islam.
Lagos: Masaga Merchants and Printing Press, pp.10-11 Al-Fārūqī, I.R.
(2008), Tawhīd, Its Relevance for Thought and Life.
Lagos: Islamic Heritage Foundation, pp.272-273.
Khan, M.A (1991), What is Islam.
Pakistan:Kazi publications pp.
64-65.
Mawdudi, S.A.A.
(1985), Let Us be Muslims.
Leicester: Islamic Foundation.
http://www.parvez-video.com/muhammad.asp http://www.missionIslam.com/knowledge/Zakat.htmZakat 31ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 3: Relation between Zakāt and other Pillars of Islam CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Relationship in the primary source 3.2 Goals and Conditions 3.3 Responsibility of the State 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION To realize the desired results envisioned by Islam none of its aspects should be practices in isolation.
All the parts are integrated as a system.
A society of Zakāt payers without Şalāt is not imaginable as the latter is even a duty before the former.
Besides, it prepares the mind of the payer for a nobler goal.
In this light, this unit is poised to discuss the connection between Zakāt and other Pillars of Islam.
The variables, which will be compared, will include the conditions, which make them valid, reference to the primary sources of Islam, their objectives, complimentary roles and responsibility of the state.
7.0 OBJECTIVES It is expect that at the end of this unit you will be able to: 1.
Relate Zakāt to other pillars of Islam.
2.
State their goals and conditions.
3.
Explain their direct complimentary impact on the Observers.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 The relationship in the Primary Source Reading through the Qur’ān, one will observe a regular mention of Zakāt and Şalāt; this tends to underscore their close relationship and significance.
For example Q2:43, says: “And observe Şalāt and pay the Zakāt and bow down with those who bow” 32ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) This verse is one out of the eighty-two (82) others wherein the Qur’ān mentions the observance of Şalāt in concurrently with Zakāt.
Ibn Abbās was reported to have said that “three verses were revealed accompanying three others, the acceptance of one is dependent on the observance of its accompanying one”, they are: a.
“Obey Allah and his messenger…” (Q4:59).
b.
“And establish Şalāt and give Zakāt…” (Q2:43) c. “And that you should give thanks to me and your parents… (Q31:14) There is hardly such regular reference between it and fasting or pilgrimage or between Şalāt and the two.
The five pillars of Islam are its cornerstones around which every other enjoined practice revolves.
Each is targeted towards a specific goal but dependent on others to achieve the global objective of the religion.
The first pillar with its six principles serves as a foundation upon which the correct link with Allah is established.
It serves as inner condition, which decides the genuineness of all man’s action.
All other pillars are physical to a large extent but linked with the first for validity and acceptability.
Noteworthy, however, is the constant way in which the Qur’ān juxtaposes Şalāt and Zakāt as if they are twins; whereas, one is purely spiritual while the other is monetary but both have social contexts.
At Şalāt time, people of different backgrounds are mobilized for worship.
In the case of Zakāt, there is a direct or indirect relationship between the giver and the recipient.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 How will you describe the relationship between Zakāt and Şalāt through its primary sources?
3.2 Relationship in the Goals and Conditions The goal of worship in Islam is submission and humility before the Lord of all the worlds.
The first pillar teaches that this Lord is one and unique.
The second teaches humility and constant remembrance while the third, Zakāt helps to overcome greed.
The essence of fasting is discipline and ability to be able to control appetites and desires.
In the case of Ħajj, it trains one to sacrifice and be forbearing.
As earlier mentioned, the relationship between Zakāt and Şalāt covers the perspective of what both imply by way of meaning as they have literal and technical meanings.
This helps to comprehend their objectives, which are primarily purification in all its kinds.
While a genuinely observed Şalāt to Allah cleanses the soul from all lowly characters, the Zakāt purifies the wealth given to man and its source.
It cleanses the heart of the giver from selfishness, greed and miserliness and that of the receiver from envy and jealousy.
Thus, the standard of the society is elevated to the heights of decency and purity.
33ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) In addition, it is the strong belief of a Muslim that he does not own his body, thus he uses it to bow and prostrate for his Creator.
He also believes that he does not own his wealth; hence he readily gives it out to its owner, Allah on demand through Zakāt.
Consequently, the ummah is trained spiritually and morally through Şalāt and for economic stability through Zakāt.
Some of the conditions, which determine the validity and correctness of Şalāt, Şiyām and Ħajj, are Islam, maturity, sanity and timing.
In the case of Zakāt, it is said to be obligatory on the young and the insane.
This is premised on Q9:103 which says, “Of their goods take alms so that you may purify and sanctify them..." This directive is treated as inclusive of the old, young, sane and insane.
Jurist like Ibn Hazm says the cleansing of the wealth is applicable to all because the evidence is not restrictive.
In a tradition, the Prophet has also exhorted that, "Trade with the money of the orphan, lest it is eaten up by Zakāt."
(Aţ-Ţabrānī).
This Hadīth is explicit that there is Zakāt on the money of an orphan who is young while a trustee is managing his wealth.
The injunction aims at preventing the owner from becoming poor having been rich.
It is true that children and the insane are exempted from Şalāt, fasting and Ħajj but the case with regards to Zakāt is different.
Here, the wealth is already available and being managed by a competent person, thus there is no question of ‘unconscious or immature mind’, which may lead to wrong judgment.
Secondly, if the original owners of the estate, that is the parents of the orphan, or if the insane had been sane; they would have given their Zakāt.
So, the age or insanity should not prevent the spiritual purification of wealth that has reached the nisāb.
Some exemptions, which women enjoy as regard Şalāt, fasting or Ħajj, are absent in Zakāt.
This is another evidence for the peculiar nature of Zakāt.
Therefore, its payment is obligatory on all well-to-do Muslims, be it young or old, sane or insane, male or female whose wealth have reached the nisāb and been in their possession for a year except for peculiar cases like farm produce and some form of transactions.
In addition, the legal implication for non-observance of either is same.
That is, the culprit will be asked to repent within some days, after which he may be subjected to a capital punishment by a truly established Islamic government.
34ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) As a matter of fact, the economic aspect of Şalāt is directly translated through Zakāt which is a major economic means of establishing social justice.
Imagine a people who have all stood up to observe Şalāt together.
Among this congregation are the Poor, the Needy and the Weak.
They have all shared the brotherhood of standing together before Allah to worship Him.
It is then the duty of the well-to-do among them to assist Allah by sharing a minimum portion of their divinely bestowed wealth with the less privileged within the congregation and outside it.
By this singular act, they would have demonstrated their understanding of the Quranic recitation of the Imām during Şalāt that those who have should spend their wealth in the cause of Allah.
On a general note, the payment of Zakāt does create a good atmosphere for the continuous observance of Şalāt.
It serves as a security against theft, armed-robbery and unemployment, which can threaten the peace of the society.
Of course, when people are pushed to the wall due to dire needs, they can resort to any thing to redress the situation.
But if the Zakāt is paid accordingly, it will cater for the economic welfare of the have-nots or the unemployed.
They will then be at home to serve their Creator and think of what will benefit the society.
In a situation where people are groaning under a terrible economic hardship, the weaklings may discard the worship of Allah and the urchins can take to any form of aggressive attack on the well-to-do.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Correlate the objectives of Zakāt with that of Şalāt.
3.3 Responsibility of the State Şalāt and Zakāt are basic requirements in the establishment and preservation of an Islamic ummah.
The Qur’ān lends credence to this while talking about the obligations of an Islamic state.
“Those who, if we establish them in the land, will observe Şalāt and pay the Zakāt, and enjoin good and forbid evil, and with Allah rests the final issue of all affairs” (Q22:41) Understandably, the other pillars are not mentioned.
As mentioned earlier, the first pillar is the nucleus of all affairs in Islam.
Thus, its non-mention does not rule out its vital role in discharging the basic roles of an Islamic state.
Şiyām and Ħajj are more personal and hardly affect others directly.
Although, unlike Şalāt, which is daily and creates avenue for constant interaction amongst the worshippers; Zakāt is annual but its benefit can be 35ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) of use around the year, since most givers are not likely to give it at the same time.
More so, one of its benefits is the welfare of the society.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Establishment of Zakāt is obligatory on the state, discuss.
4.0 CONCLUSION The juxtaposition of both Zakāt and Şalāt in the Qur’ān, signifies that their status and benefits are almost similar.
Şalāt remains an act of worship through words and some bodily movements; Zakāt is principally submission to Allah through giving of wealth.
Commitment to a cause is imbued in the mind of the worshipper.
The personal sense of responsibility, which makes a Muslim to regularly observe his Şalāt at the stipulated time, has the same spirit in Zakāt.
Besides, Zakāt goes further to drive the vehicle of Islam socio-economically and of course in practical terms.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit delves into the relationship, which exists between Zakāt and other pillars.
It reveals that there is a stronger relationship between Zakāt and Şalāt.
It draws inference from the primary sources of Islam, correlates their socio-economic goals and their place in the central functions of an established state of Islam.
The social justice of Islam is practically demonstrated by Zakāt and Şalāt.
The latter gathers people of different backgrounds while the former bridges the gap between the members with regards to welfare.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Enumerate the areas of relationship between Zakāt and Şalāt.
2.
Expound practically how these aspects are related.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeniyi, O.Z.
(1999) Living By Şalāt.
Lagos: Al-Hikmah Communications Limited, pp.4-6.
Al-Sawwaf, M.M.
(nd.
), The Muslim Book of Prayer.
Salimiah: IFSO.pp.14-22.
Mahmudunnasir, Syed(1984) Islam, Its Concept, New Delhi: Kitāb Bhavan Mawdūdī, SAA.
(2006).
Towards Understanding Islam.
Salimiah: IIFSO.pp.109-116.
Nadwi, S. Abu `l - Hasan Ali, (1972) The Four Pillars of Islam.
Lucknow : Academy of Islamic Research and Publications.
36ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 4: Differences Between Zakāt and Şadaqāt.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Differences in Status 3.2 Differences in their Objectives 3.4 Differences between Zakāt and Sadaqah 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 8.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Islam takes the reality in human society into cognizance by stipulating specific binding injunctions and others which are also meritorious but left to individuals who may desire to avail of it.
This, on one hand allows for general participation and on the other hand compulsory compliance so that there will be no vacuum in addressing some vital welfare concerns; this is because everybody’s job is nobody’s job.
In this light, this unit sets to treat classification of Zakāt with focus on the objectives of Sadaqah and the differences between it and Zakāt.
2.0 Objectives The students at the end of this unit will be able to a. Differentiate in the Status of Zakāt vis-a-vis Sadaqāt.
b.
Discuss the concept of Sadaqāt.
c. Compare and contrast Zakāt and Sadaqāt.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Status of Zakāt and Sadaqah Charity in Islam may either be obligatory or voluntary.
The compulsoriness of a particular act places all devotees on the same footing.
Such acts that are declared obligatory always have their communal place in promoting peace, brotherhood and stability.
This could be seen in the roles of Şalāt, Zakāt, Şiyām and Ħajj.
On the other hand, the voluntary acts only provide ‘extra- miles’ for the worshipers to move at their own pace and have improved self-development.
In the realm of Zakāt, its compulsoriness is generally acceptable by all scholars, while Sadaqah is agreed to be voluntary.
There is also Zakāt al- fitr, which could also be regarded as voluntary or voluntarily compulsory.
37ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) There is no capital punishment for its non-payment and can therefore not be placed on the same footing with Zakāt.
It is defined as charity and it enlists all charitable acts, gifts and speeches.
Judging from the name however, it is a charity done sincerely to please Allah.
It aims at inculcating in the heart of a servant of Allah that he should willingly give out what Allah has given him as an appreciation to fellow human being who may not be lucky as he is.
Beyond this, Prophet Muhammad has said that it is a form of light.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 How do you differentiate between the status of Zakāt and Sadaqāt ?
3.2 The Concept of Sadaqāt.
Sadaqah aims at broadening the scope of those who can carry out charitable activities as well as the comprehensive manner by which it could be done.
The multifaceted nature of Sadaqāt grants one the opportunity to get more purified, rewarded and safeguarded from evils.
Its main impetus stems from a willing heart to assist fellow man.
Besides, it makes one to care for even animals, bird and other creatures as anything done for them by way of feeding or providing drinks is charity.
One can therefore say that the reach out of Sadaqah is broader than that of Zakāt.
Encouraging this practice, the glorious Qur’ān says: "They ask you what they should spend ( in charity) .Say: What ever of your wealth you spend shall be for the parents and for the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the traveller; and whatever good you do, verily, God has full knowledge of it."
(2:215) “A kind word and the covering of faults are better than a charity followed by an injury” (Q2:261-263) "0 you who believe!
Do not cancel your charity by reminders of your generosity or by injury, like those who spend their substance.
to be seen men but do not believe either in God or in the Last Day."
(2:264) 38ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) "You shall not attain righteousness unless you spend on others of that which you love, and whatever you spend, verily God has knowledge of it."
(3:92) The Prophet is also reported to have said that: “Verily, charity extinguishes Allah’s anger …(Tirmidhī) In some other reports, he says that it increases life span, it frees one from boastfulness, angels pray for the giver, every act of goodness is charity and so on.
In fact, in Sahih al-Bukhari, he enjoins that every Muslim must give Şadaqah.
On enquiry that, “O Allah’s Messenger, what about the one who does not have?” He states that the person should work so as to benefit himself and others”.
On a further enquiry, he mentions that the person should assist the one who is weak or in need; and if this is not also possible he should involve in righteous deeds and desists from evil.
All these, he says will serve as charity.
The following according to the Prophet, constitute charitable acts: 1.
Maintaining justice between two people.
2.
Giving helping hand for a ride.
3.
Assisting someone to carry load.
4.
Removal of harmful object on the road.
5.
Good speech.
6.
Trekking to the place of Şalāt.
7.
Saying of Allahu Akbar.
8.
Saying Subhānallah 9.
Saying Al-hamdulillah 10.
Saying Lā ilāha illallah 11.
Saying Astaghfirullah 12.
Commanding good.
13.
Forbidding evil.
14.
Guiding the blind and assisting the deaf and dumb get communicated 15.
Sexual intercourse between legally married couple.
16.
Smiling to gladden a brother’s heart.
17.
Planting crops which man, animals or birds eat benefit from.
Islam discourages taunts, after giving şadaqah, or taking it back.
As regard the former, it regards such şadaqah as oblivious while in the case of the latter, it is like swallowing one’s vomit after vomiting.
39ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Discuss the concept of Şadaqah?
3.3 Comparison between Zakāt and Şadaqah The first distinction is that Zakāt is a pillar of Islam while Şadaqah is not.
Being a pillar implies that one who intentionally discards it could become an apostate or even an unbeliever and there are some penalties for such defaulters.
One who refuses to pay Zakāt will be fought and compelled by the state to pay it because it is Allah’s due.
After all, in human society, the government of the day does not toy with those who refuse to pay their tax not to talk of commandment of Allah.
There are no sanctions or penalties on whoever decides not to give Şadaqah.
He could only be admonished to do so while extolling the virtue of doing so.
The second is that Zakāt is obligatory while Şadaqah is voluntary.
This obligation applies to the wealthy Muslims alone.
Anybody can give out Sadaqah.
The religious implication of this is that one who pays the Zakāt will be rewarded while the defaulter will be chastised in the hereafter.
The third difference is that Zakāt has its guided scope or limit on who gives, who takes and what is given.
These limitations are absent in Şadaqah.
Zakāt’s limit and prescribed beneficiaries help to draw a dividing line between those who are really rich and the level of their buoyancy.
The nisāb helps to caution and guide the rich who might want to be stingy.
Unlike Zakāt, which has limited items upon which it is payable, Şadaqah, is not limited to any amount or people.
Hence, there might be at times where it may even be more than Zakāt, because the latter is only 2.5 percent.
It is both tangible and intangible.
There are countless of things upon which it could be given.
In some traditions of the prophet, he regards smiling to gladden a fellow brother’s heart and sexual intercourse between the married ones as Şadaqah.
The former bothers on human relation while the latter unveils the importance and sensitivity of sexual relation in a matrimonial home.
The fourth is that Zakāt is an annual obligation while Şadaqah can even be momentary.
This implies, in the case of cash or kind, that the Zakāt must be in the possession of the owner for a hawl (twelve calendar months) and is to also be paid annually.
This aims at organising, monitoring and reducing the rigours of the payers and collectors.
Were it to be anytime, weekly or monthly, it will definitely impose hardship on both sides.
It may even discourage the givers or affect the economic booming.
Moreover, if the poor or other recipients were to always wait for the end of the year; this will definitely affect some realistic welfare concerns.
Hence, Islam exhorts 40ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Şadaqah as a stop-gap and all-time welfare package.
This allows, on one hand, those whose wealth may not attain the nisāb to equally contribute to the cause of assisting fellow men.
On the other hand, the well-to-do will be at liberty to expend on people for the welfare of the society in whatever way they so desire.
The fifth point is that in the event of death before the payment of the Zakāt for someone who is qualified, it is to be paid from his legacy before the inheritance is shared.
Şadaqah will only be paid in such circumstance if the person has made it a kind of vow.
Otherwise, his wealth will not be touched no matter the plentitude.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Enumerate the differences between Zakāt and Şadaqah.
.
4.0 Conclusion The Islamic way of life apart from encompassing all aspects of life also allows every Muslim to participate in all acts of good deeds based on their financial or physical capability.
The classification of Zakāt into two or three as the case may be is a demonstration of this as the entire Muslim member of the society is mobilised to promote and participate in welfare concerns.
The obligation of Zakāt aims at forestalling probable negligence by all as everybody’s job after all may be nobody’s job.
Şadaqah is voluntary but broader than Zakāt in items and beneficiaries and allows for immediate solution to the indigents’ problem.
5.0 Summary We have in this unit discussed the classification of Zakāt into obligatory, voluntarily obligatory and voluntary.
The status of each determines the Benefactor or the Beneficiary.
Our discussion on the concept and objectives of Şadaqah unveils its spiritual and social values.
Its broad nature allows every Muslim to be dedicated to the societal welfare no matter the circumstance.
We also elaborated on the differences between Zakāt and Şadaqah through which we are able to realise the specific guiding principles and limited scope of Zakāt but general and unlimited nature of Şadaqah.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Discuss concept of Şadaqāt.
2.
Identify and discuss FIVE basic distinctions between Zakāt and Şadaqah.
41ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 7.0 References/Further Reading Abdu `r-Raūf, Muhammad (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion.
Lagos: Islamic Publication Bureau, p.106.
Abdullah, Shaykh Ahmad (1992), Zakāt (Poor Due), A Misunderstood Pillar of Islam.
Lagos: Masaga Merchants and Printing Press, pp.7-8.
Al-Qarñāwī, Y.
(2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakah, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdu `l-‘Azīz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
Sābiq, S (1983).
Fiqh al-Sunnah, Vol.1, 4th ed., Beirut: Dār al- Fikr, pp.357-359.
Mahmud Nasir, Syed (1984).
Islam, Its Concepts.
New Delhi : Kitāb Bhavan, pp.68-70.
42ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 43ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Unit 5 : Zakātu `l –Fiţr CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning and Importance 3.2 Obligation and Condition 3.3 Collection in the Modern times 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Ramadān is like a soul purification season where man is expected to restrain himself from what is not only unlawful but even some lawful things like food, drink, etc.
His humanity may, however, not allow him to completely distance himself from some sins.
Hence, the Zakātu `l-fiţr is ordained as an opportunity to further cleanse him.
This unit will focus Zakātu `l-fiţr as one of the acts of charity in Islam relating to Zakāt.
The areas of attention will include its meaning, obligation, conditions, recipients, collection and the modern challenges.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the lesson, you should be able to: a.
Give the different names of Zakātu `l-fiţr and define it.
b.
State its conditions and recipients.
c. Discuss its modern challenges 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning and Importance of Zakātu `l-fiţr Zakātu `l-fiţr derives its title from the period of its payment, which is annually on completion of Ramadān fast.
The festival on the first day of Shawwāl, after the 29th or 30th day of Ramadān fast is called Eid al- fiţr while the official charitable act, which marks its end is called Zakāt al-fiţr.
It is also known as Zakāt al-Şawm, that is the charity of cleansing the fasting person.
It is also known as Şadaqatu `l-fiţr i. e. charity for breaking fast.
A prominent Companion, Wakī‘u bn al-Jarrāh expressed the opinion that : 44ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) “Zakatu `l-fiţr for the month of Ramadān is like prostration of forgetfulness to Şalāt.
This implies that it is a kind of atonement for some acts of forgetfulness which one might have committed that are against the spirit of fasting like the proper use of the tongue or lowering the gaze.” Ibn Abbās, another celebrated Companion of the Prophet, has also related that, the Prophet made the charity of Zakātu `l-fiţr compulsory as a purification for the fasting one from indecency and obscenity; and food for the needy; whoever gives it before prayer (Eidu `l-fiţr) it is an acceptable charity of breaking the fast; he who gives it thereafter has only given just a charity.
(Abu Dāwud) It relates with Zakāt in some regards.
One is in its being given annually on the last days of Ramadān fast.
Two, it has a fixed measurement upon which it is applicable.
Three, it serves an immediate purpose and targeted welfare.
It is to make people happy by providing them what to eat.
Four, its scope of giver is broader than Zakāt, which is limited to a set of well-to–do believers.
The condition for this is purely a left over of the staple food or its equivalent.
Five, it purifies the soul and fast for acceptability to Allah.
It is however not an institution like Zakāt where the state must administer and even fight the defaulters.
This is left to individual jugdement.
The first objective of Zakātu `l-fiţr is the cleansing of the one who has fasted from all indecent talks or deeds he might have engaged in.
A Muslim is ordinarily expected to live in the month of Ramadān in a perfect state of abstaining from all sinful acts inwardly and outwardly.
But the human nature and the environment might at times affect him negatively, so the Zakātu `l-fiţr provision is a mercy from Allah to purify those spiritual or physical impurities.
The second objective is humanitarian.
It aims at carrying every believing members of the community along the same mood of happiness.
This is understandably logical.
These are people who have been for about 29 days fasting together where destitution of none is really visible.
So, on the first day when everybody is allowed to eat, it could be too uncomfortable on those who could not get anything to feed on.
By this provision, Islam only 45ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) officially legislates this charity but beyond that, it expects the blood of faith to make them extend hands of love and welfare as at and when due.
It thus enjoins that the Zakātu `l-fiţr be given out even a day or two before the festival so that the destitute can also psychologically get set for the Eid.
As regards when to give it out exactly, the consensus of the jurists is that it should be at the end of Ramadān but they differ on the exact time.
Scholars like al-Thawri, Ahmad and Ishāq say it should be after sunset on the eve of Eidu `l-fiţr; Abu Hanifah, al-Layth and others say it should be at the appearance of fajr of ‘Eīd day.
The generality of scholars, however, allows giving of Zakātu `l-fiţr a day or two prior to the ‘Eīd.
Ibn ‘Umar was said to have done so.
Another opinion even says it can be given out at the beginning of Ramadān but compulsorily after the sunset of the last day of Ramadān.
If however, somebody who has the means but incapacitated by a cogent factor like unavailability of what to give at the right time, he may still give it thereafter.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 What is Zakātu `l-fiţr and what can you say about its significance?
3.2 Obligation and Condition It was made obligatory in the month of Sha‘bān, the second year after Hijrah.
Its payment is incumbent on every individual Muslim.
This is inclusive of the young and the elderly, male and female, freeborn and slave.
This is based on the Hadīth narrated by Ibn ‘Umar that: The messenger of Allah makes Zakātu `l-fiţr compulsory in Ramadān; a şā‘ of date or şā‘ of grain for every slave, freeborn, male, female, young and old Muslims, he enjoins that it be given before people go for the prayer.
The implications of this Hadīth among many others include: 1.
It differentiates it from the compulsory Zakāt by specifically mentioning it as Zakātu `l-fiţr.
2.
Its payment is only valid in Ramadān.
3.
The use of the word farada in the Arabic text shows it is compulsory.
Although, in this context, it will mean necessary or required as explained in subul al-salām.
It is however posited by 46ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Ishāq that it is compulsory by consensus.
There are some shafiites who regard it as sunnah.
There are others who say it was initially obligatory but abrogated by the commandment on Zakāt.
4.
It is to be given by all – the slave, freeborn, men, women, young, old, rich and poor.
Although that of the young ones is contested because the fast itself is not in the first instance compulsory on him.
It is however argued that just as Zakāt is due in his wealth if he is a minor, so it is for this if what he has can pay it; otherwise his father or guardian is bound to pay on his behalf.
The same has been said of the slave but that if he cannot afford it, his master pays on his behalf.
The husband also pays for his wife if she cannot afford it.
5.
The measurement is a şā‘.
A şā‘ is four ‘mudus’; a mudu is two hand - full of an average man put together.
6.
Dates and grains are mentioned specifically as staple food and the kind expected to be given out.
It is to be raw and uncooked.
gari, corn, millet or guinea-corn are the staple food in some localities.
7.
This is to be given out before the observance of the 'Eīd prayer.
The issues identified from the above are the basic aspect of Zakātu `l-fiţr.
It can however be drawn from the above positions that its obligation is not like that of Zakāt.
Three conditions determine its obligation.
1.
It is binding on a freeborn Muslim.
An unbeliever cannot give it.
2.
Availability of food that can sustain one’s family or dependents for a night and a day.
3.
Giving it out before the observance of the 'Eid prayer.
It is to be given out on behalf of self, wife, children and other dependent relatives like house help.
Moreover, the recipients of this Zakāt are as highlighted in Q9:60 in respect of the eight beneficiaries of Zakāt.
The poor is however given the priority because they are the first set as mentioned in the verse.
Scholars like Abu Hanīfah, Ibn Sīrīn and others permit giving it to the Dhimmīs i.e.
non- Muslims living in a Muslim state.
47ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Discuss the conditions and obligations of Zakāt.
3.3 Collection in the modem times In the modem times, beside individuals, which directly give these food items, there are many organizations, which shoulder the task of managing the Zakātu `l- fiţr.
They print tickets which people buy, and they, on their behalf, get it to the poor.
Another good development is the printing of pamphlets to enlighten people on the current value of each food item based on locality.
There has also arisen payment of Zakātu `l- fiţr by its monetary equivalent.
This has been an area of debate between the traditional and contemporary scholars of Islam.
The traditionalists say that Zakātu `l- fiţr can only be as stipulated by the Prophet, that is, in grains and the like.
The contemporary scholars agree with them but posit that the environment and circumstance might warrant these items to be given in the value of money.
Their first reason is premised on the wisdom behind the whole issue of Zakātu `l- fiţr itself, which aims at making the recipient enjoy the period of the festival.
If he is given raw food alone and he is not able to get money to buy other ingredients, then the purpose will be defeated as he will still not be happy.
Another is that the circumstance of the recipient may require money instead of raw food.
Amongst the scholars who support monetary value for Zakātu `l- fiţr are Sayyid Sābiq and Yusuf al-Qaradāwī.
Another attending issue in the modern time is that the operation of this type of Zakāt and its collection in some places and by some people, especially in these modern times is being shrouded in some misconceptions.
One is the prohibition of some staple food like ‘gari’, ‘yam flour’ and the like.
They believe that it must be grains alone.
This may be untenable because there are some places where some kinds of food items or grains are not even available, does it them mean that Zakātu `l- fiţr will not be given?
Looking at its objective also, which is feeding the indigent on the festival of Ramadān completion, a staple food in a particular area will be the most appropriate.
The Prophet could be said to have simply used a universal 48ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) scale, which does not prohibit other food items.
In addition, staple foods vary from one place to another.
Also, some collectors have attached some form of supplications written on papers for the givers to swallow; this has no basis in the traditions of Islam.
Another one is the practice of giving everything to some imams, mallams or Afas (Islamic teachers).
There is no cause for alarm if such persons so given help to disburse or share to the poor since it is expected that they be at the centre of attention in the community.
However, if the Imams or the Afas are entitled, they are qualified to eat thereof.
But if not, they are to also pay theirs and share along with others.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Identify TWO contemporary issues on Zakātu `l- fiţr.
4.0 Conclusion Zakātu`l- fiţr is a charitable duty which a Muslim carries out at the end of annual Ramañan fast.
It is a means of spiritual purification in two perspectives.
It cleanses the fasting Muslim from some minor sins he might have committed during his fast.
It also frees the mind of the poor Muslim beneficiary from the likely ill feeling which might preoccupy his thinking about how to enjoy the Eid festival.
The Zakātu`l- fiţr can thus be described as a rapid response to poverty.
Its link with the basic requirement that it should be from staple food shows the dire concern Islam attaches to the problem of hunger.
Unlike Zakāt, the head of the family or the one responsible for himself is obligated to pay it after ensuring that their needs have been catered for.
This, apart from locally alleviating poverty also helps to maintain family tie.
5.0 Summary This Unit considers Zakāt al-fitr as it correlates with Zakāt.
It discusses its obligation, means and goal of making the poor happy on the occasion of Eidu `l-Fitr festival.
In other words the conditions guiding its obligation as well as the recipients who are entitled to it are presented in the Unit.
The other issue given attention was mode of collection in the modern times.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
How is Zakātu `l- fiţr related to Zakāt.
2.
Zakātu `l- fiţr helps to alleviate poverty, discuss.
3.
Correlate Zakātu `l- fiţr with the fast of Ramadān.
49ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 7.0 References/Further Readings Al-Mundhirī, ‘Abd al- ‘Azīm (2004) Al-Targhīb wa `t-Tarhīb.
Cairo: Dār al-Bayān al –Arabī, pp.
432 – 433.
Ibn Ismāil, M. (2002).
Subulu `s-Salām.
Dāru `- Manār.
p.195 Hallaq, M. S. Hasan (2008).
Fiqh According to the Qur’ān and Sunnah, trans.
by Sameh Strauch.
Riyadh: Maktabat Dar-us-Salam, vol.
1, pp.635.
Mistu, Muhyid-Dīn (1994) Al-Zakāt - Fiqhuhā-Asrāruhā.
Beirut: Dāru Ibn Kathīr, pp.121.
Sābiq, S (1983).
Fiqhu `s-Sunnah, Vol.1, 4th ed., Beirut: Dār al- Fikr, pp.351 50ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 51ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) MODULE 2 : Unit 1 Zakāt on Minerals and Rikāz Unit 2 Zakāt on Livestock and Farm produce Unit 3 Zakāt on Cash, Articles of Merchandise and other Modern Monetary Transactions Unit 4 Beneficiaries of Zakāt Unit 1: Zakāt on Minerals and Rikāz CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Dutiable Properties 3.2 Zakāt on Minerals 3.3 Zakāt on Rikāz 3.4 Sea Products 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION All that is in the heavens and on earth belong to Allah (SWT).
Out of those things on the earth are many other precious materials underneath the earth, which Allah (SWT) has bestowed man special knowledge to discover, extract and utilize for different purposes.
It is in this light, this unit sets out to focus Zakāt on Minerals and Rikāz.
It will specifically address minerals, buried treasures and sea products.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Students will be expected at the end of this unit to be able to: 1.
Enumerate dutiable properties 2.
Explain minerals as ratable property in the context Zakat.
3.
Discuss the place of Rikāz as a treasure different from lost but found property.
4.
Explain the Zakāt on sea products 5.
State the Zakāt rates on them.
52ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Dutiable Properties Islam takes cognizance of the myriads of things man possesses or transacts as business and lays down guidelines on how to assess them in oder to fulfil zakat obligations on them and pay them when they are due.
Such dutiable properties may be grouped into six thus: i) Naqd: This includes paper currency, gold and silver.
ii) Merchandise: This includes articles used for trade.
iii) Livestock: Cows, oxen, buffalos, sheep, goats, camel.
iv) Mineral resources v) Rikaz: This refers to relic which is exhumed.
vi) Farm produce Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 Enumerate the various items upon which Zakāt is due.
3.2 Zakāt on Minerals Minerals refer to all that are extracted from the earth.
This is referred to as ma‘adin in Arabic.
These are things other than the earth, which Allah as part of His bounties has created for the use of mankind.
This includes petroleum, solid salt, gases, tin, sulphur, diamond, iron, ore, lead, silver, gold, copper etc.
The payment on minerals is not annual but depends on extraction and filtration so far it reaches the nisāb of 85 grams of gold value and 2.5 % is paid.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 What is the Zakāt on minerals?
3.3 Zakāt on Gold and silver At the time of the Prophet, there was no paper currency as we have it today.
It was gold and silver that served the currency of exchange.
These were minted into dirham and dinar for silver and gold respectively.
Silver was more circulated than gold and these had made scholars to prefer silver as standard to fix nisāb for paper currency because they believe it will raise the minimum of nisāb while gold lowers it.
These two are not really in circulation as before but they are invaluable in the face of ever fluctuating paper currency which strengthens some economy at the expense of others.
The nisāb for gold is 20 dinār as contained in one of his sayings that: 53ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) "No Zakāt on you is due until it reaches 20 dinār."
(Abu Dawud) The nisāb for silver is 40 dirhams.
This finds support in the following Hadīth of the Prophet: "There is no Zakāt on less then five oqiyah."
(Muslim/Bukhari) Dinār in the context of Islamic register is one mithqal.
This is a unit of weight which weighs four and one quarter of a gram.
This brings the nisāb to 85 grams.
In the case of silver, an oqiyah is equal to fourty dirhams; thus the nisāb will be 200 dirhams (595 grams).
*[Gold: 20 dinar = 85 grams; Silver: 200 dirhams = 595 grams] Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Discuss the value of gold and Silver as standard for Zakāt of paper currency.
3.4 Zakāt on Rikāz This refers to treasure-trove, i. e. buried treasure.
In another word it is “an ancient treasure belonging to pre-Islamic age excavated from one’s own property or found in an unclaimed land.
If it belongs to the Islamic age, it has to be returned to its owner”.
It however enlists all that people of the past put in the earth.
It could also mean both buried treasures and minerals like gold, silver, used metals, etc.
Most scholars also believe that whatever is found on the earth surface could be Rikāz.
This is also premised on the prophetic saying that “…But things found in deserted roads or villages are charged, as in the case of Rikāz, one-fifth.” The payable Zakāt by the finder is one-fifth according to Jurists.
This is based on the Hadīth which says “One-fifth is obligated on rikāz” This kind of Zakāt does not require nisāb as the finder does not incur any expenditure and it is not like minerals or other forms of Zakāt.
It has been said that items like diamonds, which do not melt in the fire do not have any share for bayt al-māl.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.4 Describe Rikāz and mention the rate of its Zakāt.
3.5 Sea Products These include extractions like marble, pearls and the like.
It is the view of Abū Hanīfah that nothing is due on all extractions from the sea.
This corroborates the argument of those who say that during the time of the 54ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Prophet the companions who extracted materials from the sea did not usually pay any charge on it.
There is however a solid opinion that ‘Umar bn Khaţţāb says that there should be a charge of one fifth on every jewel extracted from the sea.
There is however another view that the Prophet did not give a specific directive on the issue, therefore it should be left to the ijtihād of qualified scholars who should looked at the efforts involved and thereafter draw inference from other relevant categories of Zakāt.
Considering the great level fishing has reached in economic transactions, it is attributed to ‘Umar bn ‘Abdu `l-‘Azīz, that he says: “there will be no Zakāt on fish till it reaches 200 dirhams in value as nisāb of money.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.5 Zakāt on sea product is voluntary, discuss.
4.
0 CONCLUSION Amongst the favours of Allah are minerals or treasures buried in the earth.
These include gold, silver and copper, lead, etc etc.
Rikāz (treasure trove) exhumed from its hidden location and sea produce are other items related to minerals for Zakāt purposes.
Islam instituted Zakāt as a way by which the proceeds of these items should circulate.
The rates to be paid varied from one item to another but can said to be average of 10 percent in respect of mineral that has reached ratability proportion called nişāb.
5.
0 SUMMARY This Unit delved into the obligation of Zakāt on minerals, gold and silver, rikāz or treasure trove.
Extractions from the sea are also discussed because of their processing nature which is close to that of other minerals.
6.
0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Discuss minerals, rikāz and sea products as ratable Zakāt property; delve on their nisāb among other things.
3.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Sābiq S (1983).
Fiqh al-Sunnah, Vol.1, Beirut: Dār al- Fikr, pp.357- 359.
Yusuf Al-Qarñāwī (2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakah, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdulaziz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
Hallaq, M. S. Hasan (2008).
Fiqh According to the Qur’ān and Sunnah, trans.
by Sameh Strauch.
Riyadh: Maktabat Dar-us-Salam, vol.
1, pp.635.
55ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Unit 2: Zakāt on Livestock and Farm Produce CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 General Conditions for livestock 3.2 Zakāt Rates for Livestock 3.3 Place of Agriculture 3.4 Ratable Crops 3.5 The Nisāb 3.4 Conditions for ‘ushr 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The possession of all things by Allah is ever revealed by everything in nature so that man cannot at any time claim original ownership.
So, when Allah directs on livestock and agriculture, it is very evident that he wants man to serve Him through the fulfilling of some obligations on these creations.
Hence, this unit will expatiate Zakāt on Livestock and Farm Produce.
It will consider the general conditions for livestock, rates, place of agriculture and ‘ushr.
2.0 Objective At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
State the general conditions zakat of livestock and crops 2.
List ratable animals and crops for zakat.
3.
Mention the conditions for ‘ushur.
4.
Shed light on their nisāb.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 General Conditions for Livestock The inclusiveness of livestock amongst items upon which Zakāt is payable has further justified the broadness of Islam in its economic scope and environmental consideration.
By specifically mentioning some animals, it shows that Islamic business as long as it is lawful and safe can proceed in any realm.
On the other hand, it foresees that society could be generally rural, agrarian or husbandry.
Since, the goal of Zakāt is welfare and purification, it enlists these set of wealth for payment of Allah’s due in 56ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) them in form of Zakāt.
In respect of livestock, it stipulates some conditions, which include the following: 1.
The rich or poor whose animals reach nisāb will pay Zakāt of the animals.
The nisāb for camel, cattle and sheep have been specified as five, thirty and forty respectively.
2.
Ownership of the animals must have passed year duration.
3.
The grazing should have been natural; that is without the owner laboring to get feed or hay for the animals.
4.
Such animals should not be the one being used by the owner for cultivation, personal transportation or other kind of work.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 State the general conditions guiding the Zakāt of animals.
3.2 Zakāt Rates for Animals The animals that can be rated for Zakāt include camel, cattle, sheep, goat, oxen and buffalo.
A major condition in this wise is that they must be domesticated.
Thus all wild animals even if they are lawful are excluded.
The male and female of these animals are to be treated alike.
All other domestic animals are exempted.
The following tables show the rate of each based on the kind and quantity.
Table 1: Zakāt on Camel Number of Camels Zakāt Rate 5-9 1 sheep 10-14 2 sheep 15-19 3 sheep 20-24 4 Sheep 25-35 Female camel between 1 and 2 years old 36-45 Female camel between 2 and 3 years old 46-60 Female camel between 3 and 4 years old 61-75 Female camel between 4 and 5 years old 76-90 2 female camels between 2 and 3 years old 91-120 2 female camels between 3 and 4 years old ***The rate after this for every 40 camels is a 2-year female camel; and for each 50 camels 1 three-year female camel.
57ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Table 2: Zakāt on Cow Number of cows, etc Zakāt Rate 30 –39 1 one year-old cow 40-59 1 two-year–old cow 60-69 2 one-year old cow 70 –79 1 one-year old and 1 two-year old 80-89 2 two-year-old 90-99 3 one-year-old ***For every 30 thereafter is 1 one-year-old or 1 two-year-old for every 40.
Table 3: Zakāt on Sheep Number of Sheep Zakāt Rate 40-120 1 goat 121-200 2 goats 201-300 3 goats 301-400 4 goats 401-500 5 goats After which it will be one goat for every 100 Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 How are the Zakāt rates on animals calculated?
3.3 Place of Agriculture The provision Islam made on agricultural produce shows the importance Islam attaches to the occupation as source of livelihood for mankind.
Viewing agriculture as a vital means of economic sustenance is another proof of the global perception of the religion.
Qur’ān, the divine scripture of the religion says for instance: “O you, who believe, give of the good things which you have (honourably) earned and of the fruits of the earth which we have produced for you” [Q2:267] It states further in Q6:141: “…and give away Allah’s due at the harvest time” This due is either 1/ or 1/ depending on whether it is irrigated or not.
This 10 20 too is a mercy of Islam that the one who labours to get his crops grown through irrigation or any artificial means is relieved.
One of the general 58ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) conditions of Zakāt payment is that it should be annual.
But in the case of crops, the harvest time is stipulated.
There is no contradiction here as it is a peculiarity of farm produce to have their harvest seasons, which is a divine arrangement to allow for their availability throughout the year.
In addition, there is the wisdom of preventing them from getting them spoilt or imposing extra burden on the farmer to store them if it were made annual.
Due to the increasing urbanization, just as people are becoming negligent about other dutiable properties, this too appears not to receive required attention as most agriculturists are ignorant of the rules or just blatantly negligent.
Another possible contributing factor could be the notion that Zakāt is due on the well-to-do, thus the farmer, who because he is dwelling in a hut but has his produce up to the nisāb may be tempted not to pay the Zakāt.
There is therefore the dire need to carry out enlightenment especially in the rural areas where most are farmers.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Discuss the significance of Zakāt of agricultural produce and the rates to be paid.
3.4 Zakatable Crops Zakāt is mandatory on wheat, barley, dates, raisins, rice, lentils, maize, groundnuts, sugarcane, dry fruits, carrot, melons, oranges, mango, cocoa, pistachios, coffee, cashews, honey, etc.
It is generally upheld that any liable farm product should be edible and naturally storable without any recourse to refrigeration.
Some jurists also say that it is payable on vegetables and fruits which are not stored.
If they are however sold, the proceeds will be treated like commercial goods.
It is however, the opinions of Imām Mālik and some others that there is no Zakāt on honey because there is no sound evidence or consensus about its obligation as well as the similarity between it and milk upon which there is unanimous voice of its exclusion from ratable lists.
Some regard it like rain water which could be availed of by anybody.
The Hadīth of the Prophet as reported by Tirmidhī, which says “One leather bag of honey out of every ten leather bags is obligatory” is one of the evidences of those who deem it ratable.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.4 List the crops upon which Zakāt is payable.
3.5 Nisāb on Farm Produce Before any farm produce could be ratable, it should be up to five wasq.
Unanimously, a wasq is equal to sixty şā‘ and so nisāb in this measurement 59ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) will be three hundred şā‘.
In contemporary equivalent, the nişāb for farm product will either be 825 litres or 652.8 kilograms.
The crops, which cannot be measured by capacity, like cotton, their rates will be determined by their value.
In calculating the nişāb, if the harvested crops are of different kinds, they should be treated separately.
The one which falls short of the nişāb will not be Zakatable.
Another major requirement is that the farm product should be seasonal and be ready for harvest.
The due after the nişāb is established will be either 1/ 10 or 1/ of the produce.
This finds support in the Hadīth of the Prophet 20 (SAW) that: “It is compulsory to give away 1/ of the farm produce if the land is 10 irrigated by spring or rain or river naturally, and 1/ if it is irrigated by 20 drawing out water from the well.” In the case of honey, most supporters of its obligation agree on ratio ten percent while those produced having production costs is put for five percent.
Al-Qarñāwī differs as he is of the opinion that there is no reported nişāb on honey.
He thus opines that an estimate of five wasq as applicable to an average grain such as wheat should be considered.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.5 How is the nişāb on farm produce determined?
3.6 Conditions for ‘Ushr ‘Ushr is the terminology for the 1/ (or 1/ ) Zakāt payable on agricultural 10 20 produce.
The following conditions are outlined for ‘ushr 1.
Its deduction should be from the total produce.
2.
It should take effect as soon as the crops are usable in any form.
3.
The one who buys the crop garden before ‘ushr time will be liable for its payment.
4.
The farmer is responsible for payment of ‘ushr on his crops.
5.
Harvest season is the time for ‘ushr and not passage of one year.
Hence, if a particular crop is harvested twice or more than that in a year, it shall be so determined.
6.
In the event of combined natural or artificial irrigation, the one that is done more determines the Zakāt payment option.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.6 What is ‘ushr and what are its conditions?
60ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 4.0 CONCLUSION The obligation of Zakāt on both harvested crops and some animals helps to further emphasize the comprehensiveness of Islam and that everything belong to Allah.
It also shows that agriculture is highly placed in Islam as means of economic empowerment and feeding.
It opens avenues for those who do not deal in physical cash to equally worship Allah through their wealth as well as another avenue to circulate wealth.
It therefore makes a special provision on the rulings guiding their Zakāt which is neither inclusive of all crops nor animals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit the broad scope of Zakāt is explained to enlist animal husbandry.
The mercy of the Creator is also demonstrated as not all animals are obligated for Zakāt but few ones like camel, cattle and sheep.
Farm produce is another aspect looked into in the Unit as the place of agriculture cannot be underestimated into a global economy.
We enumerate the conditions and rates guiding both livestock and farm products.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Distinguish between the conditions applicable to Zakāt of livestock and farm produce.
2.Discuss the Zakāt rates for both livestock and farm products.
7.0 References/Further Readings Abdu `r-Raūf Muhammad (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion, Lagos, IPB.
pp.103-104.
Hallaq, M. S. Hassan ( 2008).
Fiqh According to the Qur’ān and Sunnah trans.
by Sameh Strauch.
Riyadh: Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, pp.601-607.
Muhyid-Din Mistu (1994).
Al-Zakāt - Fiqhuhā-Asrāruhā.
Beirut: Dār ibn Kathīr, pp.
72.
Yusuf Al-Qarñāwī (2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakāh, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdulaziz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
Sayyid Sābiq (1983).
Fiqhu `s-Sunnah, Vol.1, Beirut: Dār al- Fikr, pp.357- 359.
61ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 3: Zakāt on Cash, Articles of Merchandise and other Modern Monetary Transactions CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Zakāt on Cash and Currency 3.2 Zakāt on Articles of Merchandise 3.3 Stocks and Shares 3.4 Public Tax 3.5 Zakāt Exemptions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Islam is aware of the fact that materials upon which man do business and transactions varies it provides guidelines for the payment and collection of Zakāt on them.
Some of them are minerals and treasure troves, livestock and agricultural produce already discussed in the two Units above.
This unit will address other items such as cash, commerce, stocks and others which attracts Zakāt payment, the rates payable on the conditions governing their payment.
We have also identified public tax and zakat excemptions for discussion in the Unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to: Students will be expected at the end of this unit to be able to: • Explain the Zakāt on cash in hand or in bank • Discuss the Zakāt on articles of merchandise • Discuss Zakāt rates on some modern transactions such as stocks.
• Differentiate between Zakāt and public tax.
• Mention the Zakāt exemptions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Zakāt on Paper Currency This could be cash at hand, in bank or smart cards.
Generally, most people’s property and other material possessions are usually tied down in money that they keep at home.
The denomination and value of these monies vary from one country to another.
Looking at the natural trend in exchange of currency, there is no stability as regard the value attached to a 62ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) currency.
In fact, some countries’ currencies like dollars have been imposed as the international standard of determining other currencies.
In the wisdom and justice of Islam, the value of gold and silver has been stipulated as the only means of determining the minimum taxable limits (nisāb).
One is not expected to pay Zakāt on all his money except on the net balance after he would have met all permissible expenses.
The minimum rate to be paid is 2.5%.
If one’s money is not up to nisāb, one is exempted from payment.
It may however happen that his money initially is many times more than the nisāb but if after lawful expenses within the year, it is lesser than the nisāb, such a person is not qualified.
The current value of silver or gold should be used to assess the Zakāt of money and not any so-called hard currency which are determined by political will.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 Account for Zakāt provision on money?
3.2 Zakāt on Merchandise Apart from cash which could be readily at hand when Zakāt is due, proceeds from commercial transactions like land, animals, heavy trucks, taxi cars, buses, planes, canoe, houses food provisions, fabric, spare parts and business centre and so on are to be calculated and added before the 2.5 percent is deducted.
This is convenient instead of having to be determining each on its merit, which automatically may not qualify some as having reached nişāb.
To protect the owner’s interest, that is why only the revenue on rental properties is Zakatable because they are considered as permanent assets.
The owner will simply add their returns to his cash and thereafter determine the 2.5 percent.
In the event of any other earning within the year, the calculation is also done along with that of the cash.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Zakāt on merchandise is different from Zakāt on paper currency, discuss.
3.
3 Zakāt on Stock and Shares The payment of Zakāt on stock and merchandise is compulsory.
This is because they are means, in the modern times, through which people transact business and make huge sums of profit that may even be more than other dutiable properties.
Stocks and shares might not have fully existed during prophet’s time as we have it today just like the advancement in banking system and its attendant operations.
But he stipulates the basic rules that will ever be relevant.
One of such is the narration by Samra ibn Jundub that the prophet used to ask them to offer Zakāt on items meant for 63ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) sale.
Since most shares and stocks have capital gain underneath, Zakāt will be binding based on the market value of such transactions.
If for example, somebody buys a share of ten thousand naira which at the Zakatable time has the value of thirty thousand naira.
The calculation will be based on the thirty thousand naira because the share has become a trading article.
If however, the share aims at getting the annual dividend, then there is the exemption for one to subtract the value of the items exempted from Zakāt after which the calculation is then made.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 How will you describe Zakāt on Stock and shares?
3.4 Zakāt and Public Tax Tax is state’s entitlement and cannot replace Zakāt.
It is imposed by government upon citizens to take care of its cost of services been rendered.
It could be increased and modified at will to broaden or limit its scope.
It is also possible for the state to suspend or abolish it as a whole.
There is also a variance in amount, disbursement and liability between Zakāt and tax.
Although both are meant to be collected by the Islamic state, while tax is deducted across all working class whose money may not be up to the nisāb, Zakāt is restricted only to the well-to-do whose money reaches a particular limit.
Zakāt is a religious duty and Allah’s due.
So, any Muslim who lives in a place where tax is imposed should not regard it as his Zakāt.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.4 How is Zakāt different from public tax?
3.5 Zakāt Exemptions Some exemptions in Zakāt are indications of Islam being dynamic and considerate in the rules laid down for enforcement.
It is in the spirit of the Qur’ān that Allah does not want to impose difficulties on man.
The exemptions in Zakāt being discussed here cover different items and properties..
Some of these exemptions are conditional, temporary or subject to differences of opinions amongst the jurists.
These among many others include whatever is below the nisāb, unmarketable vegetable or fruits, private residence, personal clothing, furniture in use, war equipment, forbidden animals, implements for earning living, state revenues collected from taxes because the right to them is for the whole society and not owned by specific person, property put in public trust like for the poor (e,g schools, orphanages, etc) unlawful wealth, etc.)
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.5 List TEN items which are exempted from Zakāt.
64ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 4.0 CONCLUSION It is indeed an evidence of Islamic comprehensiveness that it provides details on items upon which Zakāt is due.
Besides, it also helps to circulate money and stabilize the economy by allowing the owners of wealth to invest it throughout the year and thereafter paying the Zakāt.
It foresees the likely economic domination of one country over another, hence it stipulates gold and silver as standard for assessment as they are more stable than any other form of wealth.
Islam is not against lawful pursuit of business.
Thus, it allows a Muslim to deal in modern transactions as long as they fall within the confines of Shari‘ah.
Also, Islam is not against payment of tax meant for development but that it should not be muddled up with the real Zakāt.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has treated five items ratable for Zakat purposes both through ages and in our contemporary times.
The items include money, commerce, stocks and shares.
Differences between public tax and Zakāt are also highlighted in the Unit and items that do not attract Zakāt enumerated.. 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss the modalities of paying Zakāt from cash in hand, banknotes and stocks.
2.
How are investments in shares and merchandize properties are treated in Zakāt.
3.
Write notes on: (i) differences between Zakāt and State tax (ii) Items that do not attract Zakāt 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdu `r-Raūf M. (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion.
Lagos, Islamic Publications Bureau, p.102.
Mawdudi, S. A.
(1985).
Let Us Be Muslims.
Leicester, The Islamic Foundation, pp.232.
Abdullah, S.A (1992) Zakāt, Poor Due, A Misunderstood Pillar of Islam.
Lagos: Masaga Merchants and Printing Press, pp.
7 and 32.
Al-Qarñāwī, Y.
(2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakāh, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdu `l- ‘Azīz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
http://www.hom.net/~hassan/Zakāt.htm 65ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 4 Beneficiaries of Zakāt CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Eight Beneficiaries 3.2 The Poor and the Needy 3.3 The Collectors and Converts 3.4 The Slaves and Debtors 3.5 The Wayfarer and Cause of Allah 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Specifically, Allah has Himself stipulated who the recipients of Zakāh should be.
This, apart from showing His concern and mercy for these people, is an identification of those mostly in need.
The categorization of these people into eight is comprehensive as it enlists all aspects requiring serious attention.
In this unit therefore, it is our concern to identify these beneficiaries and explain what each represents.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Students will be expected at the end of this unit to be able to: • Mention the eight classes of the beneficiaries.
• Define and explain what each represents.
• Identify other areas covered by these categorizations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 The Eight Beneficiaries The Qur’ān identifies eight eligible beneficiaries of Zakāh in Q9:60 "The alms are only for the poor, the needy, those who collect them, those whose hearts are to be reconciled, to free the captives and the debtors, for the cause of God, and for the travellers; a duty imposed by God.
God is All- Knowing, All-Wise."
66ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) These classes as identified by the Glorious Qur’ān many centuries ago are not circumscribed by time or environment.
They are ever relevant to any given society.
There may however, be some circumstances which warrant that some new strategies be adopted as in the case of whose hearts are to be reconciled or ‘fi sebilillah’.
The modern setting of the society will definitely require that entitlement of these groups be channelled on some projects.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 Mention those recognized by the Qur’ān as entitled to Zakāt.
3.2 The Poor and the Needy The poor and the Needy are referred to as al-Faqīr and al-Miskīn respectively.
Al-Fakīr connotes a state of destitution whereby one outrightly lacks material possessions and means of livelihood.
Al-Miskīn on his own part only suffers insufficiency.
This, unlike the al-faqīr who does not have at all, does not only have what is enough to cater for basic needs.
In modern economic explanation, the earnings of the poor are environmentally not up to the living cost and thus they live below average cost of living.
This implies that the living cost in an environment is a parameter to determine the poverty level.
The peasant who dwells in a hamlet can not be treated as somebody who lives in the urban setting.
This being the case, a rich person in an environment may either become poor or a needy in another.
It has also been opined that whatever is given to the poor should sustain them throughout the year.
Since, the needy does not only have what is required to fulfill basic needs, the kinds of person which belong here include bachelors or spinsters not having enough to get married, an apprentice wanting to work on his own but not having means to get equipment.
Employees whose emolument are meager to cater for their basic needs like family upkeep, medical fees, rent and the like are to be supported with Zakāt money under this category.
Educational supports like tuition, study materials, transportation, feeding and so on are to be extended to students who cannot afford them and have nobody to bail them out.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Differentiate between the Poor and the Needy with respect to Zakāt.
67ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 3.3 The Collectors and the Converts The collectors are those appointed by an Islamic government or community as workers to collect, register and distribute Zakāt.
Taking the weakness and natural inclination of man into consideration, these people are assured by Allah that they have a share in the collection.
In this case, poverty or needfulness is not the factor but the efforts involved in getting others fulfill the obligation.
The littleness or hugeness of the wealth, if the collectors are not taken care of can make them negligent or even be tempted to divert some portions for their needs.
This will definitely reduce the impact of Zakāt as their may not be enough to be given to the various beneficiaries.
Besides, it will earn them the wrath of Allah because they are embezzling His money in the true sense of the word.
As a foresight and a practical step to prevent this ugly situation, a portion is set aside for them.
It is only logical too to at least appreciate or compensate for their time.
Their share can serve as their salaries or compensations.
On the other hand, the Converts are referred to as those whose hearts are being reconciled to the religion of Islam.
Al-Qarñāwī says they include “persons who have recently been brought to Islam, or who need to strengthen their commitment to this faith, and individuals whose evil can be forestalled or who can benefit and defend Muslims.” This position enlists other than converts but emphasizes the winning of souls or having lovers or friends of the ummah who may not necessarily become Muslims immediately but are ready to fight on the side of Islam.
The case of Şafwān bn Ummayyah is sighted whom the Prophet gave many camels loaded with goods after the battle of Hunayn.
This eventually led him to becoming a committed Muslim.
Imām Shāfi‘ī emphasized that Zakāt fund can only be given to a Muslim and he quotes the Prophet’s directive to Mu‘ādh bn Jabal that “…to be taken from the rich among them and rendered to the poor among them.” He argues that the gift to some unbelievers could have been from war proceeds or personal property of the Prophet.
In his own view, Al-Qarñāwī argues that the term (al-Mu’alaff) used is applicable to both Muslims and non-Muslims and could thus be given to reconcile their hearts.
Qatādah is said to have said that, “Those whose hearts were reconciled were often pagan Bedouins whom the Prophet used to reconcile through giving Zakāt in order to bring them to faith.” Another position says that the reconciliation of heart was when Islam was not strong and that it is no more applicable today and thus annulled.
However, as long as there are always genuine hearts to be reconciled and the fact that there is clear verse of the Qur’ān which contradicts this, the reconciliation is held while annulment s refuted.
The right to determine this should be left to the 68ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) state and it has been recommended the portion of this reconciliation could be given as aids to non-Muslim organizations or individuals who support the cause of Islam and can prevent harm from coming to Islam.
Fundamentally, new comers to Islam, especially these days must be well catered for as they usually face serious sanctions from their former co- religionists.
This share of Zakāt should be utilized to properly settle them down for a comfortable new life that will make them become committed Muslims.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Discuss the wisdom for the Zakāt that is given to the workers and the converts.
3.4 Slaves and Debtors The slaves here imply two categories of people.
The first are those under contract to pay their masters.
The second is the one who is totally under slavery.
In the two instances, Zakāt fund can be used to liberate them if their freedom is attached to monetary value.
This provision is inclusive of Muslim war prisoners who have fallen into the hands of the enemies.
Some of our contemporary Scholars like Shaltūt have extended the meaning of slavery to those under oppressive system like colonialism.
Al-Qarñāwī disagrees and says another aspect of Zakāt takes care of this better.
This aspect of Zakāt disbursement teaches the Islamic goal of fighting slavery.
It does not want fellow men to enslave others as all are the servants of Allah.
It sees the enslavement of others as dehumanisation and this is against the spirit of worship which regards all men as equal.
The welfare concern here is not only financial but moral and psychological.
As regards those indebted, they are the ones who are unable to pay debts incurred for basic lawful venture without any extravagance.
These categories of people include those who have borrowed money for personal expenditures like marriage, residence, medicals, liability to others and so on.
They should be bailed out by the state through the Zakāt fund and other means.
Included here are those who suffer natural disasters or accidents and are consequently indebted for borrowing to attend to basic needs.
This has been regarded as a special insurance which does not only cater for subscribers, to cushion the effect of financial catastrophes.
To grant anyone this portion of Zakāt, some conditions have been attached.
The debtor should really be in need to offset the debts, the incurred debt must have been for Islamic purposes, the debt must have been due and it should be due of fellow men and not obligations to Allah.
69ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Self-Assessment Exercise 3.4 Debtors deserve Zakāt more than the converts, discuss.
3.5 Wayfarer and Cause of Allah These are the last two categories upon which Zakāt is payable.
The Wayfarer or traveller (Ibn Sabīl) refers to somebody who may be rich or poor but stranded outside his locality by running out of funds or basic materials to sustain himself.
Through Mujāhid, al-Tabari has reported that, “The Wayfarer is the traveller, rich or poor, who has lost his means of expenditure or depleted them while on the road.
Helping this person is obligatory.” The essence of grouping the wayfarer along with other beneficiaries is to show the encouragement for travelling in Islam.
Al-Qarñāwī identifies four vis-a-viz travelling for work and opportunity, to seek knowledge and reflect over creations of Allah, for jihād in Allah’s cause and to perform Ħajj.
The essence of this provision is to build social solidarity or a sort of social insurance.
One who has ever been stranded will appreciate this provision better.
Such individuals are cut off from their families, relatives, friends and finances.
They are upset and psychologically not at ease.
This Zakāt opportunity will give them succour and assist them to proceed on their travel for a noble cause or return home to re-prepare.
The last category is an all encompassing one.
It is Fī Sebīlillah.
This encapsulates all endeavours to promote the cause of Allah in all ramifications.
It is an aspect which shows the depth of Quranic use of language to have an all-time relevance.
Generally, it is said to refer to the one who fights for the cause of Allah.
These causes are many and not restrictive.
It means financing of jihād activities to propagate Islam and defend Islam from enemy attacks, managing mosques, Islamic centres, schools and the like which are established to promote Islam.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.5 Why is it important to give Zakāt to the wayfarer and in the cause of Allah?
4.0 CONCLUSION The categories of recipients of Zakāt as enumerated in the divine revelation are inclusive of all kinds of welfare concerns.
Specifically, the holy book mentions the poor, the needy, the collector, the convert, the slave, the debtors, the wayfarer and in the cause of Allah.
The sharing formula for each is to be determined by the state based on the available wealth, items or materials.
The mention of the beneficiaries in order of preference shows 70ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) that some are more in need than others and this teaches that the more needy should be attended to before any other person.
They are in different ways unique financial, social, moral and psychological insurances.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discusses the eight headings to which Zakāt should be disbursed and lucidly explained the nature and essence of each.
Specifically, the poor, the needy, the collector, the convert, the slave, the debtors, the wayfarer and in the cause of Allah are the eight headings.
The unit also touches on the discussion of the sharing formula for each which to be determined by the state based on the available wealth, items or materials.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Enumerate the beneficiaries of Zakāt.
2.
Explain the wisdom and conditions for giving Zakāt to the debtors.
3.
Which of the beneficiaries will you regard as deserving the Zakāt most?
State why.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdu `r-Raūf M. (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion.
Lagos, Islamic Publications Bureau, p.102.
Mawdudi, S. A.
(1985).
Let Us Be Muslims.
Leicester, The Islamic Foundation, pp.232.
Abdullah, S.A (1992) Zakāt, Poor Due, A Misunderstood Pillar of Islam.
Lagos: Masaga Merchants and Printing Press, pp.
7 and 32.
Al-Qarñāwī, Y.
(2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakāh, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdu `l- ‘Azīz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
http://www.hom.net/~hassan/Zakāt.htm 71ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Module 3 Unit 1 Zakāt as a Socio-economic System Unit 2 Zakāt and Poverty Alleviation Unit 3 Women and Zakāt Unit 4 Administration of Zakāt/ Unit 5 Zakāt and Modern Challenges UNIT 1 Zakāt as a socio-economic System CONTENTS 8.0 Introduction 9.0 Objectives 10.0 Main Contents 10.1 Basics of economic system in Islam 10.2 Zakat as a Social Institution 10.3 Zakat as Economic Institution 11.0 Conclusion 12.0 Summary 13.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 14.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Islam is not confined to some moral teachings, some rituals or some modes of worship alone.
It rather contains guidance in every sphere of life including socio-economic fields: The obedience from Servants of Allah is required not only in worship, but also in their economic activities, even though it is at the price of some apparent benefits, because these apparent benefits may go against the collective interest of the society”.
This unit will look at Zakāt as a socio-economic System.
It will enumerate the basics of economic system of Islam and treat Zakāt as both socio and economic institutions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you are expected to be able to be able to: 1.
Highlight the basics of Islamic economic system.
2.
Explain Zakāt as an instrument of national development.
3.
Discuss Zakāt as a tool of economic empowerment.
72ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Basics of economic system in Islam To comprehend the socio-economic nature of Zakāt, there is the need to know the basic principles of Islam.
These include the following: 1.
Ownership: From the point of view of Islam, all wealth and its resources belong to Allah.
Qurān 24:33 alludes to this when it says” Give them of Allah’s wealth which he has bestowed on you” As such, man is psychologically prepared to realize that he owns nothing and if he is thus given anything by the owner who is Allah, he should be disposed towards spending or giving it in the cause of Allah without any arrogance or show.
He is not to see himself as doing anything spectacular if for example he has to give Zakāt to promote social welfare.
2.
Custodianship: Man is a vicegerent and a custodian of Allah’s wealth on earth.
He is thus expected to lawfully pursue it and willingly expend it in His cause without any form of miserliness or withholding.
Hence, if he is enriched to attain the status of a Zakāt giver, he should feel happy complying with the rulings guiding it.
3.
Natural inclination to love wealth: The Qur’ān states that man’s love for wealth is strong.
(Q100: 8).
this explains the secret why man is always striving to acquire wealth in various ways to cater for himself and his family.
Were it not for this natural craving, he would not have bothered to bear the various stress involved in sustenance.
Allah imbues this nature in man so that he will acquire what he needs to act as a true vicegerent on earth.
Among which is that he has to attend to the needs of the poor and the needy.
4.
Another economic foundation of Islam is that it does not show contempt to wealth and so it supports acquisition of wealth through lawful means.
Islam thus cherishes people who feed themselves from their labour.
It goes further to say that labourers should be paid their wages before their sweat dries off.
One who does not work to earn will not be able to fulfill the pillar of Islam which enjoins Zakāt.
5.
Individual ownership: As part of the golden principle of Islam, it allows individuals to own wealth but with some limitations vis-a-vis 73ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) lawful earning and spending.
By it, it recognizes the natural differences in people and does not support the socialist concept which arrogates all resources to the government.
It allows the use of talents and potentials to the best ability.
The institution of Zakāt itself is a negation of socialist and capitalist concepts of ownership.
With the prevalence of the former, there will be no need for Zakāt whereas man will always have insatiable needs.
The latter too will not restrict their illegal acquisition.
This principle will give meaning to nisāb and help to address societal welfare in a practical sense.
6.
Communal welfare: The Islamic economic system allows individuals and community to interact and transact.
Islam makes Zakāt obligatory so that individuals can discharge their duties towards the members or communal affairs of the society.
It allows individuals to progress economically but with a due sense of commitment to the progress of the society.
7.
Prohibition of Riba and unlawful means: The current economic meltdown or downturn which is largely due to interest has vindicated Islam.
It has shown the evil of riba in a growing economy.
Hence, as a basic principle, Islam prohibits all transactions that are based on riba, gambling, hoarding, monopoly and the like.
One who wants to pay Zakāt must definitely not get it from harām.
If he does so, whatever he gives out regardless of the amount will be valueless and unacceptable in Islam.
The wisdom here is that Zakāt is aimed at improving the welfare of the society, so if these unlawful means are accommodated, it means we are causing pain for some to satisfy others.
This is because all riba, gambling and the like always have those who suffer for it.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 Enumerate the basics of economic system of Islam.
3.2 Zakāt as a social Institution Beyond just being a pillar of Islam and through due consideration of the beneficiaries, it is evident that Zakāt has a great concern for the society.
As an institution, it has various aspects which address the need of individuals and groups.
In the first place, it cleanses individual of selfishness which does not allow him to have a broader vision for humanity.
He becomes 74ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) more concerned about himself seeking quick means and immediate benefits.
If he is not cleansed of the selfishness, he will query the wisdom behind helping the orphan, the poor, the needy and others.
He will absolve himself of their plight and count on his personal effort and intelligence.
In the words of Mawdūdī (1985), such a person might say “why should I take on the responsibility of helping an orphan?
His father should have made provision for him… what has it got to do with me if a traveler is in trouble?
He should never have left home without having made all the necessary arrangements.
People in trouble should help themselves…” Selfish attitude of such an individual may make him exploit the poor.
His participation in any social work will be determined by the profits that may be accruable to him.
In a situation like this, wealth will accumulate only in few hands and the destitute will be further impoverished.
The vantage status of the rich will afford them to take advantage of any loan opportunities even with huge interest but make the poor pay indirectly by exorbitant sale of products of their businesses.
It is thus evident from the above that all members of the society are like passengers traveling together in the same bus, no one will normally wish that an accident should occur.
So, the same is the society.
The spirit of Zakāt makes the well-to-do help other.
The wealth circulates and the benefits derivable are very enormous.
One of which is that it brings about national development.
Those in whose possession the power of wealth lies and gives out for the sake of Allah will act as custodians and the recipients as those entrusted to them.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 How is Zakāt a social institution?
3.3 Zakāt as an economic institution Although Zakāh aims at giving out specific percentage of one’s wealth to a specific set of people at a specific time.
It, on the other hand, establishes the equilibrium of Islam.
As against communism which denies individuals from having personal pursuits to own wealth based on ability,, it allows individuals to engage in lawful business and become prosperous.
It only rules that when the wealth gets to a particular taxable limit, the due of Allah which is meant to cater for other members of the society must be given.
This allows for healthy and natural striving to earn.
It does not turn individuals into slaves of the nation whereby people’s capacity and natural differences are jettisoned.
75ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Also, it liberates the society from the scourge of materialism which is orchestrated by capitalism.
The latter allows individuals to be rich by whatever means at the expense of the society and encourages monopoly, fraud and materialism at its peak.
Furthermore, Zakāt guides against evil by purifying hearts of men from excessive and unlawful acquisition of wealth.
Islam declares the monopolists as wrongdoers and the one who hoards as a sinner whom Allah will renounce.
To prevent accumulation of resources in a few people’s hand, Islam institutionalizes Zakāt at a fixed rate.
By this, those concerned will give for the sake of Allah.
This act of giving makes them realize their loyalty to Allah.
Thus their mind will become free from abuse of their wealth.
They will rather use it to empower fellow men to be meaningfully engaged and freed from shackles of economic downturn.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 How will you describe Zakāt as an economic institution?
4.0 CONCLUSION As a divine institution, Zakāt is poised to develop the nation for social and economic stability.
Its latent social and economic values are the avenues by which every member of the society is protected from both economic oppression and deprivation.
The givers and recipients feel responsible to Allah in their handling of wealth.
Its role as a social- economic system allows for equitable circulation of wealth.
It is futuristic as it safeguards the likely misfortune which may befall the rich who becomes poor.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has expounded Zakāt as a socio-economic system whereby the haves and have-nots cooperate in developing the nation.
It discusses Zakāt operation within some basic economic principles of Islam like individual ownership, prohibition of riba and others as stipulated by Islam and differentiated from either capitalism or communism.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Zakāt is a socio- economic institution, discuss.
2.
Enumerate the points which qualify Zakāt as a socio-economic system.
76ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Shāfī, M.M.
(1975) Distribution of wealth in Islam.
Karachi: Begun Aisha Bawany Waqf, pp.7-12.
Muhammad Taqi ‘Usmān (1999) An Introduction to Islamic Finance, n.p, pp.16-17.
Saleem, A Abdu `l-Mun‘im (2005).
Important Lessons for Muslim Women.
Riyadh: Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, p.295.
Al-Hashimī, Muhammad Ali (2007).
The Ideal Muslim Society as Defined in the Qur’ān and Sunnah, Riyadh: International Islamic Publishing House, pp.287- 294.
Hallaq, M. Ş. Hassān ( 2008).
Fiqh According to the Qur’ān and Sunnah trans.
by Sameh Strauch.
Riyadh: Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, vol.
2, pp.227-231.
77ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 2 Zakāt and Poverty Alleviation CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Perspectives on Poverty 3.2 Causes of poverty 3.3 Effects of poverty 3.4 How Zakāt alleviates poverty 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Poverty today has become a global phenomenon.
Its effect on every aspect of human endeavour is very grievous.
This unit will define poverty, identify its various perspectives, enumerate its causes, and discuss its effects and how institution of Zakāt alleviates it.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you have thoroughly assimilate this unit you should be able to: 1.
Define poverty in the Islamic context 2.
State its various perspectives.
3.
Enumerate its causes.
4.
State how Zakāt tackles the problem.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Perspectives on Poverty In Islam, poverty is referred to as al-faqr while the one who is poor is called al-Faqīr.
It connotes absence of material possessions and means of livelihood.
People who fall within this group earn or live below average cost of living.
Poverty is not a new phenomenon as it has always been part and parcel of human society.
Its depth is dependent on the kind of economic machineries operating and the prevailing situation.
There is the group which regards it as a grace of Allah.
This they say, He bestows on those He loves so that their hearts will be devoted to him in total worship.
To them, it is not in any way an evil or problem to be tackled.
They go to the extent of declaring the world as evil from which the sage must seek shelter with Allah in poverty so that the heart will be 78ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) preoccupied preparing for the joy of the hereafter.
They glorify poverty and see it as a necessary punishment for the body which will aid the development of the soul.
Al-Qaradawi quotes one of their maxims thus: “When you see poverty proceeding towards you say: ‘welcome to the motto of the pious persons and when you see the wealth proceeding towards you say: ‘A sin which punishment hastened.” From the perspective of this stand, it is futile to seek for solution to poverty.
Also, it will endanger peaceful living and proper utilization of natural potentials to pursue lawful sustenance.
One would have even expected these proponents to absolutely abstain from any form of food or drink as they are also wealth in a form meant to empower the body.
Unfortunately, their so-called self-abnegation is partial.
The second groups are the fatalists.
It is their stand that poverty is an evil but a destiny of Allah.
It is by His will that people become poor, if He does not want, they cannot become.
Thus, there is no need seeking solution for what Allah has decreed.
This fatalist’s view is actually fatal.
It riots against the natural tendency of man to struggle.
It will also create an extremely unbridled gap between the rich and the poor.
It is very likely too that at a point in time, their will be explosion of crime which may ruin the society as a whole.
The third perspective on poverty considers it as an evil and a trial.
It considers it as requiring remedy.
Thus, there emerge preachers who call on wealthy ones to give alms to the poor so that they can attend to some basic needs.
Although these almsgivers are promised rewards with Allah but they are not under obligation to give out alms not to talk of specifying the amount.
The implication of this is that if all the so-called rich in such a society unashamedly refuse to give alms, the poor will remain in their abject penury and die as such.
The fourth stand could be referred to as ‘Quranic group’.
This is deduced from the story of Qarun, one of the followers of Musa in the Quran.
.
He is extremely rich but counts on his intelligence and spends it lavishly with utter disregard to the injunction of his Creator.
It is the view of this group that poverty is self-made, a luck or destiny.
It does not see the extreme prosperity of the well-to-do and their manipulation of means of economy as having anything to do with poverty.
This is purely the capitalist point of view where the end justifies the means.
Without any doubt, this will breed unbridled quest for materialism and impoverishment of the poor ones.
79ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) The fifth perception identifies the rich people as the architect of poverty and should thus be uprooted.
It mobilizes the masses to hate the rich ones some of whom might have accrued their wealth lawfully.
There is a high level incitement of envy and jealousy against them.
Thus, the state has the power to confiscate their resources.
Further still, individuals are never allowed to own properties because it causes poverty for the generality.
This also conflicts the natural inclination of man to acquire materials for personal use.
The last perspective is that of Islam.
: “Islam considers poverty as a problem that does not require any solution only but it is also considered a dangerous calamity which needs to be fought and tackled.
Its solution is possible.
It is not destiny or the Divine will.” It is clear from this view that poverty is seen as a serious problem with possible solutions to avert its multifaceted dangerous consequences.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 Enumerate various perceptions on poverty critically.
3.2 Causes of Poverty Considering all the stated views, one can conveniently state that the causes of poverty encapsulate the following.
The perception about poverty itself can be a cause or even worsen poverty level.
One who believes that it is an evil or a destiny will not make any genuine effort to tackle the problem.
Thus, if people with such views are in the majority, there is no way it will not affect the well-being of the society.
Also, the accumulation of wealth or control of resources by a few individual who do not consider the welfare of the masses as anything will definitely cause poverty.
The less privileged will not have assess to wealth or get empowered to pursue lawful earnings.
Ignorance and level of education can cause poverty.
People who are ignorant or uneducated may not be able to avail themselves of scientific or improved methods or skill to improve their economic pursuits in a growing fading soil and damaging ozone layers.
On the other hand, they will not know their right dues from companies or government.
‘Dirty politics’ can be a cause of poverty, this occurs when a clique mobilizes the populace with ‘paltry tips’ to pursue a cause of vying for a post or wining election.
If at the end of the day such a person wins, he will definitely want to reap his investment by embezzling fund or vouching out fund for projects and abandoning it thereafter.
Personal laziness and lacking initiative to strive can induce poverty.
Such individuals may rely on 80ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) begging or crook means of making ends meet.
Such individuals may not want to engage in laborious job or less profitable one for no genuine reason.
The misplaced priority of any government may inadvertently impoverish some members of the society while others live in luxury.
This is aided when there is no proper transparency and probity.
The last but not the least is the design of Allah that some people should be poor.
This is to serve as a further test for human beings to see who will be envious or elegant.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Identify and discuss FIVE causes of poverty.
3.3 Effects of poverty First and foremost, it affects true service to Allah.
An individual whose basic needs are not catered for may not be really disposed to better frame of mind while worshipping Allah as his mind may continue to waver.
In another way, he can become slaves to fellow men who will capitalize on his penury to exploit him in various ways.
He may be lured into immorality like fornication, adultery, corruption and the like.
It can lead to a general decline in health and less resistance to illness.
People will not be able to get healthy and good food to eat; they will not be able to live in a good environment that is devoid of what can cause ill health; in the event of even sickness, they will not have access to good health care or hospital for better treatment.
They will resort to self- treatment with either fake drugs or means that worsen their state.
There will also be declining productivity, increase in unemployment, rise in ignorance, moral deterioration and increase in crime rate.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 What are the consequences of poverty?
3.4 How Zakāt alleviates poverty Islam institutionalizes Zakāt as its third pillar as a means among other things to cater for poverty which is a threat and danger to faith, morality, human thought, family and society.
The Zakāt institution comes next to belief in the unity of Allah, Messenger hood of Muhammad and observance of Şalāt.
By the Zakāt institution, Islam has established from the outset that there must be concern for the need of the poor.
It therefore makes it compulsory for the well-to-do to give out a required percentage of their wealth in that respect.
It is not what they just give out as alms whenever they feel, or any amount they desire or even withhold it.
Moreover, as a concern for the poor, there is a specific provision on whom the recipients of Zakāt are in Q8:60.
81ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) “Zakāt is for the poor, and the needy and those who are employed to administer and collect it, and the new converts, and for those who are in bondage, and in debt and service of the cause of Allah, and for the wayfarers, a duty ordained by Allah, and Allah is the All-Knowing, the Wise".
On this list, the poor are given the first attention.
So, the law of Zakāt, in its scale of preference has the poor on a priority list.
In the traditions of the prophet (SAW) too, he also mentions them first or even alone.
When he sent Mu’adh bn Jabal to Yemen, he instructed him to collect Zakāt from the rich and give it to the poor.
In addition, the Zakāt to be given to the poor covers a wide range of people among which are the orphans, widows, old people, feeble minded, blind, physically challenged, chronically ill that do not have people to care for them.
Furthermore, the coverage of items upon which Zakāt is payable also provides the opportunity for the need of the poor to be taken care on time.
Hence, the commoners can easily get what suits their need.
Since all the payers may not all necessarily all pay at the same time, it provides a continuous strategy of tackling poverty as people may not also become poor at the same time.
Zakāt is seen as a right of the poor and a debt upon the rich in Islam.
Both are aware who pays and who receives.
To facilitate the willingness of the rich to give the Zakāt, several ayahs of the Qur’ān and sayings of the Prophet are stated, wherein there are promises of reward and the consequence of non-payment in the hereafter.
Psychologically, therefore the rich are inwardly prepared to alleviate the plight of the poor.
Also, the injunction on Zakāt al-fitr is another targeted poverty alleviator.
Apart from its communal effect which is very great, it also helps to evaluate the poverty level on a grass root level.
Since most people often give their Zakāt during Ramadān, the generated statistics of the poor as at the end of the fast will assist in channeling some portions of the Zakāt funds.
As part of its permanent solution, however, Islam orders every individual of the society to work so that they can satisfy their needs.
It believes in the protection of individual dignity and foresees complacent people awaiting Zakāt fund.
Hence, it out rightly condemns begging as well as those claiming what is not their entitlement.
Warning against the consequence of both, the Prophet, in the Hadīth book of Muslim says: “Whoever asks people for their money so as to get rich, he is asking for flames of fire…” And in another place he mentions that those who give are better than those 82ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) who receive.
Also, while encouraging the dignity of labour, ‘Umar bn al- Khattab exhorts that it is better for people to get ropes and become hewers of wood than going about begging whether they are given or not.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.4 How does Zakāt practically tackle the problem of poverty?
4.0 CONCLUSION The concept of society in Islam is communal whereby all live under the hegemony of Allah using His shari‘ah to rule and guide their lives.
It is therefore antithetical to its spirit that wealth concentrates in some few hands thus causing socio-economic problems.
This will definitely hinder economic development, promote avarice and excruciating poverty.
Hence, it is a golden achievement of Zakāt that it prevents concentration of wealth in just few hands by stipulating that the qualified members should pay Zakāt as a divine due.
Circulation of wealth is practically put in place which necessarily and gradually alleviates the plight of the poor.
5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 SUMMARY This unit looks at how Zakāt alleviates poverty.
The fact that the Poor is mentioned as the first beneficiary is an evidence for its eradication.
The unit also highlights six views on poverty and criticizes them accordingly.
The Unit presents Islamic perception of poverty as a problem and believes that it could be solved.
Causes and consequences of the urgly social phenomena are also discussed.
A convenient conclusion is drawn that Zakāt is a major antidote for problem of poverty.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Outline the Zakāt steps in alleviating poverty.
2.
Define poverty and discuss the various views on it.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Yūsuf Al-Qarñāwī (2007) Poverty and its Solution in Islam.
New Delhi: Adam Publishers and Distributers, pp.18-61.
Mistu, Muhyid-Dīn (1994) Al-Zakāt - Fiqhuhā-Asrāruhā.
Beirut: Dāru Ibn Kathīr, pp.105-106.
Yūsuf Al-Qarñāwī (2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakāh, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdu `l-‘Azīz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
83ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 3 : WOMEN AND ZAKĀT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Obligation and Specifics 3.2 Giving Zakāt to Husband 3.3 Giving Zakāt on Dowry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The precious status of women makes Islam legislate some specifics as permissible or prohibited for women.
Besides, books of jurisprudence have always designated some pages for women affairs as well as the ones that are even general describing how they are to carry out theirs.
One of such cases is that of Zakāt.
Apart from being bound by the entire rulings on Zakāt; there are still some peculiar things in respect of women.
This unit thus looks at the obligation of Zakāt in relation to some specifics for women, her paying Zakāt to her husband and on her dowry.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Having studied this Unit thoroughly you should be able to: 1.
State the Zakāt obligatory specifics for women.
2.
Discuss the ruling on a woman paying Zakāt to her husband.
3.
Explain the Zakāt on a woman’s dowry 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Obligation and Specifics The importance of Zakāt also lie in the fact that unlike Şalāt, Şiyām and Ħajj which have some levels of exemption for women due to monthly period, pregnancy, breastfeeding, or post natal blood, it is compulsory for her to give Zakāt regardless of all these situations.
Since Zakāt is a fiscal worship, the fact that women are also enjoined to pay it show that they have right to transact some business that can enrich them or to which they can be heirs and become owners of properties.
The following verses are often quoted in respect of Zakāt: "...And there are those who bury gold and silver and spend it not in the way of Allah: announce unto them a most grievous 84ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) penalty.
On the day when heat will be produced out of that (wealth) in the fire of hell, and with it will be branded their foreheads, their flanks and their backs.
This is the (treasure) which you buried for yourselves: taste you, then, the (treasures) you buried."
(Q.9: 34-35).
It has been explained by some exegetes that the hoarding means refusal to spend it in the cause of Allah, which includes Zakāt.
As it is well known that women are used to jewels, there comes a report by Abdullah bn `Amr bn `Āş.
He related that a woman came to the Messenger of Allah with her daughter.
On the daughter's wrist were two heavy gold bracelets.
The Messenger asked her, "Do you pay Zakāt on this?"
She replied, "No."
The Messenger said: "Would it please you that Allah will encircle you with two bracelets of fire?"
The reporter commented that she took them off and threw them down in front of the Messenger, and said: "They are for Allah and his Messenger."
(Ahmed, Tirmidhi).
In another Hadīth reported by Abu Hurayrah, obligation of assessing Zakāt dues on property is reported from the Messenger of Allah as follows: "For the owner or possessor of gold and silver who does not fulfill its obligation, on the Day of Resurrection it will be cast into sheets of fire and be branded on his forehead, side and back.
Whenever it cools it is to be repeated for him in a day whose length is the length of fifty thousand years, until the judgement is rendered among the people."
(Muslim) The Hadīth above and some others have made jurists to differ in their opinions of whether Zakāt is obligatory on gold or silver permissible for a woman.
To Abū Hanīfah and Ibn Ħazm, it is mandatory if they are up to the nisāb.
But the Malikites, the Shafiites and the Hambilites say it is not obligatory.
Some of them opine that it will only be binding if such jewelries are kept for trading, reserved for would be son’s wife dowry or exigencies.
The Shafiites however add that if for example, a woman inherits what reaches a nisāb but is never aware of the ownership until after a year, the Zakāt will be paid.
One of the proofs upon which the other schools base their opinion is the one related by Al-Bayhaqī that Asmāu bint Abu Bakr used to adorn her daughters with gold.
Although its value was around fifty thousand dinars, she did not pay Zakāt on it.
One may therefore conclude that a woman whose jewelry is basically for adornment may not pay Zakāt on it but 85ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) according to Khamīs: “If the woman possesses it as a treasure and for storage in the name of adornment, while she only puts them on to protect them from getting lost then it has become a currency deposit satisfying no direct need of its own.
Hence, Zakāt is compulsory on it.” The opinion that it is compulsory if it is up to a nisāb appears safer based on the various traditions where punishment by hell is mentioned to show how grievous it is not to pay the Zakāt.
However, there are no Zakāt on diamonds, pearls, rubies, corals or any kind of precious stone unless they are used for trade.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 What can you say about the obligation of Zakāt on a woman’s jewel?
3.2 Giving Zakāt to Husband A woman can give part of her Zakāt to her husband so far he falls within the Zakāt beneficiaries.
This is because she is not under obligation to spend on him.
The story of Zaynab, wife of Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ud, buttresses this when she came to inquire “whether it is permissible for women to spend the Zakāt on their husband and the orphans under their protection”.
(Bukhārī/ Muslim) The Prophet’s reply was that “They will receive double rewards (for that): one for helping relatives, and the other for giving Zakāt”.
A man or husband cannot give Zakāt to those he has the obligation to cater for like his parents, children, wife, and the like.
By giving them Zakāt, he has indirectly benefited himself.
If his wife is however a debtor, she may be given part of the portion meant for debtors.
There are however two other views.
One forbids while the other discourages women giving her husband part of her Zakāt except she is sure that part of it will not get back to her in any form.
Attempt was made to explain that the case of Zaynab was in respect of voluntary charity.
One may want to draw a conclusion that one of the objectives of Zakāt is to bring ease and alleviate poverty.
Hence, the intention of the woman comes first.
If it is to give Zakāt and not an attempt to help the husband carry out the obligation of caring for the family, there should be no objection for her to give him.
By virtue of the husband becoming a recipient, it means the Zakāt so given becomes his personal wealth which he should be able to use as he may so desire.
It may almost be impossible for him that such Zakāt does not get back to the wife by way of feeding or clothing.
86ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) On the other hand, to avoid the debate whether she can give her husband her Zakāt or not, one would have preferred that the wife willingly helps the husband if she knows he is in need before the season of Zakāt.
If by then, she still has what is up to nisāb, she can then proceed to pay it to the collector.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 A wife can pay part of her Zakāt to her husband, discuss.
3.3 Giving Zakāt on her dowry A woman is to pay Zakāt on her dowry on the condition that she has taken possession of it and it has reached nişāb and has been with her for a year.
This is because her dowry is like any other benefit she may get from her business.
The underlining principle remains purification.
So, it is a misconception to believe that since it is given as a nuptial gift she is not to pay it.
The general rule is that any means of wealth in one’s possession should fulfill the Zakāt conditions.
In the event of divorce before consummation she will only pay on the half if it measures nişāb.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Should a woman pay Zakāt on her dowry?
4.0 CONCLUSION In Islam a woman’s sex is not a barrier to her religious duty and service to her creator.
The status the religion accorded her is unequalled.
Her inclusion amongst the Zakāt payers is recognition of her right to own and dispose property as she wills.
Besides, it also shows that she has role to play in the economic well-being of the society.
She may even be more qualified to the payment of Zakāt than her husband who may on the other hand be a recipient.
Apart from other general rules, there are specifics with respect to her jewel, dowry and giving of either to her husband.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit Zakāt is presented as a pillar of Islam obligatory on a Muslim woman.
The unit has looked into this issue with specific focus on her jewelry, dowry and their disbursements.
It explained that taking possession and the use for which either her dowry or jewelry is put into determines the Zakāt she has to pay.
It also indicates that her husband may be a beneficiary, one way or the other.
87ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss the specific role of a woman in the obligatory duty of Zakāt.
2.
Compare the various views on Zakāt in a woman’s dowry and jewelleries.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Hallaq, Muhammad Subhi bin Hassan ( 2008).
Fiqh According to the Qur’an and Sunnah translated by Sameh Strauch.
Riyadh: Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, vol.
1, p.613.
Muhammad Al-Musnad (n.d.).
trans.
Fatāwā (Islamic Legal Injunctions) Regarding Women, Saudi Arabia: Darussalam Publishers and Distributors, pp.138-144.
M. A. Khamīs (2004).
trans.
Fiqhu `n-Nisā’ fi `l-‘Ibādāt.
Lagos: Islamic Heritage Foundation, pp.10-25.
Saleem, Amr Abdul-Mun‘im (2005).
Important Lessons for Muslim Women.
Riyadh: Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, p.279.
Zeno, M. Jamil (1996).
The Pillars of Islam and Iman and What every Muslim must know about his religion, Riyadh: Dar-us-Salam Publications, pp.178-179.
88ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 89ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) UNIT 4: ADMINISTRATION OF ZAKĀT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Role of the State 3.2 Role of Individual in Zakāt Assessment 3.3 Roles and Qualities of Zakāt Workers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As an institution, management of Zakāt funds requires some strategies for it to achieve desired impact in the society.
Hence, our concern in this unit is the Administration of zakāt.
The sub headings to be treated include roles of the state, individuals and the workers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES A the end of this unit you should be able to: • state the role of the government in Zakāt management.
• discuss the function of the collectors in its assessment • explain the roles of individuals in its administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Role of the State Zakāt, being a religious obligatory duty, the state is divinely-bound to establish its proper and prompt collection.
It is States responsibility to also distribute same to the beneficiaries or punish defaulters.
It is thus the duty of an Islamic state to establish an arm for the management of Zakāt in its ministry to be provided with professionally trained personnel.
As should have been noted Zakāt is an obligatory religious charity that should not be left to the implementation of individuals.
It is also not a tax to be taken by the state for prosecution of an obscure project.
It is such a great pillar meant to help the society and fulfillment of the obligation rests on the shoulder of the state.
In other words, to prevent oppression of the government, self-interest of the collectors, and insincerity of the givers and to achieve proper monitoring and transparency in distribution of Zakāt, Allah defines the limits of 90ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) collection and the manners of distribution.
The minimum amount due on different ranges of properties has also been stipulated.
The state is expected to have a separate Zakāt treasury for proper distribution as wanted by Allah.
It is its duty to establish effective modern ways to facilitate the collection.
There is unanimity among scholars that those who refuse to pay can be penalized and can even be collected by force if the payer will not pay willingly.
It is also a binding duty of the state to create adequate avenues to enlighten all the members of the society, especially the payers and the workers on the virtue of payment and perils of default or dishonesty in collection and distribution of Zakāt.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 What is the duty of the state in the collection of Zakāt?
3.2 Individual Role in Zakāt Assessment Individuals who are qualified have great roles to play in its success.
They are to be honest in declaring their assets to the collectors as whatever is left behind has serious consequence in the hereafter.
Besides, it is a fiscal worship requiring sincerity like the one in other ways of worship.
The individual should adopt the option of the Zakāt workers helping him to assess the properties.
His role is to give them details on his wealth.
The individual is not to start distributing his Zakāt personally.
This on one hand may make him withhold some aspect of it most especially if it is huge and he does not have the spiritual strength to let go of all entitlements.
Secondly, if individuals take up the task of personal sharing, it will bring about the lopsidedness in the distribution and defeat the objective of equitable consideration for the stipulated beneficiaries.
The individual may however set a day aside for his annual Zakāt.
For example, if he chooses 10th of every Ramadān, it means his Zakāt will always be assessed and payable on that day.
Scholars have recommended the month because of its spiritual and meritorious atmosphere.
It is not ordinarily easy for people to give out money but the spiritual terrain of the month has effect on the hearts.
In addition, the calculation of the Zakāt especially for someone who delves into different areas of the economy should be left to the Zakāt workers who are trained for such.
As such, an example of a payer who has monies all 91ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) over in different banks does not require that he withdraws them; he will simply add his cash balances and some it up with the balances in all his accounts.
It will also do an individual a great good to enlighten himself about the institution of Zakāt by getting relevant materials from reliable sources.
This will at least put him on a sound footing to discharge his duty accordingly.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 What are the expected roles of an individual in Zakāt?
3.3 Role and Qualities of Zakāt Workers The major facilitators in the collection and distribution of Zakāt are its Workers.
Going over Q9:60, they are the third in the categorisations.
It, on one hand classifies them as autonomous group that is why they are granted a percentage of the Zakāt and to disallow them from imposing any other duty on the givers for their services.
There will be job specification for the Workers which among many others will include collection, documentation, public relation and information gathering, education, distribution, follow ups and reviews.
There will also be the need for division of labours with regards to different Zakātable items like livestock, minerals, money, etc.
There are also eligibility conditions for these Workers of which the basic ones among many others are Islam, sanity, trustworthiness, professionalism and efficiency.
The salary of these workers is their share of the Zakāt.
It should be commensurate with the market value of their service.
They are prohibited from taking gift from Zakāt payers and such is regarded as bribe.
They are required to be kind to the rich and even pray for them.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Explain the administrative role of Collectors of Zakāt.
4.0 CONCLUSION The state should be involved in the administration of Zakāt by enforcing its proper and prompt collection, the distribution of same to the beneficiaries or punishment of defaulters in line with divine guidance in each respect.
It is also necessary for the State to provide professionally trained personnel.
92ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) The State can also create adequate avenues to enlighten Zakat payers and workers.
Individuals are to be honest in declaring their assets to the collectors.
It is the role of individuals to give Zakāt workers details on his wealth.
The individual is not to start distributing his Zakāt personally.
It will also do an individual a gread deal of good to set a day aside, say in Ramadan, that his annual Zakāt will always be assessed and payable.
Major facilitators in the collection and distribution of Zakāt are its Workers.
They are to be granted a percentage of the Zakāt.
Their duty will include collection, documentation, public relation and information gathering, education, distribution, follow ups and reviews.
There will also be the need for division of labours with regards to different Zakātable items like livestock, minerals, money, etc.
To qualify for the work a Worker should.
be Muslim, sane, trustworthy, professionally trained and efficient.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discusses the role of the state in organizing proper and prompt collection and payment of Zakāt, and use of force against defaulters if need be.
It then highlights the role of individuals in being honest in their declaration of assets to collectors.
An account of the role of Zakat workers and their eligibility and qualifications concludes the Unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Discuss the role of various groups that should be involved in an ideal system for the administration of Zakāt .
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Muhammad Abdu `r-Raūf (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion, Lagos, IPB.
pp.103-104.
Yūsuf Al-Qarñāwī (2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakāh, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdulaziz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
Sayyid Sābiq (1983).
Fiqhu `s-Sunnah, Vol.1, Beirut: Dār al- Fikr, pp.357- 359.
Muhyid-Din Mistu (1994).
Al-Zakāt - Fiqhuhā-Asrāruhā.
Beirut: Dāru ibn Kathīr, pp.
72. http://wwwZakathouse.org/guide/index.htm http:/www.muis.gov.sg/services/Zakat-1.html.
http://www.realIslam.com/Zakat_in_detail.htm 93ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Unit 5 Zakāt and Contemporary Challenges 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Zakāt in the early days of Islam 3.2 Present Modus Operandi 3.3 Restoring the Institution of Zakāt 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will address Zakāt and Contemporary Challenges.
In the cause of our discussion we will look at Zakāt from the window of its early days so as to establish how it worked as a system in the past.
It will also treat its present modus operandi to x-ray deviations from the original sources.
Lastly, action plan on restoration of spirit of Zakāt shall be suggested.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you are expected to be able to: • narrate how Zakāt was operated in its early days.
• analyze its present operation.
• suggest action plans for restoring the spirit of Zakāt.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Zakāt in the early days of Islam As general to other pillars of Islam, the Qur’ān simply states the obligation of Zakāt and some other aspects without going into details.
The Prophet (SAW) broadened its scope of collection and distribution.
He fixed the amount, the nisāb, and the conditions for Zakāt.
He was very meticulous in making sure that it was justly collected and distributed.
He gave very frightening Hadīth on the consequence of not paying Zakāt.
Amongst his Zakāt workers were al-Muhājir bn Abī Ummayah Ibn al- Mughīrah (sent to Syria), Zayād bn Labid ( sent to Ħañramawt), ‘Adī bn Ħātim (sent to tribe of Asad), Malik bn Nuwayrah (sent to tribe of Ħanzalah), al-Zabriqān bn Badr and Qays bn Āşim (sent to tribe of S‘ad), al-‘Alāī bn al-Khañramī ( sent to Baħrayn); ‘Alī bn Abī Tālib (sent to Najrān) and many others.
He used to send them to different parts of the Islamic state and they were warned strictly against taking gift in the cause 94ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) of their assignment.
He frowned at an incident when one of them returned withholding a little aspect which was actually given to him as a gift.
Abū Dāwud and Muslim relate this incident in respect of one Abdullah bn Lutbiyyah when he returns and says: “This is for you and this is given to me as a gift”.
The prophet mounted the minbar, praised Allah and said “Why is it when we send a worker, he returns saying: “This is for you and this is given to me as a gift, why can’t he sit in his parent’s house and expect whether they will give him the gift or not.
I swear by the one in whose hand is the soul of Muhammad, none of you will ever bring such on the day of resurrection except that he carries it on his knees.
If it is a camel it will be …, if it is a cow, it will be… and if it is a goat, it will be bleating.
Then he raises his two hands up saying: “O Allah!
Have I delivered”.
He said it twice’.
Thus, what is taken beside Zakāt as personal is regarded a fraud.
This guidance is to prevent people from getting corrupted and not doing their jobs properly.
Due to the great importance attached to the task of collection and the foresight to prevent temptation, the collectors are designated as part of the beneficiaries.
This will allow them to do their job conscientiously.
The Prophet extols the virtue of the truthful and just Collector as being like the fighter in the cause of Allah till he returns.
After the demise of the Prophet, the operation of Zakāt received great boost in the hands of his Companions and their followers.
The era of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar ‘Abdu `l-‘Azīz was noteworthy.
One of the major challenges before Abu Bakr on his ascendance to the throne is that some Muslims decided to stop paying Zakāt since the Prophet had died.
He single- handedly resolved to fight them because they differentiated between Şalāt and Zakāt.
He declared that Zakāt was the right of Allah.
It has become proverbial to cite the reign of ‘Umar bn ‘Abdu `l-‘Azīz as a period when people enjoy abundance of wealth to the extent that when Zakāt is mobilized there are no beneficiaries.
One of the reasons attributed to it is the prudent implementation of Zakāt to alleviate poverty.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.1 How will you describe the operation of Zakāt in the early days of Islam?
95ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 3.2 Present Modus Operandi There have been several beautiful presentations and discussions on Zakāt in recent times but with apparent very little or no effect as most Muslims still suffer economic deprivation which their living in lands of surplus and natural resources fail to arrest.
The main cause of this unsatisfactory situation is the deviation from the right path of effective implementation of Zakāt injunctions.
This reflects in different ways.
First, there is no Islamic government to enjoin or enforce the institution, so individuals or groups are left to use their discretion.
The few Muslim countries lack the will power to implement the Zakāt in its entirety as they at times fall prey to the global economic system.
Second, there is also the attitudinal dimension.
This is as a result of ignorance and quest for materialism.
Individual Muslims hardly feel obliged to carry out this duty like Şalāt.
They go scot free as we live in the so-called free world and there is nobody to challenge or apprehend them.
Third, where few individuals even want to pay, they do it based on their personal calculations without consultation with any other person because they do not want people to know the extent of their wealth.
Consequently, they either under-rate or or withhold payment or deceive by giving out some huge amount which fall short of Allah’s due as Zakāt in their wealth.
Some of them cannot differentiate between it and Şadaqah.
There are also others who gather their resources from harām source.
Fourth, the established foundations except for few in some non-Muslim countries lack the professionalism required for its collection and distribution.
Self-Assessment Exercise 3.2 Write what you know about the present practice regarding Zakāt amongst the Muslims?
3.3 Restoring the Institution of Zakāt Through our insight into the Prophetic time and a review of the current Zakāt practice, we have seen that the latter due to ignorance and modern challenges has deviated from the genuine practices.
The absence of Islamic state is a major factor in the passive effect of this institution.
Therefore, taking the great roles and objectives of Zakāt into consideration, the need to revive it in the face of present negligence could not have been dire now than any other time.
To do this, there will be the need for the following steps to be taken.
a. Enlightenment: There should be effective and consistent programme through all available media to reawaken the Muslims and non-Muslims alike about the great roles of Zakāt in alleviating 96ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) poverty and circulating wealth as well as individual roles in paying their Zakāt.
There should be pamphlets, books and bill boards with catchy statements like ‘pay your Zakāt’, ‘Fulfill Allah’s Zakat obligation” Pay Zakāt you owe Allah’, etc.
b. Scholars and Capacity Building: The need for the Scholars to update their knowledge in the current dispensation is vital so that they will be able to discharge their duty and lead the ummah to the true spirit of Zakāt stipulations.
c. Role of Organisation: The various bodies or Muslim groups who have established foundations should make efforts to ensure that the collections can be properly channeled and be better utilized.
d. Professionalism: Different training opportunities should be created so that Zakāt Workers will be effective and efficient in the task of collection and distribution.
Spiritual and moral programmes should also be included so that they will be trustworthy and ethical in their job.
e. Assessment Approach: In the face of the attendant modern challenges, there is the need by the Zakāt Specialists to study each community based on its peculiarity and come forth with clear Zakatable items and specific amounts to pay.
The Scholars need to reach a consensus on aspects where there are different views so that the payers will not be confused or get discouraged.
f. Security: There should be adequate protection for Zakāt Money and its workers.
Modern means of transactions should be used for proper documentation to prevent fraud or loss.
Defaulters who mismanage the fund should be brought to book.
g. Communication: For transparency, the contributors should be carried along on how these wealth are utilized even if they do not ask for that.
This becomes necessary in the face of corruptions which have entangled every sector of the society.
This will encourage the contributors to do more and also caution the workers from embezzlement.
h. Remuneration: The Zakāt Workers should be adequately remunerated as finance operational staffs or even better than those in the financial industry.
Allah Himself has apportioned for this cause what can sustain their service.
i. Islamic State: To operate the institution of Zakāt in its full force, there is the need for an Islamic State.
So, efforts towards it should be the concern of every true Muslim.
This starts by individual Muslims living as true Muslims and thereafter calling others to the ideals of Islam.
The current economic melt down has shown that man made laws are temporary and lack comprehensive solutions.
97ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) Self-Assessment Exercise 3.3 Suggest practical steps to revive the institution of Zakāt.
4.0 CONCLUSION The great role and impact of Zakāt requires that its contemporary management be critically looked into.
The absence of Islamic leadership in many lands has dealt a great blow to this institution.
The modern transaction is another challenge which requires proper and regular enlightenment to make people pay their Zakāt.
All rulings about Zakāt are relevant to all time and clime; hence the modern settings are not determinants.
The ignorance and unbridled quest for materialism are also impediments for proper Zakāt payment, collection and disbursement.
Also, the collection and distribution are central to it.
These are basic responsibility of an Islamic state wherever it is established.
This power is entrusted in the state because of the nature of man in finding it difficult to always part with his wealth.
The peril of this is that the legitimate recipients in the society will suffer deprivation while the individual will suffer perdition in the hereafter.
To prevent these awful ends, both the Collectors and the payers are sensitised and remunerated as the case may be with a view to achieving the welfare concern of Islam.
5.0 SUMMARY The practice of Zakāt during the time of the Prophet and his noble companions serves as a model for all time.
This unit further discusses the present modus operandi and states that the role of Zakāt cannot be downplayed especially when all human economic systems are suffering meltdown.
Nine steps for repositioning it in the economic scheme of affairs are recommended to restore the institution of Zakāt.
It is also one of its kernel the Islamic state is duty bound to collect and disburse.
The Collectors represent the state on one hand and may not necessarily be the distributors but their honesty in this wise is indispensible.
The sincerity, cooperation and correct understanding of the individual payers will increase the Zakāt treasury and thus help in largely promoting communal welfare and eradicating poverty.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What are your views on the current situation of Zakāt among the Muslims?
2.
Identify the missing links between Zakāt at the time of the companions and its operation today.
3.
List strategic steps of reviving the lost glories of Zakāt.
98ISL132 ZAKAT (CHARITY IN ISLAM) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS S. A. Abdullah (1992).
Zakāt, Poor Due, A Misunderstood Pillar of Islam.Lagos: Masaga Merchants and Printing Press, pp.
36-40.
Muhyi `d-Dīn Mistu (1994).
Al-Zakāt - Fiqhuhā-Asrāruhā Beirut: Dāru Ibn Kathīr, pp.
181-188.
Muhammad Abdu `r-Raūf (1982).
Islam, Faith and Devotion, Lagos, IPB.
pp.
72, 103-104.
Yūsuf Al-Qarñāwī (2000) Fiqhu `z- Zakāh, A Comparative Study of Zakāt Regulations and Philosophy in the light of Qur’ān and Sunnah, Vol.I, Saudi Arabia: King Abdulaziz University Press, pp.xxxix-xli.
Sayyid Sābiq (1983).
Fiqhu `s-Sunnah, Vol.1, Beirut: Dār al- Fikr, pp.357- 359. http://wwwZakathouse.org/guide/index.htm http:/www.muis.gov.sg/services/Zakat-1.html.
http://www.realIslam.com/Zakat_in_detail.htm 99
