 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 113 COURSE TITLE: HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA MAC113 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Course Team Mr Philip Onuoha (Developer/Writer) - IMSU Onwubere Chidebere H. (Editor/Coordinator) - NOUN ii MAC113 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-779-9 All Rights Reserved iii MAC113 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………….………… 1 What You Will Learn in This Course……………………………….. 1 Course Aims…………………………………………..……………... 1 Course Objectives………………………………….………………... 2 Working through This Course……………………………………….. 2 Course Materials………………………………….………………….
2 Study Units……………………………………………….………….
2 Textbooks and References…………………….…………………….
3 Assessment………………………………………….……………….
3 Tutor-Marked Assignment…………………………...……………… 4 Final Examination and Grading……………………..……………….
4 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………….
4 Conclusion………………………………………………….……….. 4 Summary…………………………………………………………….
4 iv Introduction Let me first congratulate you for choosing to study mass communication.
I want to state right away that MAC 113: History of Nigerian Mass Media is indispensable at this early stage..
It will guide and reveal to you the events, personalities and factors that preceded and surrounded the emergence of the press in Nigeria.
In this course, you will come across popular Nigerians who laid strong foundation for the establishment and development of the mass media in the country.
If you carefully read the Course Material, you will realise that colonialism gave birth to nationalism, while nationalism and journalism became bed fellows.
This will help you understand the types, nature and characteristics of the media that historically set the pace for other media in Nigeria.
What You Will Learn in This Course It is important to note that all the nations of the world have peculiar experiences regarding the growth of the media.
For this reason, this course simply presents the history of the mass media; the Nigerian experience.
The modules in this course will look at the inception and development of various newspapers from the nineteen century to the past-independence era.
You will be drawn to major newspapers as well as the proprietors whose ideas shaped the policies of those media.
You will also learn how some personalities sacrificed their time, money and pleasure to innovate media measures in order to fight colonialism.
Course Aims The aims of this course are to: • explain the concept of the mass media • discuss different types of the mass media and their inter- relationships • present various newspapers, their achievements, challenges, constraints and extent of circulation • discuss the contributions of some notable nationalists and professionals to the development of the mass media • x-ray in detail the incidence and expansion of the broadcast media as well as the political factors that determined their establishment.
MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Course Objectives At the end of this course, you should be able to: • define the mass media and identify the types of mass media • mention the newspapers in the pre-colonial and post-colonial era • list major contributors to the development of the mass media in Nigeria • recognise the role played by non-Nigerians • discuss how nationalists and politicians used the mass media to frustrate colonialism and pursue the emergence of a new and liberated Nigeria.
Working through This Course You will achieve much in this course if you devote time to study this Course Guide.
The Course Guide provides you the content and extent of the course.
It acts as a window to the course proper.
Endeavour to use jotters to write out any task you may require explanations on.
Course Materials 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units MAC113 is a two-unit 100 level course.
This course has four modules.
The first module contains three units while modules two, three and four contain four units.
There are therefore 15 units to be red and internalised.
Below are the four modules in the course.
Module 1 Introduction Unit 1 Meaning and Scope of Mass Media Unit 2 Antecedents of Modern Mass Media Unit 3 Functions of the Mass Media ii  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Module 2 Media Evolution in Nigeria Unit 1 Contributions of Henry Townsend Unit 2 Other Contributors to Media Evolution in Nigeria Unit 3 Advancement of Nigeria Newspapers: The Weekly Record Unit 4 Press Freedom Module 3 Colonial Newspapers Unit 1 The birth of nigerian newspapers: Zik and the West African Pilot Unit 2 Awolowo and the Tribune Unit 3 The Daily Times Unit 4 The Expansion of Newspapers in the East and North Module 4 Post Colonial Media Unit 1 The Post Independence Media in Nigeria Unit 2 Evolution of Radio/TV Broadcasting in Nigeria Unit 3 News Agency of Nigeria Unit 4 Deregulation of Broadcast Media in Nigeria Each unit has introduction, objectives, and main content.
It has also, at the end of each unit, self-assessment exercises.
There are also tutor- marked assignments (TMA) which you must work on and submit for grading.
Textbooks and References In studying this course, there is need to consult books that may be relevant to the subject.
I have listed some textbook and provided some relevant information that will help you to understand this course without stress.
You must commit your time to this course as much as possible to read these books to position yourself to attempt the exercises.
Assessment The assessment for this course comes in two ways.
The self -assessment exercises (SAEs) and the tutor-marked assignments (TMAs).
The SAEs are for you to determine how far you have understood what you have read.
This type will not be submitted.
The TMAs are for you to work on and submit because it is 30% of your total assessment.
It must be submitted for marking.
iii MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Tutor-Marked Assignment Tutor-marked assignments are made available at the end of every unit.
It is important that you answer all the questions, since it will be marked and added to your total score.
Always make sure you put your answers in assignment file that you have.
Final Examination and Grading Three hours are allotted to tackle the questions in MAC113 during final examinations and it carries 70% of the total course grade.
Try as much as possible to revise the entire course to be able to answer examination questions.
The questions will reflect the TMAs and the SAEs, which you have already worked on.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials The period devoted to the course will be 15 hours.
The dates and location for tutorials will be given to you including name and telephone number of your tutors.
The tutor will correct and grade your assignment while monitoring your progress.
Always submit your TMAs promptly and feel free to contact your tutor any time you encounter any difficulty with your SAE.
Lastly, prepare for classes well and try to be punctual.
You should come with questions for your tutor to answer.
Your participation in class discussions will determine how much you understand the course and succeed in examinations.
Conclusion It is important that you understands the historical background of mass media in Nigeria to equip you with the necessary information to function as a journalist.
All the newspapers and their proprietors discussed in this course give you some insights into what to expect while practicing the profession.
Summary This Course Guide is a window to MAC113: History of Nigerian Mass Media.
It helps to prepare you for the course and furnishes you with the information that will remove all the obstacles to understanding this course.
I wish you success in MAC113 and the entire programme.
iv  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Course Code MAC113 Course Title History of Nigerian Mass Media Course Team Mr Philip Onuoha (Developer/Writer) - IMSU Onwubere Chidebere H. (Editor/Coordinator) - NOUN v MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-779-9 All Rights Reserved vi  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Introduction…………………………………….…….
1 Unit 1 Meaning and Scope of Mass Media…………….…….
1 Unit 2 Antecedents of Modern Mass Media………………... 5 Unit 3 Functions of the Mass Media………………………… 12 Module 2 Media Evolution in Nigeria……………………..…….
19 Unit 1 Contributions of Henry Townsend……………….….. 19 Unit 2 Other Contributors to Media Evolution in Nigeria ..… 24 Unit 3 Advancement of Nigeria Newspapers: The Weekly Record………………………………………………… 29 Unit 4 Press Freedom…………………………….................... 33 Module 3 Colonial Newspapers……………………………….... 43 Unit 1 The Birth of Nigerian Newspapers: Zik and the West African Pilot.…………………………………..……… 43 Unit 2 Awolowo and the Tribune…………………………….. 48 Unit 3 The Daily Times…………………………….……….... 51 Unit 4 The Expansion of Newspapers in the East and North... 54 Module 4 Post Colonial Media………………………………….
58 Unit 1 The Post Independence Media in Nigeria…………….
58 Unit 2 Evolution of Radio/TV Broadcasting in Nigeria ..…... 63 Unit 3 News Agency of Nigeria…………………………….... 75 Unit 4 Deregulation of Broadcast Media in Nigeria ………… 79 vii None MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA MODULE 1 Unit 1 Meaning and Scope of Mass Media Unit 2 Antecedents to Modern Mass Media Unit 3 Functions of the Mass Media UNIT 1 MEANING AND SCOPE OF MASS MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Mass Media 3.2 Types of Mass Media 3.3 Communication Media 3.4 Mass Media and Socialisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The mass media have been around us for many centuries and affect every aspect of our daily lives.
At times, most of the mass media users are the captive audience.
The issues in this unit will discuss the meaning and types of communication media and socialisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define mass media • discuss the different types of mass communication • discuss mass communication media and media and socialisation.
1 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Mass Media Concisely, the term mass media simply translates to the modern means of giving news, opinion, education, entertainment and agenda-setting to large numbers of people, especially through radio, television, newspapers, magazines and films.
According to Joseph Dominick (2009:36), a medium is the channel through which a message travels from the source to the receiver (medium” as singular, media” is plural).
When we talk about mass communication, we also need channels to carry the message.
Therefore, mass media are the channels used for mass communication.
The definition of mass media will not only include the mechanical devices that transmit and sometimes store the message (television cameras, radio microphones, printing presses) but also the institutions that use these machines to transmit messages.
“A Media Vehicle is a single component of the mass media, such as a newspaper, radio station, television network, or magazine.
3.2 Types of Mass Media There are basically eight different mass media: radio, television, film, books, sound recordings, newspapers, magazines and the internet.
Of course, these eight are not the only mass media that exist.
Others are billboards, comic books, posters, direct mail, matchbooks and buttons.
These eight media listed above have the largest audiences, employ the most people and have the greatest impact.
People are also most familiar with these media.
3.3 Mass Communication Media For us to understand the mass communication media, it is important to look at the meaning of mass communication.
It has been viewed as a process in which “professional” communicators use media to disseminate messages widely and rapidly in large and diverse audiences in attempt to influence them in a variety of ways.
There is need to define which forms of communication should be considered as vehicles of mass media.
Components of Mass Communication From the definition, talking on the phone is not a form of mass communication because the audience is not large and diverse; usually 2  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA there is only one person at each end of the line.
Similarly, any situation in which life performers and audience can see each other directly in a theater or church, at sports events or parade- is not example of a mediated communication.
The major mass communication media or agencies of mass communication therefore are print which comprise books, magazines, newspapers, fliers, newsletters, diaries, calendars, brochures, billboards, and posters among other.
It also includes broadcast media (radio and television).
3.4 Mass Media and Socialisation At times, the media consciously attempt to inculcate values and behaviour in the audience.
The radio and television usually portray in social responsibility adverts or announcements the dangers of alcohol and over speeding.
Recently, advertisements on cigarettes remind smokers that they were liable to die.
Mass media can also transmit values by enforcing, social norms.
People who make unguarded or tribalistic comments over the radio are usually sanctioned, suspended or even sacked.
Joseph Dominick (2009:36) opined that “of all the mass media, television probably has the greatest potential for socialisation.
By the time an individual is 18 years he or she will have spent more time watching television than any single activity except sleep.” 4.0 CONCLUSION We have explained that the mass media are the channels through which professional communicators reach their target audiences.
The mass media agencies enhance socialisation, convergence and control.
It is through the mass media, that cultural interactions succeed.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with the meaning and scope of mass media by examines the types, mass communication media and mass media and socialisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is mass media?
2.
Mention the major types of media.
3.
List five components of print medium.
3 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Gerbner, G. (1967).
“Mass media and Human Communication Theory.” In Human Communication Theory: Original Essays.
Marshall, M. (1964) .Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man: New York: McGraw–Hill.
MCQuail, D. (2000).
McQuail’s Communication Theory.
Condon: Sage.
Michael, S. (1995).
“The Power of News.” Harraral University Press.
Vancil, D. L. & Pendell, S. D. (1987).
The Myth of viewer- Listener.
4  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 2 ANTECEDENTS OF MODERN MASS MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Informal Transference Media 3.2 Formal Transference Media 3.3 Adjuncts of the Mass Media 3.4 Mass Media Symbiosis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The mass media do not exist or operate in isolation.
The modern mass media evolved from the content of the public traditional communication.
These traditional media of public communication may be conveniently classified into two groups: the oral communication or informal transference media and the organised common or formal transference media.
This unit will also examine mass media symbiosis and adjuncts.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss contents of the traditional media of public communication • explain informal transference media • describe adjuncts of the mass media • define mass media symbiosis.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Informal Transference Media The media in this group operate through informal contact between individuals and persons and essentially do not go beyond the circulation or dissemination of rumours and “un official” information.
In this category, the primary example is family – visit.
The African social organisation characterised by a strong sense of kingship, 5 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA community and neighbourliness naturally increase the scope of news circulated in this way.
It was common then, as now, to visit relations and friends in their homes, eat from the same pot and exchange the latest information.
On the contrary, it was manifested in a much wider sphere, in, for example, the attitude to relatives in other communities and the relatively harmonious relationship between people in one community and those in another.
The extent of those activities and connections give some idea of the scope of news circulation in indigenous society by informal contact.
Exchange of information was also promoted by means of the organised and spontaneous gatherings, which are fairly frequent in the African society.
Death and burial ceremonies always attracted large congregations, which often included participants from neighbouring or distant places.
These ceremonies characterised by weeping and wailing had intervening periods where gossiping, storytelling and general exchange of information took place.
Dissemination of unofficial information also characterised village festivals.
Marriage and circumcision feasts, public meetings, and trials, propitiatory assemblies, open quarrels and disputes and several other aggregator events, which characterised the African way of life, are also avenues for informal information.
In this respect, mention must be made of the popular moonlight gatherings, which were dominated by folktales.
Although anyone could be a folk teller, some were highly proficient in the art.
They knew what was interesting to an audience and had an eye for the exciting and the sensational.
They could be seen as perhaps the prototypes of the modern news reporter.
Another prototype of the modern reporter was the masquerade.
Although it was essentially an impersonation of ancestors, the masquerade in some societies, like the Igbo, emerged in the night to gossip and expose scandals like a modern gossip columnist.
In addition, most communities had markets, which were not only centres of trade but also principle means or most convenient forum to meet friends, and kinsmen exchange news and gossip.
Some markets were also the terminal points of one area with one another and with foreign lands and civilisations.
The caravans, which plied these routes, helped to distribute information.
They gathered and “relayed” news as they passed 6  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA from place to place, communicating with fellow traders and collecting information on resources and prospects of trade.
3.2 Formal Transference Media This second category is concerned with more systematised dissemination of information not between persons but between the government “and the people.” The tools employed were recognised official and recognizable sounds, signs and symbols.
In the old Oyo empire, for example, state messengers and intelligence officers (Illari) carried information between the capital and the outlaying provinces.
However, the most common of these indigenous officials was the town crier or bellman.
Part of his functions include announcing the “promulgation” of laws and regulations, meetings, arrangements for communal work and generally –“official” information in the community.
The town crier is an indispensable part of village society.
He is often seen in the autochthonous (aborigine) parts of urban centers where there is an established indigenous monarchy.
In addition, some news dissemination was achieved through the booming of gun, to announce deaths of village personalities and to warn of imminent danger.
Most extensively used were the drums.
When some of these drums are expertly sounded, they are capable of conveying specific meaning.
In other words, they talk.
The Igbo, for instance, have the Ekwe or Ikoro, which were permanently set in village squares and shrines.
Other state drums are Yoruba Gbedu, the Isekiri Oji, the Edo Okha, which were used to summon special meetings, proclaim the arrival to and the departure of VIPs from the palaces.
They are equally used to announce serious acts of sacrilege and disaster, alert the community against invasion and in war and advertise the presence of warriors.
3.3 Adjuncts of the Mass Media The word adjunct originated from a Latin word “adjungere” which means “to join”.
Therefore, adjunct simply means “something joined” (Uyo 1987:36).
In other words, adjunct means some additions to the main thing being discussed.
Accordingly, adjuncts can equally be called “auxiliaries (DeFleur and Dennis) “indirect media” (Whitney), “paramedia agencies” (Murphy) as recorded by Uyo.
7 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Going by Defleur and Dennis’ views, auxiliaries are “outside organisations from which the mass media get important help.” Basically, these windows link the media to the outside events.
In Whitney’s words:“… indirect media are service media.
They have no audience of their own in the sense that the mass media do.” The adjuncts of mass media have a symbiotic relationship with each other.
This is because the media organization depends on them for additional information on news, entertainment, features, etc.
In return, the adjuncts are sustained from the money that they get from the media organizations they service.
There are eight major adjuncts of the mass media and some less obvious ones.
The major adjuncts of the mass media include the following: 1.
The news agencies or wire service: These are organisations that gather and process news, which they disseminate to their various subscribers such as the mass media, other news agencies, public institutions and commercial enterprises (Uyo: p 38).
There are some privately owned agencies while others are government owned.
The news agencies operate locally, nationally, regionally, continentally and internationally.
The major international news agencies are: i. Agence France Presse (AFP) in Paris, France ii.
Associated Press (AP) in New York, USA iii.
Reuters in London, UK iv.
The Soviet Telegraph Agency (TASS) in Moscow, USSR v. United Press, International (UPI) New York, USA These first five are usually called the “BIG FIVE”.
Others include Hinshua and the New China News Agency (NCNA).
There is also the Non-Aligned News Pool and the Inter-Press Service (IPS).
In Africa, we have the Pan-African News Agency (PANA), which has its headquarters in Dakar, Senegal.
It was specifically established on the 25th of May, 1983 for the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
The essence was to rectify the one-sided flow or reportage of news by the Western World, especially in respect of news coverage about the developing nations, which they regard as the Third World Nations.
The developing nations in reaction to this circumstance have thus, established national and regional news agencies, which will serve some nearby nations.
Examples of these agencies include: 8  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA a) Middle East News Agency(MENA)- Regional b) News Agency of Nigeria (NAN)- National c) The Press Trust of India.
Though a national newspaper, it competes with international news agencies.
2.
Syndicates: They are better known as Press Syndicates and they are very popular in American.
Their function is to package and supply feature and interpretative materials for the print media in particular.
Similarly, they promote and sell columns, analyses, comic strips, cartoons and other features to individual newspapers, magazines and other media units (Hiebert et al in Uyo 1987:39).Syndicates also supply media organisations with entertainment programmes.
3) Advertising Agencies: These are popularly called “ad agencies.” Though “advertising” is an aspect of mass communication, however, it is the intermediary between them and the media organisation.
Essentially, ad agencies specialise in promoting products.
Accordingly, Gamble defines advertising agency as: i. an independent business organization comprised of creative ii.
and business people, who develop, prepare and place iii.
advertisement in advertising media; sellers seeking to find iv.
customers for their goods and services The ad agencies liaise with, and get approval of the advertising departments of the media organisations to place ads in their organisations.
In fact, majority of ads placed in the newspapers, magazines, radio and television are placed by the advertising agencies that are in turn paid for these jobs.
The money they get is known as Agency Commission.
4.
Public Relations and Publicity Firms: These firms specifically concern themselves with the “total communication problems” of their clients.
Their major function is to counsel their clients on the outcome of their actions and advice them on how to achieve public acceptance.
The clients of PR firms include: celebrities, politicians, religious groups, political parties, educational institutions, the military, business organisations and the government.
Most profit and non-profit organisations establish PR/Information departments to handle their image problems as well as creating favorable image for them.
5.
Government Information Ministries/Services/Agencies: A majority of governments entrust their PR and publicity into the 9 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA hands of a special ministry or agency created to take care of governments’ image.
This varies with countries.
In the developing countries, the ministries of information are also responsible for the print and electronic media, especially those owned by the government.
Other adjuncts of mass media include: • Research and Rating Organisation or Services • Programme and Film Production Companies • Public Opinion Polling Agencies Organisation All these equally perform the basic functions of adjuncts of mass media.
That is, providing additional information for the media organisations to work with.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Briefly discuss what you understand by the adjuncts of mass media.
N/B: The adjuncts of mass media was prepared by Onwubere, Chidinma and included to make the unit adequate and comprehensive.
3.4 Mass Media Symbiosis This term is borrowed from biology where organisms are found to engage in symbiotic relationships.
In biology, symbiosis is seen as the association of two organisms for mutual benefit.
As analogy, in mass media, different media demonstrate what we might call a form of symbiosis.
For example, in the television and film, producers work for both media.
Films that originally played in the theatre found their way to television, video cassettes.
Film actors and actresses make television shows; most newspaper editions carry magazine inserts.
Movie scripts are transformed into novels and vice versa.
Some magazines are distributed on video tapes or newspaper copies, and so on.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have taken time to discuss what could be termed “mass media helpers”.
The mass media content, both the formal and informal communication are sustained by human and physical factors.
This also 10  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA reveals that the mass media are made up of systems that enhance information dissemination.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with the traditional media of public communication by looking at the formal transference media the informal transference media, adjuncts of the mass media and media symbiosis.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention the two types of traditional media of public communication.
2.
List the components of the informal transference media.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bagdikian, B. H. (2000).
The Media Monopoly (6th ed.).
USA: Beacon Press.
Berger, A.
A.
(1982).
Media Analysis Techniques.
Beverly Hills.
Forrest, E. (1998).
“Technology, good for what, exactly, will hunt?” The Guardian.
Gablehouse, G. (2000).
“Print is Alive and Well” Media Week.
Gamble, F.R.
(nd) What Advertising Agencies Are- What They do and How They Do It (7th ed.)
New York.
Hiebert, R.E.
; Ungurait, D.F.
& Bohn, T.W.
(1974).Mass Media: An Introduction to Modern Communication.
New York: David McKay.
Okugo, U.
(nd).
Theories of Mass Communication.
Owerri :The Nigerian Angle Cel-bez Publisher.
Uyo, O.A.
(1987).
Mass Communication Media: Classifications and Characteristics.
New York: Civilities International.
11 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 3 THE FUNCTIONS OF MASS MEDIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of the Mass Media 3.1.1 Surveillance of the Environment 3.1.2 Correlation of Different Elements of the Society 3.1.3 Socialisation and Transmission of Culture 3.1.4 Entertainment 3.2 Mass Media Systems 3.3 Mass Media Coverage 3.3.1 Local Media 3.3.2 National Media 3.4 Dysfunctions of the Mass Media 3.4.1 Anxiety 3.4.2 Revolution of Rising Expectation 3.4.3 Narcotisation 3.4.4 Privatisation 3.4.5 Human Conflicts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The mass media perform numerous functions in the society.
The media scholar, Harold Lasswell, observed that the mass media are an extension of those functions that the society has always needed.
Most importantly, whether the media are functional or dysfunctional, they operate within the social system, and that is actually why it concerns us.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the functions of the mass media • discuss mass media systems • explain media coverage • state the dysfunction of the mass media • define some terms such as status conferral, socialisation, correlation, and so on.
12  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions of the Mass Media Lasswell stated that the media perform three major social functions: (1) Surveillance of the environment (2) Correlation of different elements of society (3) Transmission of culture, from one generation to the next Charles Wright added the function of entertainment to functions of the mass media.
3.1.1 Surveillance of the Environment The media teach us most of what we know about the world through the process of surveillance.
The media expose us also to other societies.
The media reveal to us about the stock market, impending danger, business opportunities and risks, travelers guide, weather conditions great discoveries.
Surveillance is not just for the masses, but also for the entire nation.
For instance, the Government and industry leaders watch CNN and BBC – world or read the Guardian or Time magazine to know what other world leaders are saying and thinking.
Above all, the media also give status to individuals.
This is achieved by exposing the individuals to large audiences for one good reason or the other, to make them appear important and esteemed.
This process is known as status conferral.
3.1.2 Correlation of Different Elements of the Society This is an important function of the mass media.
It involves selection, evaluation and interpretation of events.
It helps impose structure on the news and it is accomplished by persuasive communication through editorialising, commentary, advertising and propaganda.
It categorises news and directs on the importance of each news item, by deciding whether the news item should appears on the front page, first headline on the broadcast or whether it should be accompanied by a teaser on the magazine cover promoting the story.
13 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.1.3 Socialisation and Transmission of Culture According to Ralph Hansen (2005), socialisation is the process of integrating people into the society through the transmission of values, social norms and knowledge to new members of the group takes place.
We actually learn the values of our society through the media, friends, clubs, school, church, etc.
Accordingly, the mass media provides socialisation through the following ways.
(a) Through role models in entertainment in programming (b) Through goals and desires as presented in media citizenship values, portrayed in the news.
(c) Through advertisements for products that may be useful to us in different stages of our lives.
3.1.4 Entertainment This is communication package, which is intended to amuse, even if it serves other functions.
For instance, television drama on HIV/AIDS can be considered entertaining even though it educates people living with HIV/AIDS on how to cope with the challenges of the ailment.
According to Neil Postman (1985), “the primary effect of television is that it changes how people see the world; that is, with television, people start seeing everything as entertainment.” 3.2 Mass Media Systems The media system that exists in a country is directly related to the political system in that country.
The political system determines the exact relationship between the media and the government.
However, the development of a national mass media system is predicated on the protection of national interest, based on national philosophy (social, geographical, cultural, religious, economic and international interests) .These are seen in terms of the attitudes of national leadership towards the people (their rights, duties, capabilities and potentialities.
There are four orientations, which determine how the mass media operate with a system.
14  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 1.
The Authoritarian Attitude This is obtainable where the controllers of mass communication lack fate in the ability of the people to govern themselves.
The authoritarian dictates the content of mass media for the public.
The media are usually state – owned and the state selects, arranges and plays up or down the media content.
This system can be found in former USSR, Cuba, Mexico and some one – party states in Africa.
2.
Paternalism or Paternalistic Attitude This system has faith in the basic intelligence of the masses and the capability deal with ideals.
They maintain a healthy media content.
The elites or highly educated, privileged individuals prescribe the standard for taste.
3.
Permissionism or Permissive Attitude This system stipulates that media organisations must operate according to government registration and regulatory requirements, all in the public interest, convenience and necessity (PICON) media contents are bared on audience research.
The result is usually competition and parasitism.
However, the negative fall out is excessive materialism and sometimes, outright irresponsibility.
4.
Pluralism or Pluralistic Attitude This is combination of what is good of the other three systems discussed above.
The developing nations are noted for pluralism.
The attitude recognises more than one ultimate substance or principle – dualism.
In other worlds, the attributes of authoritarian, paternalistic and permissive attitudes are combined in pluralism.
3.3 Mass Media Coverage The coverage of mass media depends on the geographical area it covers.
Therefore, a medium could be local, national or international coverage.
3.3.1 Local Media These are those that cover a small portion of the society during operation and circulation.
This can also mean that the media only have the interest of the people in a defined local setting.
For instance, in 15 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Nigeria, local media can be said to include the state media houses for example BCA, Umuahia, IBC, Owerri, Ambassador Newspapers, Statesman, LTV, Lagos, and so on.
3.3.2 National Media These are those that have the interest of the entire country at heart.
It could be private or public but the coverage entails what the outlook is like.
Examples are the national dailies – Vanguard, The Guardian etc, and media houses such as NTA, FRCN, and so on.
International Media Their interests cut across national boundaries.
That is, the media content are meant for audience within and outside a particular country.
Examples of international media include CNN, CFI, BBC, Time Magazine, AIT, NTA International, VON, and so on.
NOTE: Some media signals overflow to close by countries.
This is not international communication but referred to as spill over.
For instance, when Benin Republic residents receive signals from NTA Lagos.
3.4 Dysfunctions of the Mass Communication Mass communication has dysfunction, which are the negative implications or attributes of mass communication effects.
These are discussed below.
3.4.1 Anxiety Mass communication has been accused of causing anxiety that emanates from insufficient reporting, misinformation and outright falsehood.
Nigerian newspapers and magazines are known for misspelling, wrong judgment and insufficient coverage.
In doing so, they mislead, create unnecessary but avoidable anxiety thereby leaving many questions unanswered.
3.4.2 Revolution of Rising Expectation The media sometimes creates awareness of availabilities that are not within the reach of media consumers.
Through advertising, the media through glamorisation tend to make the audience believe that possession of certain products can lead to certain results that at times are not true - deceptive advertising.
16  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.4.3 Narcotisation The media have the ability to narcotise people.
They draw people to media offerings and then constitute them into a captive audience.
People then organise their lives around such programmes.
Take for instance “Super Story,” people cancel their engagements or refuse to be engaged for the time of their favourite programmes.
Like regular drunks, they rush to sustain their habit.
3.4.4 Privatisation Excessive media consumers may tend to be alienated from the run of societal life.
Media content like in times of war may lead people to withdraw into their shells.
They may prefer not to be informed about happening.
3.4.5 Human Conflicts Media content may lead to human and international conflicts.
The Sharia conflict could attribute to the media because all parties involved would like to be covered, using propaganda, “favourably” in order to achieve their objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has revealed that the mass media have become a visible, prominent and pervasive aspect of the society.
They inform, educate, entertain, mobilise and motivate the society.
The mass media perform their functions according to systems and contexts.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the role of the mass media coverage and dysfunctions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is mass media surveillance?
2.
How do media confer status on individuals?
3.
List the functions of the mass media.
4.
Mention four systems under which the mass media operate.
17 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Hansen, R. (2005).
Mass Communication: Living in a Media world.
New York: McGraw Hill Company Inc. Kerwin, A. M. & Brews, B.
(2000).
“Over Magazine Rules.”In Advertising Age.
Lasswell, H. (1980).
The Structure and Function of Communication in Society” In Mass Communication (ed.).
Wilbur Schramm (Urbana, University of Illinois Press.
Neil, P. (1985).
Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business.
New York: Penguin.
Wright, C.R.
(1986).
Mass Communication: A Sociological Perspective.
(3rd ed.).
New York: Rendom House.
18  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA MODULE 2 Unit 1 Contribution of Henry Townsend Unit 2 Other Contributors to Media Evolution in Nigeria Unit 3 Advancement of Nigeria Newspapers: The Weekly Record UNIT 1 CONTRIBUTIONS OF HENRY TOWNSEND CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The African Press: Pre-Independence 3.2 The Establishment of Iwe Irohin 3.3 Brief Profile of Henry Townsend 3.4 Contents, Format, Frequency and Readership of Iwe Irohin 3.5 Readership and Price of Iwe Irohin 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The history of the press in Africa, particularly Nigeria centers on the activities of the colonialists.
The British missionaries contributed immensely to the development of education and press in Nigeria.
In Badagry, an Anglican priest, Reverend Henry Townsend worked assiduously to establish a vernacular newspaper entitled “Iwe Irohin.” Thus, in this unit our discussion will centre on the contribution of Henry Townsend.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the birth of the African newspapers in the pre- independence era • give a brief profile of Reverend Henry Townsend • discuss the contents, formats, frequency and readership of Iwe Irohin • discuss readership and price of Iwe Irohin.
19 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 African Press: Pre-Independence Era The printed word came to Africa with the European.
The Portuguese and the Spaniards came first in search of treasure and quickly worked up an appetite for an empire.
Not to be outdone, the Belgians, the Dutch, the English, the French and the Germans moved in to do battle over real estate.
After a series of musical chairs, the situation stabilised but only to see the entrenchment of the Dutch in South Africa , the Belgians in Congo , Rwanda and Burundi , the English in Nigeria , the French in Cameroon , Togoland and the Germans in Tanganyika (Tanzania).
The occupation eventually led to racial and political conflicts between the indigenous populations and the white intruders.
Out of these conflicts was born African Nationalism.
Sections organised into resistance movements aimed at raising opposition over unpopular measures.
One of the instruments of African nationalism was the press.
Its birth and growth in different colonies depended on such factors as the fear of the nationalism spirit, commitment to the nationalism course and the state of the economy.
In a number of instances, introducing what turned out to be the foundations of the “nationalist press” was a European idea but such a beginning served only as a catalyst.
In any case, the African press seemed to have materialised first in the British colonies of West Africa.
The Ghanaians in 1857 had one of their earliest African-owned newspapers in Charles Bannerman’s organ The West African Herald, Nigeria posted its first newspaper, Iwe Irohin in 1859.
3.2 Brief Profile of Townsend It should be noted that in Nigeria, the first printing press was installed by the Presbyterian mission when they arrived in Calabar in 1946.
Eight years later, Rev.
Henry Townsend fitted up a printing press and inaugurated a printing school in the mission compound at Abeokuta.
Townsend, an Anglican, came from England.
He was asked to proceed to Abeokuta by the mission authorities in Calabar to help in ministering the spiritual needs of many sierra Leonian immigrants who were emancipated from slave trade.
He arrived Badagry and worked with Sierra Leonian immigrants at his headquarters at a place known as English Town.
It is said that during the publication of Iwe Irohin, there 20  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA were at least 300 people in CMS compound who had learnt to read and write and this generated the need for English man to set the newspaper.
3.3 Establishment of the Iwe Irohin In December 1859, Townsend established a printing press on which Iwe Irohin, Yoruba Africa’s first vernacular newspaper was printed.
The full name of Townsend’s newspaper was “Iwe Irohin Fun Awon Ara Egba Ati Yoruba” translated into English language means “Newspaper in Yoruba for the Egba and Yoruba people.” Reverend Townsend is reported to have said at the beginning of the maiden edition of Iwe Irohin that …… “my objective is to Beget the habit of seeking information by reading ……(newspapers)…… I have set on foot a Yoruba newspaper” Also, note that it was on Reverend Townsend’s printing press that the first Bible in Yoruba language was printed in 1862.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is the full name of Iwe Iroyin and what was the essence for its establishment?
3.4 Contents, Format and Frequency of Iwe Irohin Right from the outset, Iwe Irohin was published fortnightly, in Yoruba language and, later, in both Yoruba and English languages.
It had eight pages with another four pages in Yoruba languages and another four complementary pages in English language, translating the Yoruba version of it.
In other words, it was first a vernacular paper and later became a bilingual paper.
In terms of layout, typography and design, each page of Iwe Irohin was divided into two columns and measured approximately 6.5x8 inches deep.
It did not carry any pictures.
Its basic philosophical foundation among other things was to promote Christian literacy among the Yoruba people of Badagry and the England.
Iwe Irohin featured prominently on the vertical make-up.
It generally lacked typographical pluralism.
Items in each column were set-to- fit.
Iwe Irohin did not carry editorial unit until 1862.
Similarly, Iwe Irohin did not carry advertisements until five years after its first appearance.
There was lack of typographical harmony, contrast balance, but unity in 21 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA the earlier copies of Iwe Irohin was said to be very credible.
It was a political newspaper exercising great restraint from colonial politics.
It was a great critic of both the slave trade and the 1800.
Iwe Irohin advocated for morality, and continuous humanism.
In January 1866, Iwe Irohin for the first time started publishing two different editions-one in Yoruba language and the other entirely in English language.
It continued with the demise of the uprising.” The “Ifole” uprising was a civil disruption between the Ibadan and Egba traders.
It was alleged by the Egba people that the Europeans were helping the Ibadan people in their bid to by-pass Egba commercial middlemen in trading directly with the Lagos colony.
Because of this allegation, all the Europeans living in Egba land (Abeokuta) were driven away by the Egba people.
At the outset, the news coverage of Irohin was limited in scope.
For instance, it carried only religious news items.
Later, its news coverage included non-religious items like trade and commerce, information about schedules of arrivals and departure of ships, coverage’s from and to European countries.
3.5 Readership and Price Iwe Irohin was said to have been hard to read and comprehended during its first few years of existence.
In particular, the teenagers of those days “quarreled” with Iwe Irohin’s stringent moralistic philosophies.
The price of Iwe Irohin was about 120 cowries equivalent to one penny.
Similarly, in the political spheres, which were secondary to Iwe Irohin, the paper achieved a considerable influence.
Townsend used it effectively in local politics in Egba land.
The paper might have exerted a wide influence but it introduced first generation of educated Africans to the reading culture, which is part and parcel of the enlightened society.
The paper also inspired the Africans who later made use of news papering of the land.
Iwe Irohin was a catalyst to the growth of other papers.
The paper helped in revitalising other printing presses, which were existing and helped to increase the number of apprentice-printers.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have established that the first newspaper in Nigeria was published in Yoruba language.
Reverend Henry Townsend’s Iwe Irohin opened the 22  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA publication gates for aspiring indigenous printers and publishers in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the profile of Reverend Henry Townsend, the establishment of Iwe Irohin as well as the content, format, readership price and contributions of Iwe Irohin.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the contributions of Iwe Irohin?
2.
What are the contributions of Reverend Henry Townsend to the Nigerian press?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekwelie, S.A. (1989).
“The Rise of the African Press”.
In Journal of Humanities.
University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
Nwuneli, O. E. (1985).
Communication in Nigeria: A Book of Readings.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers.
Okonkwo, R.N.
(1985).
The Role of the Colonial Press in Nigeria, Pan Publishers.
Omu, F. (1985).
“Iwe Irohin 1859-1867.” Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria, Vol.
IV (1).
23 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 2 OTHER CONTRIBUTORS TO MEDIA EVOLUTION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 10 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Profile of Robert Campbell 3.2 The Birth of Anglo-African Newspaper (1863-1865) 3.3 Role of Anglo- African in the Development of Nigeria Press 3.4 Partnership between Blaize and John Payne Jackson 3.
5 The Death of Weekly Times 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The development of the Nigerian press was achieved by missionaries, colonialists and businessmen.
Some of them were interested in providing a vehicle for education and literacy.
After the publication of Iwe Irohin, Robert Campbell launched the Anglo-African newspaper to continue the media tradition in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • write the profile of Campbell and the establishment of Anglo- African newspaper • discuss the role of Anglo-African newspaper in the development of the Nigerian press • explain the partnership between Blaize and John Payne Jackson and the death of Weekly Times newspaper.
24  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Profile of Robert Campbell Born in Kingston, Jamaica of a mulato mother and a Scottish father, Campbell worked as an apprentice printer for five years.
In the United States, he was a victim of racial antagonism and discrimination.
In 1855, he served as a compositor and two years later, he joined the institute of color youth at Philadelphia, as a scientific teacher.
In 1859- 60, in response to the philanthropic idealism, which fired the imagination of many West Indians and Afro- Americans in their Back- to- Africa movement, Campbell joined Dr Martin K. Delany on a tour of Yoruba land with the aim of establishing a Negro colony.
A treaty was contracted with the Alake of Abeokuta who subsequently repudiated it before Campbell arrived Lagos in 1862, which he thought, would be his new home.
Undaunted, he decided to settle in Lagos for the next 22 years.
He distinguished himself as a journalist, intellectual manufacturer, merchant and administrator.
Early in his career in Lagos, Campbell established the Lagos Academy where he gave lectures on human physiology.
His “literacy achievements” were to earn him the title of “professor.” This background foreshadows his editorial policy as stated earlier.
Given Campbell’s background and outlook, it is not surprising that he decided on a literacy publication as a paying proposition and a 63/ x 8 ½ 4 assortment of stories called from a variety of sources, books, novels, magazines and overseas newspapers.
As a weekly journal, it sold for three pence and was printed every Saturday evening at Campbell’s printing school.
From the outset, the venture proved a failure and it would seem that what kept it going was Campbell’s determination to reject defeat and perhaps the evidently small proceeds from a few government and other advertisement which were inserted in the journal.
The literacy matter interested only a few subscribers and sales did not exceed about 30-50 copies a week.
The paper died at the end of 1865.
According to Omu, judging from feeling of utter disappointment with which Campbell continually referred to the apathy of the public, it seems obvious that the enterprise was far from self-supporting.
25 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.2 The Birth of Anglo-African (1863-1865) The Anglo-African was the second newspaper in the country.
Strictly speaking, the history of Nigeria’s indigenous press began in 1863 when Robert Campbell founded the Anglo-African, which he abandoned two years later.
However, judging by dominant principles upon which it was conducted, it cannot be said to have formed part of newspaper movement, which began in 1880’s by providing cheap and accessible material, which would educate, inform and entertain its readers.
(This formed the editorial policy of the paper).
The establishment of the Lagos Grammar School in 1859 by the CMS mission was indicative of the future educational growth and Campbell’s rich experiences as a printer and teacher embarked on experimental literacy journalism.
33 Role of Anglo-African in the Development of Nigeria Press In a large scale, the Anglo-African helped to produce more printers among whom is Richard Blaize.
It set a stage for the growth and development of printing industry, especially in Lagos.
Most importantly, the newspaper reinforced growing awareness of the significance of newspaper as an instrument of public enlightenment.
The paper became one of the major signs of growth and consolidation from the 1880s of the Lagos press thereby making Lagos assume the position of the convergent part for Nigerian press.
Till today, most newspapers are still concentrated in Lagos city and its environs.
The Instinct for Nationalism in Africa The real founding of Nigerian press was 15 years late when certain social, political, economic conditions interacted with local and foreign inspirations to create conditions, which favoured popular newspaper.
The doctrine of democracy which was practised differently by the European exponents of “divide and rule” culminated in the loss of respect for African rulers.
The missionaries who came later applauded the partition and this led to nationalism in the African minds.
These developments highlighted the need for an indigenous media for the effective ventilation of social, political and economic grievances and for the inculcation of nationalism sentiment in view of the aforementioned.
On November 10, 1880, the Lagos Times/Gold Colony Advertiser was established.
The Lagos Times was founded by Richard Blaize.
Blaize was a wealthy businessman of Yoruba and Sierra Leonian origin.
The 26  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA paper marked the beginning of indigenous newspaper movement.
The name of the newspaper reflected the joint administration of Nigeria and Gold Coast.
The editorial policy of the paper was “The press is a safeguard public right”.
The paper crusaded for the right of the commonly placed people.
It lived throughout, defending this motto.
The newspaper appeared twice a month and sold for six pence.
The paper was a four-page journal and had three columns to a page.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Briefly discuss the circumstance of the birth of Lagos Times and how the paper faired?
3.4 Partnership between Blaize and John Payne Jackson The Lagos Weekly Times, which came out on 3rd May, 1890 and sold for three pence was the new version of the defunct Lagos Times and Gold Coast Colony Advertiser revived by John Payne Jackson, a Liberian born businessman, in a special arrangement with Blaize.
The agreement between Blaize and Jackson provided that Jackson should revive the Lagos Times under the new name, have a free hand in managing sales advertisements and job-printing business and prepare a statement of account at the end of three months so that Blaize’s share of the revenue could be determined.
The three-month period could also serve to reassure Blaize that Jackson was a different man from what he was eight years ago when his poor bookkeeping and love of drink in the office of the Lagos Times led to his dismissal.
Jackson’s editorship of the Weekly Times was excellent but his financial management showed no signs of improvement.
At the end of three months, he could not render any account, not even when he was given two more months.
The relationship became strained; although Jackson eventually managed to submit an account, it failed to reassure that he had not made a mistake in yielding to Jackson’s pressure for a new relationship.
On 29th November, Blaize discontinued the Weekly Times and arranged to revert to the old name.
As from 6th December, Jackson at first acquiesced in Blaize’s decision but soon changed his mind and, in handbills, began to dispute Blaize’s right to discontinue the Weekly Times.
A court threat 27 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA made Jackson to back down, announcing that he would start his own newspaper the following year.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the relationship between Blaize and Jackson.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been established in this unit that Anglo-African newspaper helped to increase the number of trained printers in the country.
This implication fostered the growth of the press.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed giant strides taken by Blaize to establish the Anglo-African and the Lagos Weekly Times and the role of the papers in addition to the quarrel between Beale Blaize and John Payne Jackson.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who published the Anglo African newspaper?
2.
Why did Blaize and Jackson quarrel?
3. Who established the Lagos Weekly Times?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeyanyu, B.
(1998).
“Thirty years of Nigerian Press.” The Punch, April 19.
Azikiwe, N. (1964).
“Pioneer Aeroes of the Nigeria Press.” Address to First Graduating Students of the Jackson School of Journalism.
Nsukka: University of Nigeria.
Enyinnaya, I.
(n.d).
A Class work of Nigerian Media History.
Owerri.
28  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 3 ADVANCEMENT OF EARLY NEWSPAPERS: THE WEEKLY RECORD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Profile of John Payne Jackson 3.2 Formation of the Lagos Weekly Record 3.3 Issues that Attracted the Attention of the Weekly Record 3.4 Comments on the Weekly Record 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are important events and personalities that contributed immensely to the development of the Nigerian press.
One of the significant contributors was John Payne Jackson.
He established the Weekly Record after a quarrel with Blaize.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • write the profile of John Payne Jackson • discuss the formation of Lagos Weekly Record • state categorically the issues that attracted the attention of the Weekly Record.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Profile of John Payne Jackson Born in Gape Palmas (at about 1847) in the small African colony of Maryland, which united with Liberia to the north in the late fifties, Payne inherited his father’s painstaking disposition and incisive intellect.
His father who migrated from Maryland USA was known as Thomas Jackson.
29 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA At the age four, he lost his father.
This tragedy is assumed to have made Payne self-assertive and independent early in life.
Payne attended the training institute on the Cavalla River and showed great capacity in Liberal subjects and printing.
His love for travels made him go to Gold Coast and eventually ended up in Lagos in the 1860’s.
He worked with the merchant L.S Leigh and was posted to the Brass river in the 1870’s.
He worked with his employer and started to trade in palm produce on his own.
Payne suffered business setbacks and described the losses he incurred as the cruel greed of European commerce on the lower Niger.
He abandoned trade and got employment as a bookkeeper with the Lagos Times and Gold Coast colony advertiser in 1887.
3.2 The Formation of the Lagos Weekly Record The relationship between Blaize/Jackson, which was to poison the relations of the two families for a long time, had a significant effect upon the history of the record.
Jackson appeared to have resolved not only to outsell the rival Lagos Times, drive it into a second and final collapse and force his former boss out of the newspaper trade, but also to father a newspaper organisation, which would be commercially successful and possibly overshadow Blaize’s financial prestige.
It should also be noted that the background of disagreement and dispute would give a new dimension to Jackson’s editorial and propagandist competence with popular implications.
The above circumstances led to the establishment of the Lagos Weekly Record in1891.
3.3 Issues that Attracted the Attention of the Weekly Record The activities of the Lagos Weekly Record cut across all spheres of human endeavour including political, economic and social.
Host of the areas of focus can be outlined as follows.
a. Colonial administration b. British attitude to native chiefs in the course of the system of indirect rule c. New system of land tenure d. Policy of discrimination against Africans in some areas like politics, education and employment e. Type of education and work ethics summation of other issues that attracted comments from the record are as follows.
• Introduction of Water Rate: During this period the colonial government for undisclosed reasons decided to introduce water rate.
The policy did not go down well with the record, which saw 30  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA it as an imposition.
Not only did the paper describe the policy as exploitation it called on Lagosians to resist the exploitative device.
• Use of public money to build churches and mosques for worship to the exclusion of Nigerian was attacked by the record.
The paper disapproved that public money be used to build places of worship where Africans are banned from entry.
• The record propagated for the amendment of the Nigerian Constitution, which at the time did not provide for any real legislative authority in the country.
The then governor Lord Lugard, appointed few government officials in legislative council without authority.
Their only duty then was to meet once a year to listen to the governor’s address and give him rousing ovation.
• The paper bitterly opposed the flogging of Nigerian Chiefs and Emirs publicly.
In the opinion of the paper, this is inhuman and an easy means of encoding the loyalty of subjects to natural rules.
Summarily, the record by all standards was a radical Newspaper and advocated for aggressive nationalism.
In the words of Ezra, Jackson “… was uncompromising by nature and fanatical by conviction!” Jackson died on 1st August 1915 and the editorial chair moved to his son Horatio Jackson who maintained the status quo until the demise of the paper in 1935.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What were the circumstances that led to the establishment of the Weekly Record?
3.4 Comments on the Weekly Record The quality and characteristics of the paper, The Weekly Record can be deduced from the description given to the paper by eminent mass communication scholars.
• Dr. Kalu Ezra, a historian of international repute, described the Record as the first militant nationalist paper.
• B. Laotan, a journalist, said that the Weekly Record was so powerful that at one point because of its uncompromising attitude in the national interest foreign advertisements were withdrawn.
However, the paper stood its ground.
• Robert Julie, another historian, said of the record editor, “Jackson was a thoughtful student of current affairs and an exhaustive commentator of their significances for almost a quarter of 31 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA century.
His columns provided influential and instructive help to contemporaries even as they do to modern observers.
• Nnamdi Azikwe, in his book “Odyssey,” attributed his interest in journalism partly to the influence of The Weekly Record editorials.
This reflected in the way the West African Pilot was edited because the paper was full of “Jacksonian phrases and expressions.” The record with the editorial policy “Be just and fear not” strongly believed in propagation of racial consciousness.
4.0 CONCLUSION Payne Jackson succeeded in laying a solid foundation for the Nigerian press.
He also set the pace for Nigerian nationalists who eventually used the press as a strong instrument to fight colonialism.
The Weekly Record became an organ of reference for budding journalists.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the life and contributions of John Payne Jackson to Nigerian journalism and the establishment of the Weekly Record.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly discuss the relationship between J.P Jackson and B. Blaize emphasising the effect on the press.
2.
Write a brief profile of the Jacksons.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Duyile, D. (1979).
Media and Mass Communication in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Duyison Publishers.
Okafor, C. (2002).
“History of the Nigeria Print Media.” In Okunna C.S.
(Ed.).
Teaching Mass Communication: A multi- Dimensional Approach.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Uche, L. U.
(1989).
Mass Media People and Politics in Nigeria.
New Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.
32  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 4 THE CONCEPT OF PRESS FREEDOM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Press Freedom 3.2 History of Press Freedom 3.3 Constitutional Guarantees 3.4 Limits to Freedom of the Press 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a journalist, you need to know the basis of your freedom.
As such, this unit will look at the freedom of expression, press freedom as enunciated by international laws and conventions and of course the Nigerian Constitution.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define press freedom • differentiate between the freedom of expression and press freedom • identify the limitation of your freedom as a journalist working in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Press Freedom Liberty or freedom of expression and the meaning: • Laying no previous restraint upon publication.
Liberty of the press means laying no previous or prior censorship of publication.
Every person has the right to lay what sentiments, facts, information or publication he has before the public.
To forbid this right is to destroy freedom of expression and the press; but, 33 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA • Where a person publishes what is unlawful, criminal, defamatory or mischievous, he must face the consequences of his publication.
• Liberty of the press consists in laying no previous restrain upon publication and not in freedom from censorship for criminal matters published.
Every man has the undoubted right to lay what sentiment he pleases before the public… to forbid that is to destroy the freedom of the press- but if he publishes what is illegal or mischievous he must face the consequences of his own temerity” (Osinbajo and Fogam, 1991).
Concisely, the liberty of the press is a right with a responsibility.
The freedom of expression which Ray Ekpu (1998) regarded as the grandmother of all freedom has been given an important place in virtually all international and national charters of human rights.
For instance, Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Right States that: Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media regardless of frontier.
Article 19 (1) of the international Convention on Civil and Political Right says that “Everyone shall have the Right to hold opinion without interference.” The African charter on Human and Peoples’ Right Article 9 says “Every individual shall have the right to express and disseminate his opinions within the law.
In most countries of the world including Nigeria, freedom of expression has always been given a significant place.
3.2 History of Press Freedom The revolution caused by the invention of printing brought about literacy, development of modern European languages and of course, the establishment of newspapers.
This eventually led to the symbolic relationship between the government and the media, a relationship that still exists until date.
By this relationship, the government tried to maintain power and control press over the dissemination of information about government activities.
The public (through the media newspapers) wanted to know what the governments were doing.
Hence, the conflict between these two forces, which still continues up until date.
Throughout the history of mankind, people have really fought for the freedom of speech.
Laws have been passed and wars fought over people’s rights to express ideas publicly.
According to history, the great philosopher, Socrates, is said to be the first known person to fight for freedom of speech.
When he was accused of corrupting the morals of the youths of Athens through his teachings, Socrates confessed that he is 34  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA ready to die many times if that is the sacrifice he has to make in the course of speaking his mind in his search for wisdom.
This, clearly, means fighting for the freedom of speech and expression.
Definition of Press Freedom Press freedom is actually an extension of the freedom of expression.
The concept of freedom of press has been something on the lips of many people right from the olden days.
For instance, in Nigeria, if we look back at the earliest newspapers such as Rev.
Henry Townsend’s Iwe Irohin published in 1859 and the other newspapers that followed it, we will observe the struggle for press freedom.
It is unfortunate and regrettable that up until date, the freedom of the press has not been protected despite pressmen’s involvement in government in many cases.
Prominent Nigerians such as late Dr. Nnamdi Azikwe, Ernest Ikoli, Chief Anthony Enahoro, Alhaji Babatunde Jose, late Dele Giwa, Nosa Igiebor, etc.
have fought for freedom of the press, yet they have not been able to guarantee it.
Robert L. Stevenson in J.C Merrill (1995:63) rightly observed that: Everyone is in favour of freedom of the press.
The problem is lack of agreement on what it is and who has it…….
This simply means that press freedom is still a rare commodity in the world.
Merrill (1995:69).
This is why Nigerian journalists, like their counterparts in some parts of the world, are still agitating for press freedom today.
The definition of press freedom is relatively obscure.
However, it can generally be said that “press freedom is the freedom a journalist has to perform his duties without interference of any kind, while still maintaining ethical standards.” Contemporary Freedom With the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, independent journalism began to thrive and find foot in Africa since the 1990s.
The fact could be justified from announcement of PANA (Pan Africa News Agency) towards a change to independent reporting.
Hence, many African countries, media organisations which, hitherto, had very little powers began to challenge government authority.
Unfortunately, the wave of democracy sweeping through the developing countries is still lacking in some of these countries.
The effect is that 35 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA many African countries still have a very long way to go.
It is, however, hoped that the countries involved will learn from one another, while still, collectively, forging ahead towards the common goal of achieving press freedom.
Current Trends In 1991, a study done on “human rights” in 104 countries showed that there is an improvement in human rights conditions.
The work noted that there has been an unparalleled improvement in this direction for five years ranging from 1986-1991 A similar progress was also reported by Freedom House.
By the Freedom House categorisation of Press Freedom in 1993, it was observed that only 25per cent of the world’s population operated a free press, 44per cent partly free press, while 31per cent were not free.
Another analysis of the Freedom House looked at a number of countries rather than the percentages that fell under these different categories.
It also observed that 67 countries were regarded as having a free press, 60 partly free and 50, not free.
It also observed that the number of Countries improving in press freedom out numbered those with declining freedom.
Prospects All over the world, press freedom is under one kind of threat or the other.
Since democracy initiates a constant battle between different forces in the society, most people are seen demanding freedom for themselves.
Unfortunately, these people do not carry along this enthusiasm for demanding freedom when they are in power.
This is often because at this stage, they now face challenges from both political and journalistic oppositions.
These struggles are important because they define the scope of press freedom in the different countries, which the rest of the whole may aspire to attain.
These were the views of Stevenson, which he considers responsible for the challenges facing press freedom.
The scope of press freedom, however, depends on the individual countries of the world and the extent of the relationship of the media and the government in each country.
In addition, it borders on what provisions each Country’s constitution makes for the freedom of speech/expression generally and for the freedom of the press in particular.
For according to Udoakah, freedom of the press is not an idea that can be conceptualised in a vacuum.
It is rather a factor of other circumstances.
To him, freedom of the press is not just the right of the journalist to publish news and comments without interference.
In the views of Udoakah (1994) in J.C Merrill (1995:223), it also includes: 36  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA The right of the people to express themselves in the media of public communication without being curtailed by those who wield political, religious, economic and other powers.
It means the availability of the press to people.
The people should be given free and unimpeded access to news and information….
According to him, freedom of the press is therefore, the relative absence of governmental, economic and other controls in the operation of the press.
Given this scenario, it is obvious that the future for press freedom is still bleak because most African governments are not willing to fully succumb to the demands of absolute press freedom.
Coverage of Africa by the Western Media As earlier mentioned, the coverage of Africa by the western world is not only shabby, but also predominantly negative.
This can be vividly ascertained by the findings of Gary T. Hunt (1996:189) who examined (investigated) “the image” of Africa as reflected by the elite American press.
His findings are in line with the observations of Hatchten and Beil (1985) and Martin (1992) who posited that Africa is “one of the most underreported regions in the world, even though Africa is the second largest continent of the world” (Hachten & Beil1985:626-630).
Some of the findings of G.T Hunt in his study are: i) The Association Press (AP’s) coverage of Africa reflects crises and conflicts from troubled spots.
ii) The developing countries have often been scantily reported by the western media iii) The interests of the American media audience dictate the coverage in the media.
The perception of American editors appears to be that their audience have limited or virtually no interest in Third World events and news, hence, their scanty coverage of these areas.
Unfortunately, this is the opposite of what happens in the Third World countries, who rather, have American news consistently featuring in their media.
There is, therefore, a lack of reciprocity.
When foreign news does appear in the American media, it tends to focus on Western Europe, South Asia, the Far East, and the Middle East (G.T Hunt, in Merrill: 1995:192).
These are the areas which they have business relationships with, apart from regional proximity with them.
These factors determine their coverage of foreign news.
Although journalists, in the Western world are encouraged to write chaotic stories about Africa, the Western audience do not care 37 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA about these stories on disaster and coups.
(Fitzgerald, 1989 in Merrill 1995:247) This is because many media organisations in the Western world have ‘decided that Africa is no longer politically fashionable or newsworthy (Fitzgerald, 1987: 24).
iv) American news has the tendency to produce odd and strange news about Africa.
v) The coverage of Africa by the Western media lacks in-depth analysis and highly researched background material.
Suffice it, however, to say that Hunt also recognised some reasons for this biased coverage of Third World countries.
Reasons for biased Coverage of Africa i) Complexity and unnecessary bureaucracy in gaining entry into Third World countries.
Difficult travel conditions and cost of reporting on such a large continent as Africa.
ii) The size of Africa and the distance between countries of interest that the Western media may want to cover or report.
iii) The focus on Western media audience interest, which is the prime concern of Western editors.
The findings of G.T Hunt actually reflect the need for the Western media and particularly the American news media to have a serious rethink, and take a look at the way it covers Africa.
On the other hand, African countries must work with American reporters to make it easier for them to cover the continent; for both objective news coverage is possible only when both the source and the reporter fully understand each other’s role (G.T Hunt, in Merrill: 1995:208).
Therefore, both the American media and the African countries have a big role to play in rectifying these discrepancies in the Western media coverage of Africa.
3.2 Constitutional Guarantees The first amendment to the American Constitution says, “Congress shall make no law to abrogate the freedom of the press.” In Nigeria, the concept of the liberty of the press is embodied in Section 39 (1) of the 1999 Constitution which says “Every person shall be entitled to freedom of expression, including freedom to hold opinion and to receive and impart ideas and information”.
Osinbajo & Fogam (1991) mentioned some justification for a free press as follows.
• First, that the institution of a free press- that is a press is independent and free of censorship is an essential element of every Free State and modern democracy.
38  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA • Second, it is held that it is the function and indeed, the duty of the press to keep the citizens of a country informed of the different opinions which are being expressed, so that the citizens can make the political decision which a democracy demands of them.
• In addition, it has been held that the security of constitutional government lies in effecting peaceful change based on the worthiness and appeal of opposing programmes and ideas presented to the public by the competitor for political power.
Besides, it is widely considered that freedom of the press is essential to the individual’s own development nd realisation.
It must however be pointed out that the freedom of expression clause as stated in the Nigerian Constitution does not specifically mention media practitioners.
Rather, it says “every person,” which presupposes that every member of the society has a right to write and to print as they will and gather news for any publication without interference.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What do you understand by freedom of expression?
2.
Is freedom of expression synonymous with the freedom of the press?
Discuss.
3.3 Limits to Freedom of the Press There is no absolute freedom anywhere, even in the freest societies of the world.
The freedom or right of one person or the press to publish should not destroy the right of another man or the right of society to exist and be safe from the effect of wrongful, harmful, defamatory or mischievous publications.
Therefore, the press has freedom and equal responsibility that goes with that freedom.
It has a right and a duty.
For every right or freedom that is claimed or enjoyed there is a corresponding duty.
In the words of Denning L. J: To our way of thinking, it is elementary that each man should be able to inquire and seek after truth until he has found it.
Every one in the land should be free to think his own thoughts, have his own opinion and give voice to them, in public or in private, so long as he does not speak ill of his neighbour, and free also to criticise the government or any party or group of people, so long as he does not incite anyone to violence.
In short, while the press wants absolute and unhindered freedom, the freedom has to be limited in the overall interest of everyone in society including the press by: 39 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA • The Constitution • The Legislature • The Courts; and • The Government While guaranteeing freedom of expression and the press, the constitution is also quick to impose limitations.
For example: The 1999 Constitution makes freedom of expression subject to any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Section 39 (3) says: Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
a.
For the purpose of preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, maintaining the authority and independence of courts or regulating telephony, wireless broadcasting, television or the exhibition of cinematographic films; or b.
Imposing restrictions upon persons holding office under the Government of the Federal or of a State, members of the Nigerian Police Force or other government security services established by law.
Section 45 (1) provides: “Nothing in Section 37, 38, 40 and 41 of this Constitution shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
a) In the interest of defense, public safety, public order, public morality; public health; or b) For the purpose of protection of the rights and freedom of other persons.
In pursuance of this constitutional provision, for the protection of the public and private individuals legislatures in Nigeria are therefore free and have been able to pass laws in the following areas: a) Contempt of court and contempt of parliament b) Disclosure or publication of official secrets including defence and security information c) Publication of obscene and harmful literature and materials d) Sedition and seditious publication e) Defamation; and f) Regulation of telephony, wireless broadcasting, television or the exhibition of cinematography films.
40  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 4.0 CONCLUSION The freedom of expression and freedom of the press given by the constitution are not without limits or warnings.
It is important for every media practitioner to know that there is a limit to his or her freedom of expression so as not to run foul of the law.
5.0 SUMMARY The freedom of expression and freedom of the press are so important that virtually all-international and national charters of human rights recognise them.
Besides, most countries of the world including Nigeria have enshrined freedom of expression and freedom of the press in their constitutions.
However, it must be noted that the freedom is not limited to journalists alone, also the freedom is not without restriction from the constitution, from government, courts and legislations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Name and explain the various ways of curtailing the freedom of the press.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING CLO, Constitutional Right Project, CRP and the National Human Rights Commission in Abuja NHRC.
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (CFRN).
(1999) (Section 39).
Epku, R. (1988).
“The Media and Democracy in Nigeria.” Being excerpts from a Paper Delivered at a Workshop on 1995 Constitution Organized by Civil Liberty Organization.
Garry, T. H. (1996).
“The Image of Africa as Reflected by the Elite American Press.” In L.U Uche North-South Information Culture: Trends in Global Communication and Research Paradigms.
Lagos: Longman: 189.
Hachten, W.A.
& Beil, B.
(1985).
“Bad News or No News?” Covering Africa, 1965-1982.
Journalism Quarterly 62, (p. 626-630) quoted in J.C Merrill, p. 246.
Onwubere, C. (2000).
The Variables in the Communication Process: A Guide for Beginners.
Lagos: Nwobodo Publishers.
41 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Osinbajo, Y.
& Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigeria Mass Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers& Limited.
Robert, L. S. (1995).
“Freedom of the Press Around the World” in J.C Merrill (Ed.)
Global Journalism Survey of International Communication.
(3rd ed.).
USA: Longman, p.63.
Sunday, O.
(2006).
“Press Freedom” News Reporting and Writing NOUN Course Book.
Udoakah, N. (1994).
“Press Freedom: The West and Africa.” Cited in J.C Merrill (1995) Global Journalism Survey of International Communication (3rd ed.).
USA: Longman, p.233.
42  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA MODULE 3 Unit 1 The Birth of Nigerian Newspapers: Zik and the West African Pilot Unit 2 Awolowo and the Tribune Unit 3 The Daily Times Unit 4 The Expansion of Newspapers in the East and North UNIT 1 THE BIRTH OF NIGERIAN NEWSPAPERS: ZIK AND THE WEST AFRICAN PILOT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Establishment of the West African Pilot (1973) 3.2 Editorial Policy of the Pilot 3.3 Pilot and Its Contributions 3.4 Pilot: Awakening Political Consciousness 3.5 Pilot: Features of General Interest 3.6 Obafemi Awolowo and the Tribune 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the products of Western education was Nnamdi Azikiwe.
He returned from overseas and was determined to fight colonalism through the muzzle of journalism.
The West African Pilot was the medium he used to register his misgivings against colonialism as well as rediscover the lost consciousness of the African personality in the grip of colonial powers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the establishment of the West African Pilot • discuss the editorial policy of the Pilot • pinpoint the contributions of the Pilot to the growth of Nigerian Press 43 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA • state the political awakening of Nigerians by the Pilot • x- ray the general features of the Pilot.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Establishment of the West African Pilot (1937) According to Fred Omu, “in November, 1937 Nnamdi Azikwe started the West African Pilot, which immediately became the major forum of the increased nationalist consciousness which had been awaiting a potent outlet and stimulus.
The Weekly Record had died in 1930, the Daily News had ceased to attract serious attention by 1934 and the mid-30s; therefore, no newspaper existed to crystallise and channelise the-growing nationalist influences of the late inter-war years.
The West African Pilot stepped into the void and with Azikwe’s admission to membership of the Nigerian Youth Movement and his election to the Central Executive Committee of the Movement, a new era of politics and nationalism was born.
Azikwe as an admirer of Thomas H. Jackson brought into Nigeria a new idealism, of nationalism as well as new techniques of political and journalistic propaganda learned during his training and experience in the United States.
His initial platform was the African Morning Post, which he edited in Accra for two and half years until he resigned on 1st April, 1937, a week after the West African Court of Appeal allowed his appeal against the judgment of the Supreme Court, which the previous year had convicted him for sedition.
His influence developed in Lagos with the incorporation of the Zik Press Limited on 5th August and the launching of the Pilot on 12 November.
The opening address entitled “The Curtain Rises” described the editorship as “sentinels of popular liberty and guardians of civilisation” whose supreme task was to make assertions in unequivocal terms.
3.2 Editorial Policy of the Pilot According to Azikwe in My odyssey: “I had christened the new daily paper West African Pilot, and chose Dante Alighieri’s immortal lines as its motto: show the light and the people will find the way”.
The duty of a pilot was to guide the ship entrusted to his care and I thought that, at the stage in the development of my country, it was not the duty of any patriot to pontificate.
It was incumbent on me to turn the searchlight of publicity, in the form of narration or exposition or; description or 44  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA argumentation, on the courses of action affecting my country directly or indirectly, leading people to decide for themselves what attitude to adopt and what action to take, under such guidance.
3.3 Pilot and Its Contributions The West African Pilot made immense contributions to the growth and development of Nigerian press.
The contribution cut across various areas of life, chief among which are outlined and discussed below.
1. Business orientations: With the appearance of Zik and the emergence of Pilot in the newspaper scene, newspaper publishing quickly turned out to be a business venture with pilot outlook.
Unlike its predecessors, the Pilot and its group made newspaper publication as a purely profit-oriented business.
Zik and his paper achieved this singular feat by appointing agencies all over the place with a view to ensuring wide circulation.
He also popularised newspaper reading by adding local news menu to attract more readerships.
2.
The advent of newspaper chains: At the time Zik launched himself into the newspaper venture, there was no trace of chain in existence, Zik’s arrival in journalism scene brought a new dimension into the profession as he introduced “Newspaper Chains” in Nigeria.
Zik’s Group of Newspapers Nigerian Limited had the Pilot as the flag bearer, the Eastern Nigerian Guardian (1940) published in Port Harcourt, Nigerian Spokesman (1943) published in Onitsha, Southern Nigerian Defender (1943) first launched in Warri and later transferred to Ibadan; The Daily Comet (1949); The Northern Advocate published in Jos and the Sentinel published in Enugu.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you consider the major contribution of the West African Pilot to the Nigerian press?
3.4 Pilot: Awakening Political Consciousness Zik (supported by Zik’s Group) embarked on publishing and employing the newspaper chain at his disposal to propagate his political ideals and beliefs.
Though the papers were independent administratively, they often closed ranks on controversial issues and took the same stand with the Pilot.
In this way, the Zik’s family had their influence felt nationwide.
45 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Use of wire service: Another important feature of the Pilot was that it made use of foreign press association starting from 1945.
It consequently became the first post war newspaper to make use of the wire services provided by Reuters.
This important foresight has turned out to be a common feature with the present day newspaper houses that rely heavily on international wire service for their foreign news.
Note that Zik was a one time Reuter’s correspondent for West Africa.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What do you understand by “The Chain of Newspapers”?
3.5 Pilot: Features of General Interests • The Pilot became the first newspaper in Nigeria to introduce columns of general interest such as women’s column; book review, and so on.
These columns were meant to lighten the heavy burden imposed on people by politics of the day.
• Introduction of banner headlines: The paper adopted use of banner headlines across the entire pages especially the lead story at the front and “back pages.
It also introduced headlines with a verb, for example, “Zik goes to Court.” There were other innovations like proper newspaper planning, pictorial or photo- journalism and other forms of illustrations that metamorphosed into today’s precision journalism.
• Purely indigenous newspapers: Pilot is the first newspaper in the country to be run entirely by Nigerians contrary to its predecessors, which were run wholly or partially by foreigners.
Pilot and its founder are by all standards devoid of any foreign interest and influence.
4.0 CONCLUSION The West African Pilot inculcated in the people the virtues of reading and seeking knowledge through the addition of local, news columns.
The objective of the publisher was achieved through wider circulation strategies.
This may explain why the paper though it has long disappeared from newsstand has remained indelible in the minds of those who read it.
46  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 5.0 SUMMARY From the foregoing, we have been able to trace the history of the West African Pilot, its editorial policy, contributions, general features and enhancement of political awareness in the country.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the relevance of “My Odyssey” to the West African Pilot?
7.0 REFERNCES/FURTHER READING Agba, P. C. (n.d).
Electronic Reporting: Heart of the New Communication Age.
Nsukka: UNN.
Ikime, O.
(nd).
“20th Anniversary History of NTV.” Ibadan: 1st Photo RAMA: Ibadan, NTV.
Okunna, S. (nd).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
47 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 2 AWOLOWO AND THE TRIBUNE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Life of Obafemi Awolowo 3.2 Awolowo and the Media 3.3 Awolowo and the Tribune 3.4 The Role of the Nigerian Tribune 4.4 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigeria Independence was made possible by nationalism.
One of the men who fought seriously for the liberation of Nigeria from colonial influence and domination was Obafemi Awolowo.
Though a lawyer politician, he made extensive use of the media to reposition the Western Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the history of the life of Obafemi Awolowo • discuss the contributions of Awolowo to the growth of the Nigerian media • discuss how Awolowo established the Tribune newspaper.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Life of Obafemi Awolowo Chief Obafemi Awolowo was born in 1909 at Ikenne, Ogun State.
He founded a political organisation called “OMO Oduduwa,” which later metamorphosed into a political party.
Though a layer by profession, he became the first premier of Western Nigeria in 1954 and, later, leader of opposition in the federal parliament.
Chief Awolowo was the proprietor of the Nigerian Tribune, a newspaper, which became an important media organ of his political party.
48  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Awolowo made his mark as a nationalist and politician, and also fought with other nationalists to send the white man packing from the shores of Nigeria.
3.2 Awolowo and the Media Awolowo’s greatest contribution to Nigeria media history was in 1959 when he established the Western Nigerian Broadcasting Service (WNBS) in Ibadan.
The WNBS provided radio and television broadcasting services.
Chief Awolowo launched the first television station in Nigeria and indeed, the African continent, the Western Nigerian Television (WNTV) at Ibadan.
The station with the call signal, “WNTV, first in Africa” laid the pioneering foundation of television broadcasting in Nigeria.
The WNTV, Ibadan, (new NTA, Ibadan) was commissioned by Chief Awolowo himself on 31 October, 1959.
Awolowo who also featured prominently in the second Republic as leader of the Unity party of Nigeria died in 1987.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Outline the contributions of Awolowo to the Nigerian press.
3.3 Awolowo and the Nigerian Tribune This newspaper belonged to the Action Group party of Chief Obafemi Awolowo.
He was also the proprietor of the newspaper.
He launched the newspaper on November 1949, through its publisher, the African Press Limited.
The vernacular associate of the paper, Iwe Irohin Yoruba had been earlier set up in 1945 through the efforts of Awolowo’s deputy in the Action Group party founded in 1951.
3.4 The Role of the Nigerian Tribune The Nigerian Tribune aimed at adopting the stance of Dr Nnamdi Azikiwe’s West African Pilot, which served the NNDP, NYM and Zik’s NCNC.
In 1962, the crisis in the Action Group Party resulted in the party’s fractionalisation into two.
Akintola, then premier of Western Nigeria whose faction was in power set up a pro-government newspaper, Daily sketch in 1964.
The Nigerian Tribune saw itself as rival to Dr. Azikiwe’s West African Pilot and its chain of newspapers, thereby polarizing the rivalry between 49 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA the two Journalist leaders.
The Tribune, as it is now called, is still a strong Ibadan-based national daily.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss the relationship between Nigerian Tribune and Daily Sketch.
4.0 CONCLUSION The contributions of Obafemi Awolowo to the media history cannot be easily swept under the carpet.
The solid foundation he laid for the Western Nigerian Television reflects in the Nigeria.
This may also explain why the Tribune still hits the newspaper stand today.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed to you the life and times of Chief Obafemi Awolowo, his contributions to the media industry in Nigeria, his establishment of Western Nigerian Television, the Nigerian Tribune and the role of the tribune to the political enhancement of the country.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the contributions of Obafemi Awolowo to the broadcast media in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Duyile, D. (1979).
Media and Mass Communication in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Gong-Duyison Publishers.
Omu, F. (1978).
Press and Politics in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Longman Publishers.
Uka, L. (1989).
Mass Media People and Politics in Nigeria.
New Delhi, India: Concept Publishing Company.
50  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 3 THE DAILY TIMES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Birth of the Daily Times 3.2 Government Ownership 3.3 X-ray of Major Highlights of Daily Times 3.4 Chain Ownership of the Newspaper 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Most of the newspapers available during the colonial era were not published daily.
There was a need to publish a newspaper that would inform the people of the daily events happening in the colonial era.
The Daily Times was the answer to that challenge.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the birth of the Daily Times • define government ownership of the paper • x-ray major highlights of the paper • state clearly the subsidiary publications of the paper.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Birth of the Daily Times The greater popularisation of the newspaper as a result of the political ferment of the early 20s and the significant expansion in advertisement patronage stimulated by post-war economy (that is after 1918) increased the attraction of the daily newspaper as a sound, commercial proposition.
Some enthusiasm for daily newspapers was also provoked by Governor Clifford’s lament of the absence of such publications, in the country in his famous address to the Nigerian council in 1920.
The absence of a daily press prevented the wide dissemination of news throughout the country which is customary in the West Indies, and 51 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA which for example, is affected in Ceylon by the publication in Colombo of two morning and two evening newspapers on every weekday.
This statement contributed to public appetite for daily newspapers.
The above scenario gave rise to the launching of the Nigerian Daily Times on 1st June, 1926, established as a company on June 6, 1925.
The first 2,000 copies of Nigerian Daily Times, as it was then called, hit the streets of Lagos a year later.
First edited by Ernest Ikoli, the paper’s editorial policy was liberal, espousing in part, “hearty support for Nigerian progress and advancement” and “a strong sense of sane nationalism.” The paper was the brain child of four gentlemen: V. Ronald Osborne, Adeyemo Alakija, Leonard Archer and Richard Barrow.
Its incorporated company was the Nigerian Printing and Publishing Company (NPPC).A copy of the newspaper sold for a penny.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In what ways do the early newspapers differ from the Daily Times?
3.2 Government Ownership In 1975, the Federal Government acquired forcefully 60 percent shares of the Daily Times of Nigeria (DTN) from their original 17,000 owners.
The acquisition of the DTN was done through the National Insurance Corporation of Nigeria (NICON).
This change of ownership was the third time ownership of the organisation would be changing hands.
The first time was in the 1930s when H.B.
Paul, a Liverpool publisher, bought its controlling shares.
Paul later sold it to Guy Bartholomew, publisher of the Daily Mirror, 20 December, 1947- this was when the name, The Nigerian Daily Times was dropped for Daily Times.
3.3 X-ray of Major Highlights of Daily Times The Daily Times assembled and worked the first privately owned rotary printing machine in Nigeria.
• It became the first non-government owned newspaper in the country, to set up its photo-engraving type setting and type- casting plant.
• It employed skilled foreign journalists who brought professionalism into the newspaper.
It also filled greater portion of the newspaper with materials from paid writers as well as views from its readers.
52  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA • If pursued a deliberate policy of Africanisation by training journalists, printers and machine operators whose skills enriched Nigerian journalism.
3.4 Chain Ownership of the Paper We mentioned earlier that Daily Times was involved in chain ownership.
They are Sunday Times, Spear (magazine) Home Studies, Evening Times, Women’s World, Business Times, Headlines, Times International and the Lagos Weekend.
Due to factors we may not discuss here, some of these publications are out of circulation now.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Daily Times was a child of necessity.
Though there was a great need to publish a newspaper that reflected the daily happenings in Nigeria, the birth of the Daily Times revealed the possibility of actualising a bunch of advertisements in one medium.
This also contributed to its instant success.
5.0 SUMMARY We have taken note of the factors that led to the birth of the Daily Times the nature of government ownership of the medium, the highlights of the newspaper and the chain ownership of the newspaper.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What factors actually contributed to the birth of the Daily Times.
2.
Mention the highlights of the Daily Times.
3.
Why did the Federal Government take over the Daily Times?
4.
Mention some of the other publications of the Daily Times.
7.0 REFFERENCES/FURTHER READING Duyile, D. (1979).
Media and Mass Communication in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Gong-Duyison Publishers.
Nwuneli, O.
(1985).
Communication in Nigeria: A Book of Readings.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers.
Omu, F. (1986).
Press and Politics in Nigeria 1880-1937.
Ibadan: Longman Publishers.
Umechukwu P.O.
(1996).
Mass Communication in Nigeria: A Student’s Companion.
Enugu: Joen Associates.
53 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 4 EXPANSION OF NEWSPAPERS IN THE EAST AND NORTH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Gaskiya Tafi Kwabo and Citizen 3.2 The Comet Newspaper (1933) 3.3 The Messenger (1921-1926) 3.4 The Daily Service (1933-1936) 3.5 The Dawn 3.6 Other Publications 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Historical records show that indigenous newspapers started from Western Nigeria, particularly Badagry, the headquarters of Iwe Irohin.
Gradually, the nationalist consciousness spread to the East and North with the publication of many newspapers by easterners and northerners.
Some of these newspapers contributed immensely to the actualisation of Nigeria as a nation.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the expansion of newspapers in the East and North.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Gaskiya Tafi Kwabo and Citizen These two newspapers belonged to the northern-based political party the Northern Peoples’ Congress (NPC).
They also emerged as rivals to the Party newspapers established by the NCNC and Action Group.
Gaskiya Tafi kwabo an Hausa language newspaper was founded on 1st January, 1939 by the Gaskiya Corporation which later added to its stable, the Citizen, another weekly that (later) metamorphosed into the 54  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA New Nigerian on 1st January, 1966.
The New Nigerian was taken over by the Federal Government alongside the Daily Times in 1975.
The Northern Nigerian government controlled by the NPC had them as its mouthpiece in the struggle for the control of the machinery of the Federal Nigerian Government still under colonial rule.
Gaskiya Tafi Kwabo means “Truth is worthier than money.” While the NCNC used the West African Pilot and its group to fight the battle for political supremacy over its counterparts, the Action Group used the Nigerian Tribune and the resurrected Daily Service to fight its course.
The NPC was relying on the Citizen and Gaskiya Tafi Kwabo for national leadership among its rivals.
More will be discussed on this topic in the chapter on issues and personalities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Justify the name “Gaskiya Tafi Kwabo.” 3.2 The Comet Newspaper (1933-1945) The Comet newspaper was set up in 1933 by Duse Mohammed Ali, an Egyptian who lived in northern Nigeria.
This Egyptian Moslem proprietor had earlier founded the newspaper in London but decided to transfer it to Nigeria in 1933.
The Comet’s objective was the advancement and promotion of the level of nationalism in Africa through its news reports and editorials.
To achieve this objective, the newspaper set out to become militant and nationalistic indeed.
It supported and promoted the cause of Nigerian workers as was evidenced by its role in the 1945 worker’s strike which led to its ban and proscription by the colonial authorities.
3.3 The Messenger (1921-1926) This newspaper established and edited by Ernest Sisei Ikoli began publication on 10th March 1921 in Lagos.
It was a weekly newspaper sold for three pence and published by the Nigerian Printing and Publishing Company (NPPC) owned by Ikoli.
The editorial office of the newspaper was at 24 Odunlami Street, Lagos while it was printed at the Awobola Press, Pearse Square, Olowogbowo, Lagos.
It published for some period, and was briefly interrupted until 1926 when it suspended publication and transformed into the Nigeria Daily Times when Ikoli was unable to fund the newspaper alone.
It was 55 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA sold to officials of the Lagos Chamber of Commerce who renamed it the Nigerian Daily Times.
3.4 The Daily Service (1933-1936) The Daily Service was published in 1933 by Ernest Ikoli who had earlier founded the African Messenger and edited the Nigerian Daily Times.
The Daily Service later became the official organ of the organisation known as the Nigeria Youth Movement (NYM).
The newspaper was published under the proprietorship of a lawyer, Mr. Olatunji Caxton- Martins.
3.5 The Dawn The Dawn newspaper was edited by Mr. C. Williams, a Sierra Leonean who also was the publisher.
He was a stenographer and printer who started publication in Aba with a handful of staff as he had not enough money to hire enough workers.
As he was almost doing everything by himself, he was given the name “The jack of all trade of Nigerian journalism.” Despite the lack of enough financial resources and staff to run the newspaper, it was able to remain on the newsstands steadily with a circulation of 2000 copies weekly.
The Dawn newspaper was able to stamp its name as an eastern-based newspaper, making its publisher one of the foremost pioneers of journalism in the eastern part of Nigeria.
It ceased publication in the year 1940.
3.6 Other Publications Other publications include the West African Advertiser (1935) published jointly by J.T.
John, a surveyor M.O.
and Hiege, a businessman, the Eastern Nigerian Mail (1933) the Calabar Observer (1902).
In addition, there are several religious journals founded in the early part of the 20th Century.
They include the Leisure Hours published by CMS Bookshop in Lagos (1917), the Nigerian Methodist (1925), the African Christian (1931), the African Church Chronicle, 1934 and the Catholic Life published in Calabar in (1936 to the 1970s).
4.0 CONCLUSION The Colonial era was indeed characterised by the preponderance of newspapers.
The interesting thing is that most of these newspapers were published by non- Nigerians.
It is believed that all these publications in 56  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA one way or the other contributed to the success of the nationalist movement in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the establishment of some newspapers in Nigeria such as Gaskiya Tafi Kwabo, Citizen, Comet, Messenger, Daily Service, Dawn and other publications.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Trace the chronology of the spread of newspapers to the eastern part of Nigeria during the colonial era?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Azikiwe, N. (1964).
“Pioneer Heroes of The Nigerian Press.” An Address to the First Graduating Students of the Jackson College of Journalism.
Nsukka: University of Nigeria.
Duyile, D. (1979).
Media and Mass Communication in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Gong-Duyison Publishers.
Uka, L. (1989).
Mass Media People and Politics in Nigeria.
New Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.
57 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA MODULE 4 Unit 1 The Post Independence Media in Nigeria Unit 2 Evolution of Radio/TV Broadcasting in Nigeria Unit 3 News Agency of Nigeria Unit 4 Deregulation of Broadcast Media in Nigeria UNIT 1 POST INDEPENDENCE MEDIA IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Guardian 3.2 The Editorial Policy of the Guardian 3.3 The Post Express 3.4 The Concord Newspaper 3.5 The Sun Newspaper 3.6 Other Newspapers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The early 1980’s witnessed the emergence of modern newspapers in Nigeria.
One significant factor about these newspapers was the availability of trained and skilled manpower to undertake the task of informing, educating and entertaining the people.
Moreover, individual business rather than government established them all.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the history of modern newspapers in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Guardian 58  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA The Guardian newspaper is one of the outstanding newspapers in Nigeria.
It was established on the 27th of February 1983 by Alex Ibru from Delta State, among those who weaned the paper at the cradle stage were Dr. Dele Cole, Dr Stanley Macebuh and Segun Osoba who were all former executives of Daily Times.
The motto of the paper is “Conscience, Nurtured by Truth” and to some reasonable extent, it tries to live up to this motto.
3.2 Editorial Policy of the Guardian The Guardian being an independent newspaper will at all times uphold the need for justice, probity in public life, equal access to the nation’s resources and equal protection under the law of Nigeria for all citizens.
It aims at presenting balanced coverage of events and of promoting the best interest of Nigeria.
It is committed to the best traits and ideals of republican democracy and to the principle of individual freedom.
The newspaper believes that all citizens have duties as well as rights.
3.3 The Post Express The Post Express newspaper owned by Chief Sony Odogwu, a top businessman, , constituted the founding management team comprising Dr Stanley Macebuh, Dr Fred Onyabor and Obaro Ikime.
The motto of the paper is “Justice in Service of Community.” It also aimed at no link with any political, cultural, ideological or ethnic group and promised accurate and fair reports, as well as reasoned and informed comments.
The management’s first news papering revolutionary step was the simultaneous printing of the Post Express in Lagos and Port Harcourt.
The newspaper has retained an independent posture and remained accurate and fair in its news report and comments.
The newspaper tries hard to safeguard the interest of the Southeast that it believes has remained perpetually marginalised.
The Post Express is noted for its in- depth stories on foreign events.
3.4 The Concord Newspaper Concord newspaper is based in Ikeja, Lagos.
The first in the stable of the newspaper published by business mogul and politician of presidential standard, Chief Moshood Abiola is National Concord.
Abiola’s National Concord was published along with its weekly edition, Sunday Concord on 1st March, 1980.
A few years later, he added three vernacular newspapers to its stable in Nigeria’s three languages.
The newspapers were Isokan (Yoruba), Udoka (Igbo) and Amana (Hausa).
59 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA The Concord group later added four more publications to its stable - Business Concord, Weekend Concord, African Science Monitor and African Concord.
Abiola’s National Concord was known for its fearlessness and attack on political opponents.
The role it played in support of the National Party of Nigeria (NPN) against Chief Obafemi Awolowo’s Unity Party of Nigeria (UPN) in the Second Republic politics is still fresh in people’s mind.
The National Concord, like Dr, Nnamdi Azikwe’s West African Pilot later set up subsidiaries in various parts of Nigeria known as “Community Concord.” At present, National Concord and all its subsidiaries have disappeared from the newspapers stands, may be temporarily.
The newspaper’s problem may not be unconnected with the death of its founder, Chief M.K.O Abiola.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Compare and contrast Chief Alex Ibru’s The Guardian and Chief Abiola’s Concord newspaper.
3.5 The Sun Newspaper The Sun, which began publication in 2003, has become more influential than some of its older counterparts.
It is published in Lagos by Chief Orji Uzor Kalu, former Governor of Abia State.
Its style of page design makes it unique among other Nigerian newspapers.
The Sun is known for its distinct method of reporting news events and its fearlessness.
It made a great mark through its detailed reporting of the Tsunami disaster of 26th December, 2004.
The Sun’s courageous and consistent reporting of the celebrated removal of former Inspector General of Police, Mr. Tafa Balogun as well as the dramatic and controversial “resignation” of Chief Audu Ogbeh as chairman of the ruling Peoples Democratic Party (PDP).
PDP is believed to have won The Sun larger readership.
3.6 Other Newspapers There is also This Day newspaper which is noted for centralization of its masthead, a feature that distinguished it from most other Nigerian newspapers.
Other newspapers that exist today in Nigeria include National Interest published in Lagos, the Examiner also published in Lagos but out of circulation at present, Eastern Voice (Jos), Agenda, 60  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA New Age, Announcer (Owerri), Eastern Herald (Owerri), Daily Independent, Hallmark and so on.
There is also the Post Express published in Lagos by Chief Sunny Odogwu.
Its establishment was pioneered under Dr Stanley Macebuh, its first chief executive who also did the same thing for the Guardian.
This newspaper was among the nation’s first newspapers to be on internet.
It furnishes its readers with detailed and up-to-date account of important events on the foreign scene supplemented with photographs.
Today, many serious Nigerian national dailies are on the internet while a few of them including the Guardian and Daily Times are members of the Audit Bureau of Circulation Network.
In the Second Republic (1979-1983), several political newspapers also sprang up and most of them disappeared the way they came just few years after.
They include, among others, the National published in Aba by Dr. Nwakamma Okoro of the National Party of Nigeria (NPN), Mail published in Owerri by interests associated with the Imo State Government under the Nigerian People’s Party (NPP).
The Satellite published in Enugu by Mr. Jim Nwobodo, the NPP Governor of the old Anambra state.
The newspaper was “resurrected” and transferred to Lagos, but it died again.
There were also newspapers such as the Reporter, Trumpet, Record, Broom and Sunray published in Port Harcourt.
Sunray lasted for a few years and later collapsed in the late 1990s.
There are also the Comet and National Interest newspapers established and published in Lagos from the end of the 1990s to the present day.
4.0 CONCLUSION The publishers of the Guardian and Concord -Chief Ibru and Chief Moshood Abiola respectively actually paved the way for other newspapers to emerge.
Their newspapers were detribalised in content and they employed skilled journalists.
Despite political challenges, the Guardian is still working strong while the death of Chief Abiola and his inconvenience in politics led to the demise of the Concord.
5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to present some post-independence newspapers in Nigeria particularly the Guardian, Concord, Sun, Post Express among others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 61 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 1.
What factor contributed to the demise of the National Concord?
2.
Mention five other post-independence newspapers in Nigeria and five community newspapers in Nigeria.
3.
State clearly the editorial policy of the Guardian.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Abiola, M.K.O.
(1981).
“How I set up National Concord.” An Address at the Mass Communication Week held by the Mass Communication Department, University of Lagos.
Akinfeleye, R.A. (1981).
“Pre and Post Independence Nigerian Journalism (1859-1873).” An Unpublished M.Sc Thesis, School of Journalism, University of Missouri, USA.
Alozie, V.O.
(2003).
“The History of the Nigerian Mass Media.” A Lecture to Mass Communication Students of Madona University, Okija.
Coker, (n.d).
“Increase Seventy Years of the Nigerian Press.” Lagos: Times Press.
62  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 2 THE EVOLUTION OF RADIO/TV BROADCASTING IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Radio Broadcasting in Nigeria 3.2 Broadcasting in Nigeria (1932-1950) 3.3 The Beginning of Effective Radio Broadcasting in Nigeria 3.4 The Transformation of NBS into NTS 3.5 Regional Broadcasting 3.6 History of Television Broadcasting 3.7 Television Broadcasting in Other Parts of the Country 3.8 The Nigeria Television Service (NTS) 3.9 The Era of Private Television Stations (1992-2004) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Broadcasting in Nigeria was the answer to the British quest for communication to her West African colonies.
From Britain, radio broadcasting, which began with the Radio Distribution Service (RDS) in Nigeria spread like the harmattan wind to the other parts of the country.
All the phases of the development of radio signaled the advancement of the medium.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • recount the history of broadcasting in Nigeria • discuss NBS transformation into NBC, regional broadcasting • trace history of television broadcasting and the Nigeria Television Authority, among others.
63 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of Radio Broadcasting in Nigeria The history of radio broadcasting in Nigeria dates back to the year 1932 when the British colonial administration in Lagos relayed the first British Empire service to Nigerians from Daventry, England.
The establishment of radio broadcasting in Nigeria was sequel to the decision of the British government in London to link its West African colonies with the “mother country”, Britain.
Such a link, according to Ikime (1979) “was expected to serve the dual purpose of providing powerful propaganda machinery for the colonial master as well as providing a source of information about Britain and the wider world.” To achieve this, programmes from the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) were relayed to other parts of the world under British Colonial administration.
The need for such a radio service had been felt for some time in Nigeria to the point that the colonial office in London resolved to take positive steps to actualise this need.
To this end, the colonial secretary in London at the time decided to set up a committee to consider and recommend what steps could be taken to accelerate the provision of broadcasting service in the colonial empire, to coordinate such services with the work of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and to make them effective instrument for promoting both local and imperial interests (Ikime, 1979).
This committee recommended the introduction of radio broadcasting in Nigeria and other British non-settler colonies.
It also envisaged that the programmes to be broadcast in the colonies would consist of mixture of selected BBC materials and “local (colonial) government programmes piped into homes through “wired wireless.” The committee naturally noted the need to control such programmes to ensure that the people were not fed with objectionable and subversive information.
3.2 Broadcasting in Nigeria (1932-1950) Broadcasting which was first introduced by colonial masters came to Nigeria in stages.
To give a more lucid explanation and for better understanding of the journey of radio broadcasting in Nigeria, the history will be given in significant stages.
The first stage began from 1932 when the first radio signal was received in Nigeria from England.
64  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA The Era of Radio Distribution Service or Wired Wireless Radio broadcasting in Nigeria began in 1932 with the introduction of wired broadcasting popularly known as Radio Distribution Service, (RDS).
Under this form of broadcasting, programmes were relayed or distributed using wires connected to loud speakers installed in the homes of subscribers who had paid a small subscription fee for this system and were also provided with a make shift and home apparatus (Uche,1989).
The Lagos studio distributed programmes originating from the British Empire Service from Daventry, England as part of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) external service.
The increasing popularity of the Radio Distribution Service in Nigeria made it to expand to other stations outside Lagos.
This method of broadcasting known as “wired broadcasting” by “wired wireless” differed from the “wireless broadcasting” which is the transmission of programmes through radio waves (Electro-magnetic waves).
The need for radio stations in the colonial countries was necessitated by the desire of Britain to expand the services of the BBC, which coordinated the activities of radio broadcasting in the British empire.
The British government had given approval for the establishment of broadcasting services in the colonial countries with the objective of making them a more effective instrument for promoting both local and imperial interests Ikime, 1979).
The circumstance in which broadcasting was introduced in Nigeria was not surprising.
At the beginning, the broadcasting service consisted simply of re-transmission of BBC programmes on a relay system similar to the radio relay exchange system, which had been operating in Britain since the 1920s.
Because of the nature of its services, it was termed Radio Distribution Service (RDS).
The RDS was introduced into Nigeria by the colonial office in London through the initiative of the engineers of the Posts and Telegraphs (P&T) Department, which, by then had established 13 stations in Nigeria, viz: Lagos, Kastina, Jos, Zaria, Sokoto, Ilorin, Maiduguri, Port Harcourt, Calabar, Onitsha, Warri, Abeokuta and Ijebu-Ode.
The P&T engineers had incidentally been involved in the monitoring of test transmissions of the BBC on short wave.
The wired broadcasting, which came to Nigeria in 1932, did not originate any programmes but simply relayed programmes from England using presenters on ground.
Each subscriber was required to 65 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA pay a monthly subscription fee of fifty pence after an initial payment of three months rental in advance.
By 1939, the RDS had less than 1000 subscribers and over 2000 licensed receivers.
By 1944, distribution stations had been opened in Lagos, Ibadan, Kaduna, Enugu, Calabar and Port-Harcourt.
Five years later (1949), a total of 9000 subscribers wired to 10 stations in the country had emerged.
By that year, there were 4,562 licensed radio sets in Nigeria.
There was only a little change in the programme content of the RDS as most of its broadcasts were still part of the BBC external service.
The colonial government’s information department produced only a few programmes, which were relayed through the service.
The relay services began at 5.00am every morning and went on until 12.00 midnight with break at mid-morning for an hour or two.
In 1936, the Plymouth committee set up to work out modalities for the introduction of a wireless broadcasting in Nigeria and empowered or mandated by the colonial office to come up with a plan which was endorsed to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).
In 1945, the establishment of a wireless broadcasting in Nigeria received mention during the preparation of the 10-year development and welfare plan.
Unfortunately, the colonial authorities did not implement this immediately, despite the fact that it was favourably considered.
The colonial authorities had blamed this on what they termed “lack of resources.” In 1948, the colonial office directed the BBC to undertake a survey of broadcasting in Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra Leone and Gambia and to make recommendation for a fast establishment of effective broadcasting services.
Two British engineers, L.W Turners of the BBC and F.A.W Bryon of the Telecommunications Department were appointed to carry out this assignment.
By this time, a short-wave transmitting station was already installed in Lagos to relay the Lagos RDS programme under the call sign, “Radio Nigeria”.
The main function of the RDS as earlier mentioned was to relay BBC programmes while in the evenings, one hour was set aside for the broadcasting of local programmes featuring news, entertainment, and local government.
The two British engineers who were saddled with the task of working out the technical details for effective broadcasting in Nigeria were asked, among other things, to determine.
• Training of technical staff.
66  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA • Using local language for broadcasting to the people and • Servicing limited revenue from carefully articulated use of sponsored programmes.
In their report, they recommended the establishment and expansion of a wireless broadcasting service in Nigeria and other West African Countries under British Colonial administration.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What major difference can you identify between the RDS in England and the RDS in Nigeria between 1932 and 1950?
3.3 The Beginning of Effective Radio Broadcasting in Nigeria The role played by radio during the Second World War also influenced the British government’s decision to set up broadcasting services that are effective in its colony.
Up to the end of the 1940’s, the programme content of Radio Distribution service had very little change as most of its broadcasts were part of BBC external service.
However, as the need for effective radio broadcasting in Nigeria became very imperative as earlier mentioned, two British engineers from the BBC, Mr. F.A.W Byron and L.W Turners were charged with the task of working out the technical requirements for a more effective radio system in British West Africa.
Their report provided the technical pattern for the broadcasting services that were established in Nigeria and other British West African colonies in the 1950s.
Another BBC top shot, Mr. Tom W. Chalmers was seconded to Lagos along with his counterpart; John W. Murray to prepare the ground for the setting up of a proper broadcasting service.
NBS was born after the Nigerian (colonial) government decided to convert the major existing Rediffusion stations into effective broadcasting stations in accordance with the Turner-Byron’s report.
Mr. Chalmers, after completing his assignment in Nigeria was appointed the first director of broadcasting in Nigeria while his counterpart, Mr. Murray was appointed the first chief engineer.
By 1952, all the existing Rediffussion stations in the country had formed the nucleus of the new NBS.
The BBC assisted much by training staff for the NBS and provided the technical equipment needed for effective broadcasting.
3.4 Regional Broadcasting 67 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA The Action Group government in Western Nigeria capitalised on the NBC Ordinance or Act to translate its dream of owning a radio station into reality by setting up the Western Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation (WNBC).
All the three regions of the country set up their own regional broadcasting stations.
The Western regional government of Chief Obafemi Awolowo, which was under the control of Action Group, started it all.
Chief Awolowo as the regional premier had strongly criticised the 1954 Macpherson Constitution introduced into the country.
However, the last British Governor-General of Nigeria, Sir James Robertson defended that constitution, using the NBS, and accusing Chief Awolowo of being unfaithful.
When Awolowo requested for an equal airtime for the NBS to refute the Governor General’s accusation, he was not obliged.
This led to increased campaign for converting the NBS to a corporation.
However, its greatest effect was the establishment of regional broadcasting as evidence in the setting up of the WNBC, which had a twin product - The Western Nigerian Television (WNTV) in 1959 and the Western Nigeria Broadcasting Service (WNBS) in 1960.
The WNBC had immediately gone into alliance with Overseas Rediffussion Limited which was to offer both radio and television services.
Its television, WNTV already mentioned was commissioned on 31st October, 1959.
It was the first television station in black Africa.
The radio-broadcasting arm of the Western Nigerian Radio-Vision Service which controlled both television and radio broadcasting was commissioned in May, 1960.
The Eastern regional government of Dr. Michael Okpara simultaneously engaged the same overseas Rediffusion Company that set up the WNBS for the Western region to build for it the Eastern Nigerian Broadcasting Service (ENBS) and Eastern Nigerian Television (ENTV) in Enugu.
Both stations went on air on the day of Nigeria’s Independence, October 1, 1960.
Shortly after, both the Eastern and Western governments paid off the foreign companies that were stakeholders in their broadcasting systems, and consequently assumed full control of their broadcasting system.
Broadcasting did not come to the Northern region until 1962 when the Northern regional government of Sir Ahmadu Bello engaged the services of Grand Group Limited which set up radio and television broadcasting systems, Radio Television Kaduna (RTVK) for the region.
The RTVK operated under the Broadcasting Company of Northern Nigeria (BCNN).
The broadcasting systems in the then three regions were fully autonomous and free of Federal Government control or 68  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA interference.
The situation was the same until the beginning of the Nigerian Civil War in 1967 when additional states were created by the wartime Military Head of State, Yakubu Gowon.
3.5 History of Television Broadcasting The Nigerian Broadcasting Service (NBS) had no initial plans to introduce television broadcasting into the country, and indeed, it never contemplated doing so.
The reason was that its resources then could not justify the establishment of television in the country.
It was the high rate of illiteracy at that time and the lack of suitable communication infrastructure, which made the authorities prefer radio broadcasting which offered a quick and reliable means of reaching the amorphous population of the country.
Television was seen in the early 1950s as a luxury the government could not afford.
However, its development in other countries and the possibilities it offered gradually became attractive and irresistible.
In 1950, two years before Nigeria’s Independence, there were series of discussions in favour of television service.
However, the regional governments cashed in on the constitutional provision, which made broadcasting a concurrent subject to commence plans to introduce commercial television broadcasting in their regions.
The Western Region in December 1958 took the lead by first indicating its intention to establish four television stations and consequently applied for four frequencies in band one.
The proposed stations were to be located in Ibadan, Ikeja, Abeokuta and Ijebu-Ode.
The programmes would originate from Ibadan with other three stations transmitting stations.
However, before the frequencies were allocated to the Western regional government, the Federal Ministry of Communication got the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation (NBC) to submit its own frequency requirements first before the Western region since it was also by law to provide radio and television services for general reception within the country.
As the Federal Government had no immediate plans for television broadcasting, it decided to allocate two frequencies in band: one to the Western regional government with some limitations in power and height of the aerials (Ladle et al, 1979).
3.6 The Birth of WNTV (1959) 69 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA With the background given, television broadcasting eventually began in Nigeria and, indeed, the whole Africa on October, 31, 1959 at Ibadan.
It was the Western Nigerian Television (WNTV) established by the Western regional government of Chief Obafemi Awolowo, then Premier of Western Nigeria.
The history of television broadcasting in Nigeria shows that it followed the same pattern with that of radio broadcasting but the exception is in the area of the initiators.
While it was the Federal Government that started the first indigenous radio broadcasting in the country, it was the regional government that first ventured into television broadcasting (Uche, 1989).
The WNTV with the call signal, “WNTV, First in Africa” was established by an Act of the Western Regional House of Assembly, which empowered the government of Chief Awolowo to forge ahead in the venture.
The WNTV now (NTA, Ibadan) was run as an arm of the then Western Nigeria Government Broadcasting Corporation initially under the trade name, Western Nigerian Radio Vision Services Limited which worked in partnership with overseas Rediffusion Limited of the United Kingdom.
Two years after its inception, the government of Western Nigerian bought over the shares of the foreign partners and became the sole proprietor.
WNTV Ibadan was soon to become the richest commercial television in the whole federation, even though commercialisation was not the main reason for its establishment, but formal informal education.
The proponents of its establishment had argued in the Regional House of Assembly that television broadcasting was needed as an additional means of improving the regional school systems that were handicapped to the shortage of qualified teachers in certain subject areas.
Their second argument was that television would act as a “surrogate” teacher in the under-staffed schools of the Western region.
Regardless of the fact, the WNTV grew to become a big commercial television, the potential ability of television to educational objectives at both primary and secondary school levels, as well as adult education became, and remained the overriding factor for its establishment.
3.7 Television Broadcasting in Other Parts of the Country One year after, the WNTV was set up as Africa’s first visual communication outfit by the government of Eastern Nigeria headed by Dr. Michael Okpara.
The premier followed the pace set by Ibadan and established Nigeria’s second television station in Enugu known as the 70  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA “East Nigerian Television (ENTV).” The station had the slogan, “ENTV, Second to None.” ENTV began full transmission precisely on October 1, 1960, Nigeria,s Independent day, and like WNTV, it has foreign partners at the top management- the same overseas Rediffussion that built WNTV, Ibadan like WNTV and ENTV Enugu later took full control and management of the station when the foreign companies that were engaged initially to manage it were disengaged.
The need for formal and informal education also was the overriding aim in the ENTV’s establishment, although it soon abandoned this objective and went into commercial television broadcasting.
ENTV was an arm of the Eastern Nigerian/Broadcasting Corporation (ENBC), which also operated ENBC Radio in Enugu following the establishment of WNTV in Ibadan (1959) and ENTV Enugu (1960).
The Northern regional government of Sir Ahmadu Bello on March 15, 1962 established the Radio Television Kaduna (RTVK) as the service arm of the Broadcasting Corporation of Northern Nigeria (BCNN).
RTVK was owned jointly by the Northern Region and two British firms- Granada Television and Pye Limited, although the Northern Region was the major shareholder.
3.8 The Nigerian Television Service (NTS) As mentioned earlier, the authorities in the Federal Government did not initially see the establishment of a television station as a priority.
It was for this purpose that it conceded the allocation of two standard frequencies on Band One to the WBTV, Ibadan.
The same Federal Government was however embarrassed at the speed with which WNTV and ENTV were set up by the Western and Eastern regional governments.
This not withstanding, some of its key officials were dissuading it from venturing into television broadcasting on the ground that television was a luxury and that it was more advantageous to maximise the development of radio.
After much political rancour and arguments, the Federal Executive Council finally approved the establishment of a Federal Government- owned television station to be located in Lagos.
The project became realistic in April, 1962 with the take off of the Nigerian Television Service (NTS), Channel 10 at Victoria Island, Lagos.
NTS was set up under agreement by management with an American network-owned NBC-International, which built the station.
It was jointly owned by the 71 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Federal Government and NBC International, which signed a five-year management contract with the provision that Nigerians would take over full management of NTS at the expiration of the contract during which the American company would also sell all its shares to the Federal Government.
At the expiration of this agreement in 1962, the NTS became a full-fledged Nigerian station under the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation (NBC).
It was initially known as NBC-TV, Lagos and its services were confined to the then federal capital, Lagos, The NBC- Television was specifically designed to provide adequate services in education, social and economic development as well as transmit Nigerian and African cultures, tradition, politics, drama, literature and entertainment, of course these were the overriding aims of modern television broadcasting in Nigeria.
The advent of television brought in its wake a new dimension in broadcasting in Africa.
For instance, within the first decade of its arrival, no fewer than 22 African countries established their own television stations.
The journey started from WNTV, Ibadan (1959), and ENTV, Enugu (1960).
Internally, the creation of an additional region in 1963- the Mid West Region also led to the establishment of the fifth television station in the country, the Mid West Television (MTV) in Benin in 1973.
Benue- Plateau Television (BPTV) followed in 1974 but with a difference.
The station established by the then Benue-Plateau state government had emerged transmitting in colour.
It is therefore a historical fact that BPTV, Jos was the first television station in Nigeria to transmit in colour.
3.9 The Era of Private Television Stations (1992-2004) This fourth phase in the development of television broadcasting in Nigeria started with the 1992 promulgation of Decree No.
38, which authorised that National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) should issue licences for private radio and television broadcasting in Nigeria that saw the establishment of NTA stations in each of the 36 states of the federation.
More will be said on this later in this unit.
Private television broadcasting started in Nigeria in 1993 and there are at present nearly a score of private television stations in different parts of the country.
With Decree No.
38 of 1992, the National Broadcasting Commission, which was empowered to regulate all kinds of broadcasting in the country, removed the exclusive right to own and run a television station from the government.
Among the private television stations that emerged earlier from 1993 were Minaj Systems Television 72  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA (MST) Obosi, Anambra State, African Independent Television (AIT) Lagos owned by Raymond Dokpesi, Channels Television, Clapper Board Television, Murhi International Television, Galaxy Television, DBN Television, Independent Television, and so on.
The government controls and regulates television broadcasting in Nigeria to ensure orderliness in the allocation of airwaves to the various interest groups in radio and television transmission.
The NBC, which is the vehicle for this control, also has the right to withdraw licence from any of the private and public radio and television stations found guilty of flouting the law that brought it into existence.
The further phase in the history of television broadcasting in Nigeria also falls within the Fourth Republic, which took off on May 29, 1999 when General Olusegun Obasanjo (rtd) became Nigeria’s third civilian president.
During this Fourth Republic, the Federal Government decided to open NTA stations in all the 36 states of the federation.
Consequently, many NTA stations were built all over the country.
Most of all the states have two NTA stations each.
The commissioning of the new stations began towards the end of 2002.
One of the new NTA stations built in Owerri, the Imo State capital was commissioned by the then Minister of Aviation, Mrs Kema Chikwe in March 2003.
Before then, many other stations had been commissioned in many other parts of the federation.
In his valedictory address as the Minister of Information and National Orientation, Professor Jerry Gana noted that a total of 67 new NTA stations and 32 FRCN stations were established in different parts of Nigeria during Obasanjo’s first tenure of four years (NTA network news, 25th May 2003).
4.0 CONCLUSION From the ongoing, it is pertinent to note that broadcasting in Nigeria was actually established for political purposes.
The emergence of radio revolutionised information dissemination in Nigeria.
Television broadcasting spread fast in Nigeria and other parts of Africa though the growth of broadcasting in Nigeria was slowed down by government intervention and ownership.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed so much about the history of radio broadcasting in Nigeria, phases in the history of broadcasting, the beginning of effective radio broadcasting, the NBC transformation into BBC, regional broadcasting, history of television broadcasting, television broadcasting 73 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA in other parts of the country, the Nigerian Television Service and the era of private televisions in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who established the first broadcasting service in Nigeria?
2.
What year was the first radio station established in Nigeria?
3.
Which region in Nigeria first established a television station?
4.
What do you understand by Radio Rediffusion Service 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Agba, P. (2002).
Electronic Reporting: Heart of the New Communities.
Nsukka: New Age Press.
Awe, G. (1983).
The Birth of Television in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NTV.
Egbuna, B.
(1996).
“Radio Broadcasting in Nigeria: Challenges and Prospects”, The Painter, Sunday.
Farounbi, Y.
(1979).
Television and Society.
Ibadan: NTV.
Mackay, I.
(1964).
Broadcasting in Nigeria.
Ibadan: University Press.
74  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 3 NEWS AGENCY OF NIGERIAN (NAN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin of NAN 3.2 Functions of NAN 3.3 Services rendered by NAN 3.4 Management of NAN 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION News media derive their content from many sources.
One of the veritable sources of news is the news agencies.
The difference is that media houses subscribe for the news with money.
It is not free.
News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) is founded for the same purpose to service the Nigerian mass media.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • trace the origin of News Agency of Nigeria • discuss the functions of NAN and the services rendered by the agency.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Origin of NAN A new development in the history of the mass media in Nigeria took place in 1976 with the establishment of an independent wire service-the NAN by the Federal Government.
NAN came into existence through the News Agency of Nigeria Decree No.
19 of 1976, which made NAN’s function straight and plain.
Before the birth of NAN, the Nigerian mass media - print and electronic, were heavily subscribing to foreign news agencies based in the developed world.
Without exception, all Nigerian newspapers, magazines, radio 75 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA and television stations depended on these foreign wire services for their international news, including news on events taking place in sister African countries.
They were subscribing to the British News Agency, Reuters based in London, United Press International (UPI) and the Associated Press (AP) based in New York and Washington in the United States of America , Agency France Press (AFP), the French News Agency based in PARIS, AND TASS, the Russian News Agency based in Moscow.
Reuters of London had played a key role in the dissemination of international news in Nigeria for many years and trained some Nigerian journalist in the art of world newsgathering even after Nigeria had attained sovereign nationhood.
Reuters was loved for its in-depth news reporting and analysis before the emergence of NAN.
Reuters ran into trouble in Nigeria in the wake of military and counter military coups, especially the July 29, 1975 coup d’état which brought General Murtala Mohammed to power and the February 13, 1973 abortive coup which led to his death.
Reuters was accused of biased reporting of events in Nigeria to the world.
The Nigerian authorities openly accused it of mischief and prejudiced journalism against Nigeria, which was unpleasant to the country and its image at home and abroad.
It was therefore sacked from Nigeria; it therefore ceased its operation in Nigeria.
Because of this incident, the Federal Military Government set up its own indigenous news agency to avoid the temptation of the Nigeria media seeking the services of Reuters again.
3.2 Functions of NAN Like its counterparts in London and Paris (Reuters and AFP), NAN was set up for the pre-press of gathering international, regional, local and other news, news material and material and features, and distributing same to its subscribers.
NAN’s subscribers include radio and stations in Nigeria, private and government-owned newspapers, magazines and journals.
It also sells news to foreign news agencies.
The decree, which set up the agency, vests the monopoly of collecting news in Nigeria for sale to NAN.
76  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA The Federal Military Government headed by Lt General Olusegun Obasanjo having decreed the setting up of NAN gave October, 1978 as the time for its commencement of full operations.
Although the establishment of NAN has been attributed to Federal Military Government at the time in question, this was because it piloted the machinery that gave it a practical face.
The idea to set up a News Agency of Nigeria similar to Ghana News Agency was conceived earlier before the military came to power in Nigeria.
3.3 Services Rendered by NAN The News Agency of Nigeria categorised its services into 10 at that time.
They are news services, bulletins, press review, news-in-depth, impact service, cultural service and daily news digest.
It is necessary here to analyze these 10 services of NAN in details.
1) News service: This refers to home and foreign news reports supplied by NAN.
2) Bulletins: They include profiles, fillers, interviews, features and updates.
3) Press review: This involves, among other major news items in the press and on Radio and Television.
4) News-in-depth: This is designed to present subscribers with what is called news behind the news; that is, an in-depth information on events.
5) Impact services: This, designed to be of tremendous service to foreign writers and critics of the political and socio economic development in Nigeria enlightens them on the true position of things in Nigeria.
Its main focus will be on reactions at home and abroad to the policies, programmes and projects of the Federal Government.
6) Economic service: This service of NAN focuses attention on stock market reports, foreign exchange reports, commodity prices trading volume, investment notes and briefs on financial, economic and business interests.
7) Sports services: This covers sports news.
8) Football service: This focuses attention on football news as well as pools forecasts and results.
9) Cultural service: This focuses attention on reports on cultural events and the projection of the cultural heritage of the various peoples of Nigeria.
10) Daily news digest: This deals with summary of the major national and international news of the day, including diary of coming events.
77 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA 3.4 Management of NAN The News Agency of Nigeria has correspondents and offices in all the states of the federation from where it distributes its news to subscribers based in those states.
The agency has a Board of Directors made up of experienced people in Mass Communication.
NAN’s chief executive is its General Manager who is assisted by the editor-in-chief and other top officials.
At present, NAN has spread its functions and services to most of the media houses in Nigeria and can be found in all the 36 states of Nigeria, including Abuja, the new federal capital.
It also has offices and correspondents in many parts of the world.
NAN’s head offices at Iganmu in Lagos shares compound with the National Theatre.
4.0 CONCLUSION From our discussion, it is apparent that NAN was a child of necessity.
Its establishment introduced a new dimension to newsgathering and dissemination in Nigeria.
The function of selling news to subscribers reduced the stress caused by scarcity of news in media houses.
Like other news agencies in the world, NAN has come to stay.
5.0 SUMMARY From the foregoing, we have traced the history of NAN and established the functions of services rendered by the agency.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
When and where was NAN established?
2.
Discuss four functions of NAN.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dayo, D. (1979).
Media and Mass Communication in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Gong- Duyison Publishers.
Onuoha, P. (n.d).
“The Mass Media and News Agency of Nigeria.” Unpublished Lecture to year three students of Abia State University.
Uche, U. L. (1989).
Mass Media People and Politics in Nigeria.
New Delhi, India: Concept Publishing Company.
78  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA UNIT 4 DEREGULATION OF BROADCASTING IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Deregulation of Broadcasting in Nigeria 3.2 Issuance of Licenses 3.3 Establishing the First Private Broadcasting in Nigeria 3.4 AIT’s Coverage 3.5 Challenges of Deregulation in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Deregulation involves a complete shift from government ownership of the broadcasting media to private ownership.
The public participation in the broadcasting industry opens a chapter in the emancipation of the media in Nigeria.
Since the 1990s, many privately owned electronic media have sprung in all parts of Nigeria, adding flavour to what the Nigerian audience received as programme content for government- owned radio and television.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this, you should be able to: • trace the history of deregulation of broadcasting in Nigeria • discuss how AIT was founded • discuss the coverage extent of AIT • discuss the problem of deregulation in the country.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of Deregulation of Broadcasting in Nigeria The clamour for deregulation of the broadcasting media in Nigeria began during the colonial era when the nationalists pressured the British 79 MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA government to allow the indigenous participation in the affairs of state- controlled broadcasting stations in the country.
The FederalGovernment was soon to find out why the colonial masters held on tight to broadcasting, there is still the reluctance to allow a full-blown deregulation.
The Government’s response in 1992 to the demand for private participation in the ownership and management of the broadcast media was a great relief.
However, five years after the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) Decree came into force; the government was not as open as expected in the issuance of licences to applicants.
3.2 Issuance of Licences by NBC The NBC has screened over 321 applications but only 33 stations have commenced radio, television and satellite transmission nationwide.
Satellite television re-distribution takes the highest number with 21 approved licences; the television transmission stations have risen to 10 while the radio licences remain at two.
3.3 Establishing The First Independent Broadcasting In the early 1990s, because of the historic National Broadcasting Commission Decree, according to Muyiwa Oyinlola (2004), Nigerian media was dominated by the government only.
Information was only disseminated from government-owned broadcasting firm.
However, the Head of State then, General Ibrahim Babangida issued another decree which allowed private broadcasting in Nigeria.
After this decree came the first private television network, Africa Independent Television (AIT).
AIT was pioneered by Dr. Raymond Dokpesi.AIT was also Africa’s first satellite TV station.
Today, Dokpesi is regarded as the “media guru of Nigeria.” This is because he not only pioneered the first satellite TV but also the first privately owned radio station in Nigeria.
In addition, he set the standard for salary structure in the media industry, which was imitated by Nigeria Television Authority.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do you understand by “deregulation in the broadcast media?” 3.5 Challenges of Deregulation in Nigeria The NBC has screened over 321 applications but only 33 stations have commenced radio, television and satellite transmissions nationwide.
80  MAC113 HISTORY OF NIGERIAN MASS MEDIA Satellite television re-distribution takes the highest number with 21 approved licences, the television transmission stations have risen to 10 while the radio licenses multiply.
The greatest problem NBC has is that the applications it is receiving are mostly coming from one part of the country.
4.0 CONCLUSION Deregulation has introduced competition in the Nigeria broadcasting industry.
It has created more jobs for the teeming population of youths in the country.
Today, government owned electronic media are striving to keep the pace set by the privately owned stations.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has at least revealed the history of deregulation of broadcasting in Nigeria, the issuance of licenses, the establishment of AIT and challenges of deregulation in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who established the first TV station in Nigeria?
2.
Mention two problems of deregulation.
3. Who issues licenses to private stations?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Okuna, C. (1999).
Introduction to Mass Communication.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Oyinlola, M. (2005).
“Ordeals of the Nigerian Media.” Daily Sun on the Web.
81
