 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC134 COURSE TITLE: PRINCIPLES & PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS 1  COURSE GUIDE MAC134 PRINCIPLES &PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Course Team: Mr. Charles Onwunali (Course Developer and Writer) – University of Lagos, Akoka.
D r. Josef Bel-Molokwu (Content Editor).
Chidinma H.Onwubere, Ph.D (Course Coordinator)-NOUN.
Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D (Programme Leader)-NOUN.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Introduction……………………………………………………….
………… Course Aims………………………………………………………………… Course Objectives…………………………………………………………..
Working through the Course……………………………………………….
Course Materials…………………………………………………………… Study Units………………………………………………………………… Assessments………………………………………………………………... Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA)………………………………………… Final Examination & Grading……………………………………………… Course Marking Scheme…………………………………………………… Course Overview/Presentation Schedule…………………………………… How to get the most from this course……………………………………….
Tutors & Tutorials………………………………………………………….. Summary…………………………………………………………………….
4 INTRODUCTION The code of this course is MAC 134 while the title is PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS.
This is a course that ushers you into the fledging and glamorous sequence of mass communication public relations.
It gives you an understanding of the fundamentals of public relations, and its role in the dynamic modern society.
The course takes a global view of the subject and is designed to position the students on a platform that will prepare them for entry into the challenging discipline of mass communication in general and public relations in particular.
The illustrations and examples draws from a rich blend of Nigerian and foreign public relations settings.
Attempt has been made in the course to blend theory and practice at the fundamental levels.
The course takes into account that most of the users are beginners and who are not likely to be professionals in the field since they are first year undergraduates who may be entirely new in the discipline of mass communication in general and public relations in particular.
This course guide has been designed to give you the required information about the course.
This includes the course structure, aims and objectives of the course, how you will be assessed and examined and time schedule for each of the assignment and other course related activities.
What You will Learn in this Course This course is written for students who need to learn basic concepts in the field of public relations.
It will enable you acquire the basic knowledge about the public relations field.
The course will prepare you to participate effectively in any intellectual discourse as well as the basic practical knowledge on the functions and uses of public relations in the society.
Through this course, students will gain the basic understanding of public relations as a persuasive communication tool that plays an important role in human society of business and governance.
Course Aims The course aims at empowering every beginner in the field of public relations with the rudimentary knowledge of the vast nature of public relations, its publics, media and tools of public relations.
In addition, it will expose the student to the process, complexities and functions of public relations as a subset of mass communication.
5 Course Objectives At the end of the course, you should be able to: 1.
Be fully exposed to the fundamentals and basics of public relations as a subset of mass communication.
2.
Have been exposed to he various functions and roles that public relations plays as a marketing communication tool and the public relations network in the complex area of marketing communication.
3.
Be acquainted with the contents and basic of planning and organizing public relations programmes.
Working through this Course To successfully complete this course, you are strongly advised to read the study units provided as a course material and recommended texts.
The recommended texts will give you broader perspective and good understanding of the course.
You are also required to do the self assessment exercises which you will find under every unit of this course.
You will be required to submit written assignments listed under the Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) section of this course material.
The TMA shall constitute your Continuous Assessment for the course.
You will be told which of them to be submitted at a particular time.
At the end of the course, you will be required to write a final examination.
The course should take about 15 weeks in total to complete.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units broken down into fourteen (14) of three modules 3.
Assignment file 4.
Relevant textbooks including the recommended ones 5.
You may be required to read newspapers, magazines and relevant journals as well as monitor news and public relations programmes on radio and television.
6 Study Units MAC 134 is a two-unit course, packaged in three modules of fourteen (14) units.
The modules and units are listed below: Module 1 Meaning and Scope of Public Relations Unit 1 Definitions and components of Public Relations/PR as a function and philosophy of management.
Unit 2 Public Relations Network Unit 3 Functions and careers in public relations Unit 4 The Publics of Public Relations Module 2 Evolution and Process of Public Relations Unit 1 Historical origins and pioneers of public relations Unit 2 History and development of public relations in Nigeria Unit 3 Media and tools of public relations Unit 4 Research in public relations Unit 5 Organisation of public relations functions/setting up a public relations department.
Module 3 Public Relations in Practice Unit 1 Planning and executing a public relations programme Unit 2 Public Relations for nonprofit organisations Unit 3 Writing and Speaking in public relations Unit 4 Law and Ethics in public relations Unit 5 Public Relations and society 7 Textbooks/References Ajala, Victoria O.
(1993).
Public Relations in Search of Professional Excellence.
Ibadan: Afrika-Link Books Black, Sam (1989).
Introduction to Public Relations.
London: The Modino Press Limited Cutlip, S.N, Center, A.H. and Broom, G.M (1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood, Cliffs, N.J:.
Prentice Hall Daramola, A.C (2003).
Fundamentals of Professional Public Relations A Global Overview.
Lagos: Certified Marketing Communication Institute of Nigeria (CMCIN).
Lucas, Stephen E. (2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Nwosu, I.E and Idemili, S.O.
(1992).
Public Relations, Speech, Media Writings & Copy.
Enugu: ACENA Publishers.
Osuji, Chuks (1990).
Principles of Public Relations Practice (The Nigerian Approach).
Owerri: Opinion Research and Communications Ltd. Seitel, Fraer P. (2001).
The Practice of Public Relation., 8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall.
APPENDIX 1-6 The Assignment File Assessment file will be made available to you.
In the file, you will find details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course: the tutor marked and the written examination.
T he marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with deadlines.
The works you submit to your tutor as assignment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You will have to submit a specified number of the (TMAs).
Every unit in this course has a tutor-marked assignment.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the (TMAs) will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on 8 or before the deadline for submissions.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of two hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the units all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of self assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following tables sets out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Four assignments (the best four of all Four assignments, each marked out of the assignments submitted for 10%, but highest scoring three selected, marking) thus totaling 30% Final examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Unit Title Of work Weeks Assignment Activity MODULE 1 1 Definitions and components of Week 1 Assignment 1 public relations 2 Public relations network Week 2 Assignment 2 3 Functions and careers in PR Week 3 Assignment 3 4 The publics of public relations Week 4 Assignment 4 MODULE 2 1 Historical origins and pioneers of PR Week 5 Assignment 5 2 History and development of public Assignment 6 9 relations in Nigeria Week 6 3 Media and tools of public relations Week 7 Assignment 7 4 Research in public relations Week 8 Assignment 8 5 Organisation of public relations functions/setting up a public Week 9 Assignment 9 relations department MODULE 3 1 Planning and executing a public relations programme Week 10 Assignment 10 2 Public relations for nonprofit Assignment 11 organisations Week 11 3 Writing and speaking in public Assignment 12 relations Week 12 4 Law and Ethics in public relations Assignment 13 Week 13 5 Public relations and society revision Assignment 14 Week 14 Revision 2 Examination 1 Total 17 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided with exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided with exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first items is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is 10 made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the Assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decided on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books in the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully and well before the relevant due dates.
The assignments have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your for tutor-marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, 11 both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: (cid:1) You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings (cid:1) You have difficulty with the exercises (cid:1) You have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of any assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary This course guide has provided an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
It is hoped that you will find it very useful.
Wishing you the very best in the course.
12  MAIN WORK MAC134 PRINCIPLES &PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Course Team: Mr. Charles Onwunali (Course Developer and Writer) – University of Lagos, Akoka.
D r. Josef Bel-Molokwu (Content Editor).
Chidinma H.Onwubere, Ph.D (Course Coordinator)-NOUN.
Christine .I.
Ofulue, Ph.D (Programme Leader)-NOUN.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 13  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 14 TABLE OF CONTENTS Page 15 MODULE 1 SCOPE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS UNIT 1 Definitions and Components of public relations PR as a philosophy and functions of management 1 Unit 2 Public Relations Network 11 Unit 3 Functions and careers in public relations 16 Unit 4 The publics of public relations 29 MODULE 2 EVOLUTION AND PROCESS OF PUBLIC 37 RELATIONS Unit 1 Historical origins and pioneers of public 37 Relations Unit 2 History and development of public relations 45 In Nigeria Unit 3 Medias and tools of public relations 53 Unit 4 Research in Public Relations 62 Unit 5 Organisation of public relations functions 72 MODULE 3 PUBLIC RELATIONS IN PRACTICE 80 Unit 1 Planning and executing a public relations 80 Programme Unit 2 Public relations for nonprofit organisations 88 Unit 3 Writing and speaking in public relations 95 Unit 4 Law and Ethics in public relations 107 Unit 5 Public Relations and society 116 APPENDICES 121 16 MODULE I SCOPE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1 - Definitions and components of public relations.
PR as a philosophy and function of management Unit 2 - Public Relations Network Unit 3 - Functions and careers in public Relations Unit 4 - The Publics of Public Relations.
MODULE I UNIT 1 - DEFINITIONS AND COMPONENTS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS AS A PHILOSOPHY OF MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Public Relations 3.2 Components of Public Relations 3.3 Public Relations as a function and philosophy of management 3.4 Misconceptions of Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Many scholars and practitioners have presented various definitions of public relations, based on their knowledge, experience and perspectives.
These definitions would assist you to appreciate and evaluate the role and functions of public relations.
One thing common to these definitions is that public relations is undertaken to create and sustain goodwill and harmony among the various entities and institutions of society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 17 • Recall accurately two or three definitions of public relations • Explain the basic ideas common to all these definitions • Come up with your own definition of public relations derived from the ones stated below.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Public Relations Cutlip, Centre and Broom, in their classical book, Effective Public Relations, (1994) defines public relations as “the management function that establishes and maintains mutually beneficial relationships between an organization and the publics on whom its success or failure depends”.
This definition clearly underlines the fact that public relations is a two-way process between an organization and its identified publics that is meant to benefit both parties.
In other words, mutual understanding requires by definition, two-way communication.
We shall explain the term publics in another unit.
The British Institute of Public Relations (BIPR) defines public relations as “the deliberate, planned and sustained effort to establish and maintain mutual understanding between an organization and its publics”.
This definition suggests that public relations is not a haphazard endeavour.
It is a process that is deliberately planned to achieve a given goal or objective, which is mutual understanding between an organization and its publics and must be planned.
“Sustained effort” means that a process does not end until it has achieved its objectives.
This means that as a public relations officer, you must always endeavour to carry our plans to a logical end, despite any difficulties you may encounter in the process.
Another definition of public relations is given by a Frank Jefkins British author: who says that “public relations consist of all forms of planned communication both inward and outward between an organization and its publics for the purpose of achieving objectives concerning mutual understanding”.
In this definition “inward and outward communication” consists of a two-way communication that involves the organization and its internal and external publics.
The Mexican statement defines public relations as the art and social science of analyzing trends, predicting their consequences counselling organization’s leaders as well as implementing a planned programme of action which serves both the organization and the public interest.
This definition was adopted at the First World Congress of National Public Relations Associations held in Mexico in 1978.
This definition is accepted to be broad, all-embracing and multidisciplinary.
It suggest that public relations takes expertise and knowledge from the social sciences and arts.
For instance, the survey method has become very useful in public relations to find out peoples’ opinions, attitudes and beliefs in order predict human behaviour.
18 Public relations monitors and researchers issues in the environment and tries to align the policies and programmes of the organization in such a way that it will favour both the organization and the publics so that there will be a mutual outcome.
Rex F. Harlow a renowned American public relations expert provides us an excellent and exhaustive definition of public relations as “a distinctive management function which helps establish and maintain mutual lines of communication, understanding, acceptance and cooperation between an organization and its publics, involves the management of problems or issues, helps management to keep informed on and responsive to public, defines and emphasizes the responsibility of management to serve the public interest, helps the management keep abreast of and effectively utilize change, serving as an early warning system to help anticipate trends, and uses research and sound and ethical communication as its principal tools.
In acknowledgement of this definition, some authors have referred to public relations as “Corporate Meguard” in Nigerian parlance.
Canfield in his book, “Public Relations: Principles, Cases and Problems, sees public relations as a social philosophy of management expressed in policies and practices which are communicated to the public to secure its understanding and Goodwill.
Finally, the definition we offer you is given by Public Relations News of New York, the industry Newsletter.
It defines public relations as the management function which evaluates public attitudes, identifies the policies and procedures of an individual or an organization with the public interest, and plans and executes a programme of action to earn public understanding and acceptance.
This definition implies that both individuals and organization need public relations in their interactions with various segments of society.
A notable public relations practitioner referred to in one of our earlier definitions summarized most of the public relations definitions as “Good Performance that is publicly appreciated”.
In other words, public relations can be seen as doing good and then getting credit for it.
He observes that public relations could succinctly be expressed as; P = Performance R = Recognition That is good performance that is publicly appreciated: That is public relations consists of all actions taken to promote a favourable relationship with the publics of an organization.
From these various definitions you should note some key and important terms for formulating a good public relations.
19 • Deliberate – a public relations event or action is intentional.
It is designed to influence or gain, understanding as well as providing information so as to gain feedback or reaction from the people or groups affected by the activity.
The public needs information to be carried long in what the organization is doing, particularly as it concerns their interest.
For instance a major market leader must create good image and reputation which public relation information provides.
• Planned – Public relations activities are organized in a systematic sequence, which is expected to culminate in solutions to identified problems.
The problem must be analyzed by systematic research.
You should note that effective public relations is planned in advance it is proactive and not reactive.
• Process – Public relations is a process.
Effective public relations must be viewed as continuing process of a series of organized actions, activities, changes or functions expected to bring about a successful end result.
On the other hand, public relations is not a one-time affair, engaged only occasionally as a fire brigade method or remedial action.
You should note that preventive public relations is a continuous process of discovering problems or opportunities, solving the problems when they are small instead of when they are full blown.
Effective public relations is not communicating promises alone.
It is based on the practices, performances, good deeds and past record of the organization.
No amount of good public relations will generate acceptance or patronage for an organization with bad image or that is not responsive to public interest.
According to Chester Burger (1998) “the best public relations campaign in the world can’t build trust while reality is destroying it.
In other words, reality limits what public relations can accomplish.
• Mutual interest – Public relations should be mutually beneficial to the organization as well as the publics.
The primary reason for establishing any public relations activity should be to serve the public interest and not benefit the organization.
Good public relations aligns the interests of the organization with the desires and interests of the public.
Self Assessment Exercise From the various definitions of public relations you have studied in this unit identity three common terms that describes the similarities and differences of public relations.
3.2 Components of Public Relations 20  Public relations is a very complex activity, with different areas of specialization.
Daramola (2003) has identified such areas to include: Employees Relations: Building better relationships between employees and management, especially in complex organizations where the lines of communication between management and workers become stressful as the workforce of a company expands.
Industrial Relations: Providing advice to management to improve mutually beneficial relations between a company and other businesses within the same industry and related ones and in the areas of suppliers, distributors, competitors and labour unions.
Community Relations: Planned activity to create a relationship of good neighbourliness between an organization and other companies as well as groups within the community in which it is located.
Customer Relations: Involves developing better relations with the massive consuming public and sustaining the goodwill of customers in particular and consumes in general.
Financial Relations: This involves improving understanding through better communication with shareholders stockbrokers, stock exchange market, fund managers, investors, banks and insurance agencies.
Press Relations: This involves working with the members of the press to maximize the free publicity that can be obtained for a newsworthy corporate event so as to create public knowledge and understanding and respond to press enquiries as it relates to their organization.
Government Relations: Lobbying government agencies such as the legislature and regulatory agency on behalf of the organization.
Special Events: This is used to stimulate interest in a product, person or organization through activities designed to interact with public through staged events.
Counselling: Advising organizations about how to understand and mobilize the public as well as interprete themselves.
This will reduce criticisms and hostility from the press and pressure groups in society.
21 Research: To determine attitudes and behaviours of relevant publics through research so as to plan public relations strategies.
Research can be used to generate understanding as well as influence and persuade publics.
Publicity: This involves the dissemination of planned messages using selected media to promote the organization’s interest.
Self Assessment Exercise Why is public relations referred to as a very complex activity?
Mention two areas of specialization in public relations and the service they render.
3.3 Public Relations as a Function and Philosophy of Management The philosophy of public relations is the creation, building and maintenance of mutual understanding and respect based on truth and effective two-way communication process for the betterment of corporate institutions and enhancement of social and economic development.
This philosophy postulates that an organization should do right, pursue the greatest good of the largest majority and support only those things that will improve the welfare of humanity.
In public relations, it is believed that in the event of any observable weakness or error of judgement in any area, an organization should be sufficiently courageous to admit it and indicate preparedness to rectify it.
Ogunsanya (1991) is right in observing that public relations is an inalienable lubricant in the wheel of strategic management.
It demands from the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) an open management system, the installation of a responsive information management system, preparedness to share power without abdicating responsibility and a decision-making machinery that accommodates the overall interest of the society and ensure equity/justice in all ramifications.
To be effective, a public relations philosophy must be expressed in action.
Good public relations involve acting in the public interest.
There can be no escape in today’s world from the effects of public opinion and public attitudes.
The increased power of public opinion (both domestic and international) and recognition of that power constitute one of the mainsprings propelling the function of public relations.
As you can observe, we now live in an era of “The public be pleased” “the customer is always right”.
It is clear that in today’s business environment, no individual or institution can prosper in the long term without public support or at least public approval.
Institutions are judged by what they do, not by what they say.
For as one of the definitions of public relations explain that public relations can be seen as good performance that is publicly recognized.
22  Public relations is the philosophy of doing things people like and doing them the way they like.
In other words, the doing is more important than the saying, but there must be saying after the doing.
This requires publicity.
In the words of Daramola, “publicity should cloth institutions with acceptable personality”.
All the publicity in the world is of no value unless the organization being publized does good works and acts in a positive and responsible manner.
Public Relations as Management Function Public relations is an instrument of management and its consideration should be taken into account when formulating policy.
For this reason, public relations should be placed at top management level of an organization, the public relations director or manager should be responsible to the Chief Executive and the Board of Directors.
As the head of the organization the chief executive officer is the leading spokesperson for the organization.
According to Daramola, the place, position or role of the public relations function is defined and re-determined by the CEO and a set of top management officials or members of the board of directors whose views and statements must be based on the organization’s changing needs, problems, opportunities and values as well as standards”.
He explains further that a public relations department will only be useful to management as the administrators want it to be, in other words, management sets the pace or tune that public relations follow.
In any organization that values the place of public relations, the public relations officer should be in a position to advise and participate in major policy decisions.
He should be in a position to represent the public viewpoint on the organization’s policies and problems.
He should be at the same level of authority as the heads of other principal departments, to as to be able to understand their problems and gain their cooperation in carrying out public relations programmes.
To be effective, public relations must be an important arm of top management.
Seitel (2001) advises that for public relations to work, its advice to management must be unfiltered, uncensored and unexpurgated.
This he maintains can only be achieved if the public relations department reports to the CEO, since public relations promotes the entire institutions, unlike marketing for instance that promotes a specific product.
Self-Assessnment Exercise Give two reasons why public relations function should be a management concern.
23  3.4 Misconceptions of Public Relations In Nigeria as well as in other parts of the world, the profession of public relations has been subjected to wrong perception of what a public relations person actually does.
To make matters worse, some of the practitioners themselves do not have a clear idea of what public relations actually is.
This situation has created credibility problems for the profession in general and the practitioners in particular.
Daramola (2003) and Nwosu (1997) have identified some of these misconceptions to include: 1.
Courtesy: Some people view public relations as consisting of good manners or being polite or respectful to others.
But good manners alone does not constitute public relations.
2.
Protocol: Even institutional officials erroneously believe that good public relations is about protocol or the proper procedure of conducting official ceremonies.
3.
Goodwill: Every individual or organization needs the cooperation of others to be able to achieve any mission or vision because no one is an island by himself.
4.
Fine Appearance: A lot of persons and companies assume that public relations is equivalent to a fine appearance, an attractive face or glamorous front.
For this reason, such people and institutions maintain a strict dress code or policy.
While a good cover is essential a good book cannot be judged by its cover.
5.
Free Gifts: Many company executives in Nigeria in particular and around the world in general, believe in projecting their organizations as charitable and benevolent through the giving of free annual gifts such as Christians hampers and Sallah rams.
Effective public relations does not begin and end with gifts.
6.
Annual Parties: The yearly staging of grand get-togethers such as Annual Dealers Dinner, Staff Children, Christmas Fun Fair, Employees New Year or end of year party is another popular method of generating goodwill and friendship among both internal and external publics of an organization.
7.
Public relations is not about employing pretty ladies to woo men into acting against their wishes.
24 8.
Public relations is not about lying and selling falsehood about your organization and product.
Equally, it is not about denying every statement that does not favour your organization.
Public relations is about telling the truth and not prevaricating or what an Israeli government spokesman once described as “Strategic Ambiguity” (neither denying, nor admitting).
9.
Public relations is not about being a yes-boy or a bag carrier for year boss madam or relations.
Instead, it is a dignified and noble profession that attracts knowledgeable, self-confident, intelligent and self-respecting women and men.
The display of professionalism and ethical conduct by public relations practitioners in their relationship with their organization and the public will go a long way to correct some of these misconceptions.
4.0 CONCLUSION The discipline of public relations has attracted many definitions from scholars and practitioners alike.
But one thing is common to all the varied definitions: they all agree that the aim of public relations is to create and sustain mutual understanding between an organization and its numerous publics.
Publics relations is an activity that is very complex, has many areas of specializations and components and to be effective, the function has to be placed at the highest levels of the management of the organization.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that public relations has many definitions as there are practitioners and academicians in the field.
Inspite of the different perspectives, the sum of their definitions is that public relations aims at creating and maintaining mutual understanding between an organization and its publics the various components of public relations include, employee relations, industrial relations, community relations, customer relations, financial relations press relations, government relations, special events, counselling, research and publicity, e.t.c.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Make a strong case for the placement of the public relations function at the top management level of an organisation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajala, V.O (1993).
Public Relations in Search of Professional Excellence.
Ibadan: Africa-Link Communications Limited.
25  Black, Sam (1989).
Introduction to Public Relations.
London: The Modino Press Limited.
Cutlip, S.M.
Centre, AH and Broom, G.M.
(1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Daramola, A.C (2003).
Fundamentals of Professional Public Relations.
A Global Overview.
Lagos:CMCIN.
Ogunsanya, A.
(1991).
Strategy and Public Relations, Techniques for the CEO.
Lagos: Richmund Books Limited.
Osuji, C. (1990).
Principles of Public Relations Practice (The Nigerian Approach).
Owerri: Opinion Research and Communications Limited.
Seitel, F.P.
(2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
26 UNIT 2: PUBLIC RELATIONS NETWORK CONTENTS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Public relations Network 3.2 Qualities of a PR Practitioner 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The nature of public relations is very broad and therefore includes a wide range of activities referred to as the public relations network.
Some of these activities are often confused as public relations instead of elements of public relations.
An examination of these related concepts will enable you understand the proper relationship between them and public relations, and the role and functions of the practitioners of public relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define the related networks in public relations such as marketing advertising, corporate promotions journalism, publicity, persuasion, propaganda, etc.
• Identify the relationships between public relations and these networks/concepts.
• Identify the qualities of a PR practitioner.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PR and Marketing Public Relations and marketing are essentially corporate functions but Public Relations is not the same thing as marketing.
PR is used both in the commercial and non-commercial organizations.
PR is not a marketing strategy as advertising is but PR is involved in all marketing decision made by any organization.
Public Relations starts from innovation stage of any product.
PR can be used in marketing of any product since the product of any company is meant for a specific market.
PR can help in educating such a market.
27 Marketing of the product will fail if the market is not educated, if people do not know how to use the product.
That is why PR helps to create a product image for the product and equally a corporate identity for the company marketing or producing the product.
A company like Nestle with a name for excellence in product has got an image to produce goods relating to its line.
At the same time the company will have to consolidate the position of the product in the market by building image for the product.
That is the function of public relations.
PR can help to introduce a new product into the market.
Public relations are very much needed to stage a good exhibition, press conference or market survey for that product.
PR is also necessary in the feedback system of the product.
The producers must be able to get a feedback from the consumers.
A lot of people will buy a product that is guaranteed.
They will buy a product that they can get spare parts or that can be serviced easily in their environment.
PR is very important in positioning of a product in the market place and it helps in educating sales forces.
The market of any products can be educated by press releases; houses journals and work visit to plants by consumers as well as the use of slides films and literature.
PR also feature prominently in dealer’s relations, for example.
Peugeot Automite Nigeria (PAN) sells its products through dealers and the dealers must be educated to know how to handle complaints by the customers.
In some cases, the dealers are educated to educate motor mechanics that will handle the repairs of the product.
In all the six stages in the product life cycle, namely, development introduction, growth, maturity, saturation and decline, PR is very important.
PR supports marketing through sponsorships of certain types of sporting activity- football, track and field events polo, golf, etc.
Public relations support marketing by attracting and getting third party endorsements of the product.
PR and Advertising While advertising makes the product known, PR is to build an image for the products.
PR can be used in promoting the product.
Nobody will buy a bad product twice and part of making the product good and acceptable is the work of the public relations officer.
Advertising is basically commercial; advertising is paid for communicating to get publicity for the product or services.
PR is not paid for in order to get publicity.
Advertising therefore is a marketing tool and a means of achieving communication.
Advertising helps to introduce a new product, to sustain an established product and to create flow of traffic for a retail outlet, to secure sales leads, demarcate a service and to promote a public cause.
A public relations professional uses advertising for corporate institutional purpose.
He uses the expertise of the advertising agency for copy writing purposes and for media placement.
28 PR and Corporate Promotions The public relations department will need research.
The department will probably need corporate institutional or advertising research to help it plan a marketing strategy for the organization.
Corporate promotions therefore provide a base for public relations department to draw its research materials.
Corporate promote is a joint work of everybody in all departments to enhance the corporate image and promotions of the company.
PR and Journalism Most practitioners of public relations enter the profession through journalism, but being a journalist does not necessarily make you a good practitioner of public relations.
In the day to day operations of the public relations officers, he will need the journalist.
The journalistic instinct must therefore equally exist in the public relations practitioner.
The PR practitioner will have to write news releases.
He will need to call press conferences; he will hold press briefings.
A practitioner cannot do all this without an in-depth knowledge of how they are being done.
That is the reason why the practitioners must be trained in the style of journalism.
PR is beyond media relations.
Also, as public affairs are concerned with politics, it does not translate to mean public relations.
PR and Propaganda When public relations is misused, people equate it with propaganda.
One of the most common misconceptions is to think that public relations, means propaganda, the manipulation of people’s minds by shady character (the Hidden Persuaders).
PR and propaganda are widely different while PR’s objective is to achieve consent true dialogue, complete openness, understanding and collection of information through ethical fact finding methods respected worldwide, the objective of propaganda is to build a movement, direct information to a people already brainwashed, use and accept monologue, obscure facts or gives half truths; promote a following whether or not the people understand the issue at stake.
Propagandists obtain information through questionable means.
Self Assessment Exercise [ 1.
Distinguish between public relations and advertising 2.
Public relations is nothing but propaganda.
Discuss.
3.2 Qualities of a PR Practitioner Public Relations involve the projection and management of image of an entity.
It therefore follows that to be effective a PR practitioner should posses certain knowledge and qualities.
29 First and foremost the PR practitioner should have a theoretical as well as practical understanding of communication.
As a foremost communicator, he must plan and execute communications that reveal, explain, defend and promote his organization’s, policies.
The PR practitioner must know how to write well, where to place what he has written and in what appropriate form i.e.
newspaper articles, news story, letter, brochure, etc.
Apart from written communication, the PR practitioner must be prepared to operate in whatever media appropriate to his communication objective in a professional manner.
A PR practitioner must have a strong, active, ethical and moral code to guide him in his every day work.
A PR practitioner must have good knowledge of attitude and behaviour change.
He must have a good grounding in the methods of understanding and predicting human behaviour.
He must have enough knowledge of such disciplines as psychology and sociology.
Reputation – A PR practitioner should be irreproachable and maintain high reputation in matter relating to moral and material integrity.
He must possess leadership qualities and radiate confidence even when he himself is not too certain of the outcome.
A PR practitioner must display unalloyed loyalty in all situations and at all times to his organization.
Habit of cleanliness.
Good education – the PR practitioner must be an all-rounder.
A basic knowledge in business administration is necessary for effective public relations programming.
4.0 CONCLUSION The network that public relations is linked is wide and diverse.
From marketing to advertising to journalism, public relations plays an important part in the successful working of these areas of co-marketing communication.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we thoroughly examined the relationships between public relations and other functions of communication to which it is related.
We also examined the qualities a good public relations practitioner must possess to enable him to excel.
30 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSGINMENT Examine the close links between public relations and marketing 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajala, V.O.
(1993).
Public Relations in search of professional Excellence, Ibadan: Afrika-Link Communication Ltd. Cutlip, S.M., Center, A.H and Brown, G.M (1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Daramola, C.A (2003).
Fundamentals of Professional Public Relations.
A Global Perspective.
Lagos: Certified Marketing Communications Institute of Nigeria (CMCIN).
31 UNIT 3: FUNCTIONS AND CAREERS IN PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Uses of Public Relations 3.2 Areas of Work of Public Relations Practitioners 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public relations involves diverse functions and is used in a variety of areas.
Public relations practitioners operate in a multitude of areas, but these various areas are integrated and interrelated and are directed towards the achievement of the objective of creating mutual understanding between the organisation and their numerous publics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • List and explain the various areas that public relation functions are performed.
• Identify the activities an average public relations practitioners engages on.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Uses of Public Relations Public Relations is used in various organizations, both commercial and non- commercial (or non-profit).
Its use is diverse.
Some of the uses of public relations include: • Employee Relations/Employee Communication • Community relations/affairs • Media Relations • Financial Public Relations • Corporate Relations • Political Public Relations/Government Liaison 32 • Special Events • Corporate Advertising • Crisis Management • Fund Raising/Launches Employee Relations Good employee relations do not occur by accident.
They are achieved by conscious design and effort and are the result of a desire to create them and the willingness to work at them.
To the management, good employee relations are tangibly reflected in a good spirit de corps, high standards of work performance and quality workmanship that in turn materially affect unit costs and profitability.
To the worker they mean good wages and employee benefits, fair and considerate treatment, job satisfaction and job security, together with the feeling of belonging, of being a vital part of the productive team.
Basically, this involves motivation and effective human relations.
The provision of an environment in which the worker can retain an appreciable level of self-respect and individual dignity.
Maintaining sound relations with the employees depends on credibility.
There must be a climate of trust between management and staff.
The PR man should be informed about the company polices in order to serve effectively as a liaison between management and staff.
The importance of employee communication lies in the fact that employees play vital role in creating the image of a company through heir contact with customers, their circle of family and friends, and their participation in community affairs and political life.
Properly informed and motivated, they can be one of the most powerful support groups in seeking to achieve the public relations objectives of their employer ill-informed, they can become cynical about the public image of the organization.
Moreover, since others regard them as one of the most credible source of information about their employers, they can seriously undermine efforts to communicate the employer’s objectives and achievements to other publics.
Effective employee communication is involved in all the four phase of employment.
1.
The start, in which recruitment, advertising, interviews, orientation pamphlets, and meetings are used to attract, select, and indoctrinate new employees.
2.
The work, during which many face-to-face and mediated communications provides instruction, news and job-related information.
33 3.
The rewards and recognition, involving announcements, publicity, and special events concerning compensation, promotions, benefit programmes, special events, and award winners.
4.
The termination or work interruption, whether caused by lay off, strike, sit-in, breakdown of equipment, disaster, elimination of positions, or dismissals of individuals.
Communication in all four phase establishes relationships between the organization and its employee publics, builds and transmits the organizational culture, and contributes to achieving the goals of employee communication.
Consumer and Dealer Relations Cutlip, Center and Broom (1985) have identified seven main forms of assistance that PR renders to marketing in consumer product and service companies as; 1.
Publicizing news and events related to the launching of new or improved products or services.
2.
Promoting establishing products or services to the extent they are news worthy.
3.
Creating a favorable image of the “company behind the product” 4.
Arranging for public appearances of marketing spokespersons 5.
Probing public opinion in market areas 6.
Focusing news-media attention on sales conferences and other marketing events.
7.
Assisting in programmes concerning consumerism.
(Protection of consumers interests).
Cutlip, Center and Broom contend that the goal of consumer relations is to help promote the sale of products and services with novel and news making projects, bit with more attention to truth and accuracy of claims.
The emphasis will still shift more to communications projects and vehicles for product-problem alerts and recalls, consumer education in the care and use of products and forms of easy redress for settlement of grievances by private arbitration.
Commercial organizations most commonly see the consumer as a priority public, besides today’s business environment has witnessed the advent of consumerism and various pressure groups seeking to protect the consumer against business.
The advent of consumerism which Ralph Bader has championed for long) poses some challenges for corporate PR and social responsibility.
The PR man should develop systems for retrieval of accurate intelligence reports from the market, most especially consumer complaints and grievance, but also from the other publics such as the dealers, the press or other marketing facilitators.
34 Also PR should keep other functional units constantly reminded of the importance of quality and performance.
PR should design programmes to counteract consumer ignorance and meet their need for information; as well as to handle or forestall complaints.
Through sales conferences, exhibitions, sales representation conventions and training programmes etc.
PR communicate with dealers to build dealer loyalty and respect and keep him abreast of new products and programmes.
Community Relations The first step in community relations is to know the community intimately.
This requires knowledge of the community’s strength and weakness an analysis of its needs and welfare.
An organization needs to ‘marry’ the community it settles with.
The need for community relations is symbolic of wife/husband relations.
The power structure of the community i.e.
Opinion leaders, prime movers and other activists must be clearly identified.
The basic prime mover is employee’s families, the press, opinion leaders, and social philanthropic organizations, crusaders, protest groups, pressure groups etc.
Community relations should focus on the building for the company, a reputation for good citizenship through social responsibility.
It is important in community affairs.
The PR practitioner must identify ways of listening to and responding to the sensitivity of the local community and extending the facilities of the organization to the community and provisions of social amenities.
The community may be in need such as water, schools, health facilities, job opportunity scholarships and vocational training, sponsorship and vocational training, sponsorship of cultural events and social activities like sports.
Media Relations Organizations depend on the media to reach their desires audiences.
Roger Haywood (1984) has observed that if an organization treats media simply as “messengers”.
It is unlikely to develop the most effective programme of media communication.
Cordial media relation is an asset to the PR practitioners particularly before, during and after a crisis.
A practitioner who maintains proactive rather than reactive media relations with media executives makes his friends before he needs them.
For crisis 35 management, positive media relations are a must for the professional PR executives.
According to Cutlip, Center and Broom, profitable press relations require adherence to the fire “Fs”: dealing with journalists and programme producers in manner that is fast, factual, frank, fair, and friendly.
The bedrock of the public relations practitioners-journalist relationship must be one of mutual trust and mutual advantage.
Organization wants news reported in a favorably manner that will promote their objectives and will not cause them trouble.
The news media on the other hand want news that will interest readers and viewers.
Balancing these two conflicting interests requires dexterity on the part of the public relations practitioner.
The media serve as “gate-keepers”, controlling information that flows to other publics.
That is why PR people must make the efforts to maintain cordiality with media men.
Crisis Management Crisis arises from both natural and man-made causes.
Planning for a crisis is essential at the three stages of crisis management.
Crisis management is about seizing the initiative taking control of what has happened before it engulfs the organization.
In other words, good crisis management means being prepared.
The first task is to understand the extent of the problem.
It is only with this understanding that the organization can ensure that it send out the right messages or even answer media inquires.
Some cause of crisis can be industrial relations, products failure, sabotage, market, changes, managerial incompetence.
Regulations and deregulation changes, impact of world events, financial difficulty, environmental conflict, misdemeanor, civil disorder, etc.
During any of these crises, the media can play a positive role by showing concern in their reporting.
Negative reporting may aggravate the crisis thereby causing a damage to the organization’s reputation.
Cordial media relationship could be an asset during crisis rime.
The secret of crisis management is identifying target audiences and giving them the right message through the friends the PR practitioner must have made in the media houses.
At crisis periods, organization’s reputation is at stake.
It is the practitioner’s duty to protect his own reputation and that of the organization he works for.
Special Events Every organization generates events that can be creatively managed through PR efforts to catch public attention and get publicity.
These events could be of potential interest to priority public e.g., the employees; it could also be of broader potential interest e.g., to the community.
The range of events is vast depending on the situation and the ability of the PR man to create and manage news.
A good special event start with planning then goes through staging 36 and timing.
Ample publicity is essential i.e.
inviting a public figure as quest using a well known venue, getting the press briefed before, during and after the events, using advertisement where necessary.
Special events could cover such activities as celebrations, anniversaries, seminars, exhibitions, products introduction.
Book launch, openings, seminars and competitions, convocations, sales conferences, open days, e.t.c factory openings news conferences, press reception, press luncheon, annual general meetings e.t.c.
A well-chosen personality well briefed or a well- organized event can make your organization the talking point of the industry.
At the same time, considerable good will can be created amongst those guests invited to attend to meet your celebrity.
And good follow-up using the pictures of the event can make those who did not attend wish they had!
Government Relations/Government Liaison The main focus of government relations is the analyzing and interpreting of government and legislative issues, counseling management and communicating the organization’s position to government bodies.
Government relations, requires more than the efforts of individual companies or organizations.
The use of an association of companies and manufactures as rallying points for lobbying or other pressure group activities is important.
As part of government relations, companies can plan activities such as: 1. helping install modern methods and techniques in local 2. government operations either as business volunteers or on a contract basis 3. serving as volunteers on government commissions and task forces 4. granting employees leaves-of-absence to run for political offices or to serve in advisory or administrative posts at the local and state level.
5. taking advocacy position on a public issue 6. supporting sales to government A good government PR is essential for an organization’s survival because of the key role of government, at all level that make decisions that can impact on an organization existence and operations.
Fund Raising/Launches Fund raising programmes are the major sources of funding non-commercial or non- profit organizations.
A PR practitioners may be charged with raising funds for the following causes.
• Community development.
The community may be in need of certain infrastructure, and the idea is to appeal to people who are well-off within or outsider the community to contribute to such a cause.
37 • Health facility-to equip hospital and probably build more buildings • Victims of natural disasters-floods or was victims may have lost all they have in war or flood and need to be rehabilitated • Sports-like raising money got the Olympic games, etc.
• Religious purpose-to raise funds to build church mosque or worship center • To aid a cause-the cause they include entertainment or mass mobilization A contemporary view of why people give donations asserts that people give to get.
The concept of transaction is based on he belief that people give because of some kind of expectations.
The PR implications of this is that for effective-fund-raising, the public relations practitioner must ask himself what does the donor get in return for giving.
To this end, nine types of reason/motives have been identified.
1.
The need for self-esteem.
To satisfy a psychological need.
This means that individuals may give because they want to boost their self-image or ego.
2.
The need for recognition from others.
To satisfy a sociological need.
This means that individuals may give to win recognition from others or the need to belong based on class or social status.
3.
Fear or insecurity/guilt.
May be donating out of guilt over deed of the past-treading on others while climbing up the ladder etc.
4.
Habitual giver-these give because it has become a normal thing, especially done by small donors.
5.
Nuisance givers-Those who give to get rid of the seemingly noisy or inconveniences from callers.
6.
Giving under pressure-These give only when they are required or compelled to like being compelled to give at the office or club by virtue of ones membership there.
7.
People to people givers-These individuals give because of a sense of solidarity.
Those who believe that must be good to man or humanists.
8.
Faith-giving-giving based on the requirements of ones faith-giving for moral or religious reasons.
9.
The captive givers-these give because of a real sense of sorrow- emotionally and sympathetically involved.
It is this reason for giving that the fundraiser should exploit to get each group to give.
Programmes, which will exploit or satisfy these motives, should be developed to achieve effective participation.
Fund raising is purely a PR activity.
The idea behind fund raising is to appeal to the minds of the people to open their wallet to support a cause.
The strategy must be 38 persuasive, deliberate and visionary.
If the practitioners fail to appeal enough to the mind of the people to support a cause, he may not win the support of such people again.
In fund raising the media must be carried along.
The media must be adequately briefed.
If necessary a facility visit must be organized for press to visit the place or site or center that the money is needed.
A press kit should be given to the press, where they can source information when they want editorial material.
In case of fund raising for charity, use of photographs is very important to bring vivid images of the conditions of the beneficiaries to appeal to people to donate.
Financial PR The main objective of financial PR is to create better understanding between the company and the financial community, make them perceive the company as a good place to invest in.
The financial community includes: • The stock exchange • The stock brokers, analyst and consultants • Unlisted or over the counter dealers • Investment bankers • Commercial banks (trust departments) • Insurance companies that buy common stocks • Mutual funds and investment trusts • Trustees of estates and other institutions • The financial press • The investing general public The next objective is to build and sustain shareholder interest in the company and promote positive press opinion of the company’s equities and profitability.
Corporate PR (Corporate Image) The corporate image consists of the totality of all the impressions that a company makes on all its audience.
The corporate images helps to determine how a person will behave towards an organisation.
Frank Jefkin’s explains further that the corporate image is the way the organization itself is perceived by the various publics.
39 The company may not actually live up to expectations, for example an organisation may occupy a posh office complex in Victoria Island or Broad Street or acquire flashy cars for its executives yet engage in questionable activities.
The impressions are how the public see the organisation and these may not be the real image of the organisation.
An organisation should plan to create the head of pictures in its publics on how they want to be held in the eyes of such publics.
These images may be communicated through the product or services, the attitude of the company’s employees (Receptionists, salesmen, drivers, etc) as well as the activities of the industry in which the company operates.
Public opinions plays an important role in forming the individual’s image of an organisation.
This underlines the importance of communication between an organisation and its publics.
Good vision, creativity, sustained research and considerable funding are essential in the development of a corporate identity.
Olin’s (1989) argues that the global success of Coca-Cola, which is probably the world’s famous and ubiquitous brand name, is a tribute to the ingenuity, financial dedication and immense sums of money devoted to communicating this identity worldwide.
To embark on corporate image systems, the organisation needs to carry out come corporate research; such would cover the following areas.
• Analysis of the organisation’s present communication practice.
• Analysis of the opinion of members of staff in relation to the organisation’s image.
• Analysis of public opinion about the organisation and its activities.
Based on these findings, the organisation would be able to identify the areas as well as the means of developing the corporate image; 1.
The product or services image; this involves the packaging, the name, the graphics, as well as the outlets used by the organisation.
In addition to these physical attributes of the organisation’s product or service, product- positioning strategy is also important.
Positioning refers to a deliberate attempt by the organisation to build a ‘personality’ for itself and its products.
In other words, this is an attempt to create a particular picture desired by the organisation in the minds of members of the publics.
2.
Employees impression; this involves the development of employees loyalty to the organisation as well as the training of employees on how to deal with 40 the public (their appearance-their total personality especially for those who have regular contacts with the public).
3.
The organisations locating and building; this includes the locations (area) of the organization (company), the building both interior and exterior and also the organization’s ‘Voice” in relation to pertinent public issues.
4.
Corporate advertising; these are advertisements sponsored by the organisation with the objectives of enhancing its corporate image or developing and sustaining goodwill (i.e.
placing the photograph of the employees as a teams in the advertisement).
5.
Corporate identification media; this includes the organisation name, logo, house colours vehicles, uniforms, etc.
(These are used to create a distinct identity for the organisation so that it stands out in the crowd.
Corporate Advertising Corporate advertising is advertising whose objectives are to make favoruable known the organisation behind the product or services, not the product or service itself.
Corporate advertising is used to promote the business or financial interest of the organisation.
Such advertising features information about the organization and its functions so that people will have more confidence in it and in the products or services it provides.
To be classified as corporate advertising, an advertisement must meet one of more of the following qualifications: 1.
It must educate inform or impress the public regarding the organisation’s policies functions, facilities, objectives, ideals and standards.
2.
It must build favoruable opinion about the organisation by stressing the competence of the organisation’s management, its scientific knowledge, manufacturing skills, technological break through and product improvements and contribution to social advancement and public welfare, and on the other hand, must offset unfavoruable publicity and negative attitudes.
3.
It must sell the company as a good place to walk.
Types of Corporate Advertising Frank Jefkins has identified five types of corporate advertising as: 41 1.
Prestige or institutional: is used for image building putting across the merits and achievement of the company in a pungent and positive way.
2.
Advocacy or issue; is more often propaganda, presenting a case for a business or stating its opposition in relation to a political or social issue.
It may be used to defend or state the organisation’s own side of the story.
3.
Diversification and take-over: is used to show the true breath of a company’s activities and operations, or directed at the investor market.
It may also be used to announce mergers and take-overs.
4.
Crisis advertising: when crisis strikes urgent advertising may be necessary.
5.
Financial advertising: announcing share issues, going to the stock market or annual report and annual general meetings.
6.
Another types of corporate advertising listed by Richard Stanley are: Patronage, Public Relations, and Public Service Corporate advertising.
Self Assessment Exercise Why is it important for an organisation to devote adequate PR resources in managing its employee relations?
3.2 Areas of Work of Public Relations Practitioners As you prepare to enter the held of public relations, it is useful for you to be acquainted with the various tasks you will be required to perform as part of your day to day activities.
The work of public relations practitioners fall into many area of functions.
Daramola (2003) has identified the specific tasks performed by a professional public relations practitioner to include: Writing: Almost every public relations activity requires good writing skill.
Good writing skill in essential to produce reports, news release, PR feature article, product information, fact sheet, radio or TV copy, magazine or newspaper article, speech of executives technical brochure or position paper.
42 Editing: More elaborate PR programmes, activities or events require the editing of publications such as company house journal, shareholder news letter, company annual report or other regular information bulletin.
Media Contacts: A public practitioner needs to establish and maintain contact, rapport and good working relationship with the press, radio, television, industry magazines, trade periodicals as well as international news media and other relevant publications, for the purpose of placing favourable publicity for the employer or client.
Special Events: Occasionally, a public relations officer will be asked to plan or organize special PR events such as press conference, association convention, fashion show, trade exhibition, new factory tour or facility open house as well as observances of special days, weeks, months or years (silver or golden jubilee) and anniversary celebrations, long-service awards and even political rallies.
Research and Evaluation: Public relation officers conduct surveys to measure public opinion, perceptions attitudes and beliefs on a continuous basis.
As research is needed for background information on a public relations problem or opportunity, public relations programme would always end with an evaluation.
Mass Media Production: A public relations practitioner should have adequate knowledge of art, graphics, layout and typography as well as photography, radio and television production to enable him/her critically evaluate the work of specialists or contractors who provide support services such as artists, models, printers, photographers, audio and video producers as well as advertising agencies.
Corporate Counselling: As you mature in the profession to higher level, you may sometimes be engaged to advise top management or leaders of institutions about public opinion or reaction to company decision or action.
Crisis Communication: A public relations officer counsels management about what to say and do in emergencies such as recalling unsafe products (like the Indomie crisis or the “My Pickin” teething powder) or plane crash (like the ADC plane crash in Abuja in October, 2006).
As a public relations officer it is your duty to manage the flow of information between your organisation and the public so as not aggravate the crisis.
As part of preventive public reactions, it is necessary to plan to avoid crisis.
However, since crisis can occur anytime, it is the duty to counsel management how to contain the pace of events and prevent them from getting out of hand.
(We shall discuss this topic in a later topic on crisis management).
43 Public Speaking: As a public relations practitioner, you may be involved in preparing speeches for senior company officials or represent your organisation or client at a gathering or forum.
Speaking engagements of a public relations officer may include press interviews, as well as being a guest lecturer at a professional seminar or training course.
Strategic Planning: Public relations practitioners may sometimes deal with the determination of institutional needs, missions or philosophies as well as helping to define objectives and goals of organisations.
4.0 CONCLUSION Public relations is a professional field which is diverse and is practiced by trained and experienced professional who operate efficiently and competently in the various areas.
It is not an all-comers field or for drop-outs or those who have no specified role in an organisation.
It requires high competence, knowledge and integrity to function effectively in any given area of the profession.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have tried to examine the various areas in which professionals practice their tasks as public relations practitioners.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why is the management of employee relations crucial in any public relations work in an organisation, and what is the importance of credibility in maintaining sound employee relations?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cutlip, S.M.
Center, A.H, and Broom, G.M.
(1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Daramola, A.C. (2003).
Fundamentals of Professional Public Relations: A Global Overview.
Lagos: CIMCN.
Jefkins, F. (1977).
Planned and Public Relations.
London: International Text book Company.
Seite, F.B.
(2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
44 UNIT 4: THE PUBLICS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Public Relation Publics 3.2 Public Relations and Public Image 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION While defining public relations in unit one of this module, we learnt that the success or failure of any organisation depends on creating and maintaining mutually beneficial relationship between an organisation and its publics.
We shall in this unit, identify the various publics with whom an organisation relates; and ways of dealing with these publics.
It is important to note that the nature and type of activity an organisation carries out determines the type of public it deals with.
2.0 OBJECTIVES • At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify the various publics of your own organisation.
• Suggest an appropriate way to deal with your publics.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Relations Publics At the beginning of this module, we attempted to define public relations.
A key recurring term in almost all the definitions given was ‘public’.
In the definitions, it was stated that the aim of public relations is to create and maintain mutual understanding between an organisation and its publics upon whom its success or failure depends.
It should therefore be clear to us that we cannot discuss public relations without reference to publics.
This is because every public relations effort is aimed at a specific public at a given time.
45 The Public of PR The publics in PR are those groups with common interest affected by the acts and policies of an institution (company, profit and non-profit organisations, schools, college, universities, the police e.t.c.)
or whose acts and opinions affect the institution.
Each organisation tends to have its own particular set of target publics which are normally identified by their involvement in specific situations or issues which are also of concern to the organisation.
Each issue, problem of interest creates its own publics.
John Dewey has defined publics as active social unit consisting of all those affected who recognize a common problem for which they can seek common solutions.
Publics are therefore formed around issues and publics are held together by communication.
Grunig and Hunt (1984) have categorized public relations publics as: • Non publics.
• Latent publics • Aware publics • Active publics.
Non Publics: People who do not face a problem or situation in which they are mutually involved with or affected by either an organisation or other people.
Their level of involvement is so low that they have no impact on the organisation and the organisation has no recognizable impact on them.
Latent Publics: These include people who are simply unaware of their connection to others and an organization with respect to some issue or other problem situation.
Public relations can be used to keep latent publics aware in a fire prevention stance.
Aware Public: These are those people who recognize that they are somehow affected by or involved in a problem situation shared by others but have not communicated about it with others.
When they begin to communicate and organize to do something about the situation, they become aware publics.
For this group, public relations can be used to suggest ways of solving the problem.
Active Publics: These are groups who organize themselves to discuss and do something about the problem.
The various environment right groups in the Niger- Delta for example, belong to this group.
In dealing with active publics, public relations should be used to ensure that while the group solves the problem, it does not damage the reputation and long-term interests of the organisation.
Active publics may be active on all issues (such pressure groups).
On the other hand, some publics may be active on issues involving only the majority of the population e.g.
Human Rights activists.
46  Importance of Publics in Public Relations: As Walter Lippman in his book Public Opinion (1922) has observed, we create perceptions of events, things people and places we could not experience directly ourselves.
In “The World Outside and the Picture in our Heads”, he said “most of us cannot or do not have direct access to much of the world; it is out of reach, out of sight, out of mind.
The mass media helps us to create a trustworthy picture of the world that is beyond our reach and direct experience.
Therefore our opinion is composed of what we think about and what we think about and what we think about includes what we know about (cognition) and what we think includes our opinions and feelings (predispositions).
The dilemma of public relations is that everyone inevitably is restricted to imperfect images about everything.
It is therefore the responsibility of public relations to try to correct the misapprehensions that most people have about many things, especially as it relates to our organisation.
Other scholars have categorized public relations publics to include: • Traditional and non-traditional publics • Primary and secondary publics • Internal and external publics • Local and international publics.
Traditional publics mean the groups which an organisation has ongoing, long term relationship.
These include employees, customers, governments at various levels, community groups, mass media, investors, supplies, etc.
Because they are always there, there is the tendency sometimes to take them for granted.
This should not be so as neglecting them can be costly for any organisation.
For example, the other public sees every organisation through its employees.
The way a receptionist for instance treats customers may cause them to continue to have favourable image and patronage of your organisation.
Non-traditional publics on the other hand consists of groups that are presently not familiar with your organisation or not relevant to the organisations business or organizational plans and as such the organisation does not have long-term on going relationship with them.
Like all potential or prospective groups, the organisations must include them in their public relations efforts.
Before the 1990s, oil companies operating in the Niger-Delta and Ogoni Land did not pay much attention to the environmental pressure groups outside the traditional rulers and civic leaders.
However, with the escalation of the activities of the Movement for the Emancipation of Ogoni People (MOSOP) following their declaration of Ogoni Bill of Rights in 1990, MOSOP became an important publics that Shell, the oil giant has to deal with.
47 Primary and Secondary Publics Every organisation has to prioritize its publics into primary and secondary publics, depending on the extent to which they affect the pursuit of the goals of the organisation.
Primary publics can be classified into such groups as employees, the immediate community, the governments at all levels, the mass media, financial institutions, suppliers and dealers, regulatory agencies like NAFDAC (for organisations in the food, beverages and cosmetics industries), etc.
The purpose of identifying your primary publics is that substantial resources and public relations efforts must continually be directed to them as they are of great importance to the success or failure of the organisation.
While attention is paid to primary publics, the secondary publics should not be completely neglected.
Because the resources of an organisation is limited, many organisations devote their attention to building and maintaining relationships with primary publics, the long term interests of the organisation demand that secondary publics should not be completely neglected.
Internal and External Publics Internal publics exist within the organisation while external publics are those outside the organisation.
For a health institution like a teaching hospital some of its internal publics include doctors, nurses, para-medical staff doctors and nurses in training resident doctors, academic staff, non-academic staff, etc while external publics include the Nigerian Medical and Dental Council, Ministry of Education, Patients and relatives of patients, blood donors, providers of municipal services like water and electricity, donor agencies (national and international) etc.
Local and international Publics Local or domestics publics are those within the country while international publics are those outside the country’s borders.
With the rise in the number of international companies that carry out activities in several countries, the international publics are now an important component of public relation targets.
With the rapid increase in technological developments in communication, the world has shrunk to what has now been referred to a global village, global sitting room, global bedroom.
The implication of this developments for companies and organisations is the issues that were regarded as local or domestic ones, have now assumed international dimension as the mass media bring the events to the attention of everyone, policy-makers and opinion leaders alike no matter wherever they are.
This has helped build international public opinion on issues hitherto regarded as domestic.
The internationalization of the Ogoni issue and the bad publicity that 48 Shell suffered as a result of the execution of the Ogoni environmental activists, Ken Saro-Wiwa is a case in point.
Grunig (1992) has further described four types of publics as: 1.
All-issue publics – Groups who are aware and active on all issues in the political and social environment.
2.
Apathetic publics – These are groups that are inattentive and inactive on all issues.
3.
Single-issue publics – They are active on one or a limited number of related issues (like anti-abortion).
4.
Hot issue publics – They are active after media expose almost everyone and the issues becomes the topic of widespread social conversation.
It is important to identify the publics of any organisation.
The range of potential publics for an organisation could consist of some of the following: • Employees and potential recruits • Customers; existing, past and potential • Traders and distributors/retailers • Trade unions • Professional associations • Community neighbors • Opinion leaders • Mass media – national and local • Government – federal, state and local • Governmental bodies (NYSC, FRSC, NDLEA, CBN, NDIC) • Pressure groups • Research bodies and policy making units • Financial publics • Shareholders • Banks/finance companies • Stock exchange/stock brokers The task of the public relations practitioners is to identify the most relevant publics at any particular time and counsel management about which should receive priority status.
The goal is to target the identified publics for effective communication which will sustain the organisation’s reputation.
Equally, the task of the PR practitioner is to identify, contact the relevant target publics and convince them of the merits of particular arguments to support specific 49 issues, or to accept and Identifying the relevant public is essential in PR because communications directed at wrong set of publics is a waste of resources organisation’s proposal to resolve the problem or adopt the ideas advocated.
The key publics of an institution like Lagos University Teaching Hospital (LUTH) could consist of Medical staff of all categories (cid:1) Other employees (cid:1) Patients (outpatients, admitted patients) (cid:1) Medical students (cid:1) University Authority (cid:1) Suppliers/contractors – Food and drug contractors (cid:1) Pharmaceutical companies (cid:1) The Federal Government (cid:1) Nigeria Medical Association/Nurses Association (cid:1) The Lagos State Government (cid:1) Media Houses (cid:1) Blood Donors (cid:1) Philanthropists/Alumni (cid:1) Banks (cid:1) PHCN (cid:1) Telecommunication companies (cid:1) Donor Agencies (Local Foreign) 3.2 Public Relations and the Public Image In public relations, when we talk about images, we mean a correct impression.
According to Frank Jefkins, in public relations there can be different kings of images.
The Mirror Image is how an organisation sees itself The Current Image is how others see the company or organisation The Wish Image is how the company would like to see itself The Optimum Image is the possible one that can be achieved bearing in mind the competition from other claims on the public attention and interest.
A Multiple Image occurs when different representatives of an organisation e.g.
salesman, each giving a different and perhaps a personal images of the organisation.
It is usually pertinent in public relations to undertake an image survey to discover the nature of the current image.
50 Advertising will set out to establish a particular images – a distinctive image that may not be the complete picture – which identifies the product or service as being, say, the cheapest, strongest, most reliable, most exclusive or whatever may be the most advantageous and sales promoting characteristics.
While it is not the function of public relations to persuade, public relations is concerned with image making which is to establish correct impressions of an organisations, it policy, product or service.
Image advertising is therefore very often in the interests of the consumer for it positions the product in the market.
There is no point in marketing a product, which no one understands or about which people are skeptical, apathetic, prejudiced or hostile.
This could lead to grossly wasteful expenditure on unsuccessful advertising.
People tend to like the things they know and understand best, therefore people are more likely to buy the known than the unknown.
We are frequently confronted with expression such as image – making, polishing, tarnished images and creating favourable images.
Correct image is a reflection of correct behaviour.
It is impossible to polish a tarnished image.
The biggest problem in image making is that there are limitations on both output and input of information upon which we form our images or impressions.
Self Assessment Exercises List the publics of two commercial organisation and two non-commercial institutions known to you in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Publics are important because they are the target of all public relations activities and attempts must be made to properly identity our relevant public as this is crucial to the success of any PR activity that we intend to undertake.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we stated that there are various public which include internal and external publics, latent publics, aware publics and active publics.
Others include primary and secondary publics, traditional and non-traditional publics as well as local and international publics.
The type of business an organisation undertakes and the goals and objectives of the organisation would largely determine the kind of public it has.
We observed that identifying the relevant public will greatly achieve effectiveness of the PR programmes as messages directed to a wrong public will amount to a waste of valuable resources.
51 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Why is it necessary for a public relations practitioner to identify the relevant publics when planning a PR programme?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cutlip, S.M, Centre, A.H and Broom, G.M (1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
Grunig, J.E, ed.
(1992).
“Strategic Management, Publics and Issues” in Excellence in Public Relations and Communications Management.
Hilsdole, N.J. Lawrence Erbaum Associates Publishers.
Grunig, J.E and Hunt T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Jefkins, Frank (1971).
Introduction to Public Relations.
London: Heinemann Publishers.
Post, J.E, Lawrence, AT, and Weber J.
(1999).
Business and Society Corporate Strategy, Public Policy Ethics.
9th ed.
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
52 MODULE 2: EVOLUTION AND PROCESS OF PUBLIC RELATI0NS Unit 1 Historical origins and pioneers of public relations Unit 2 History and Development of Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 3 Media and tools of public relations Unit 4 Research in public relations Unit 5 Organisation of public relations functions UNIT 1: HISTORICAL ORIGINS AND PIONEERS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Origins of public relations 3.2 Factors that have contributed to development of modern public relations 3.3 Pioneers of public relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION History enables us to know where we are coming from so that we can have a good understanding of where we are and a guide for the future.
In this unit, we shall take a look at the development of public relations at the global level.
Studying how Public Relations evolved will help you understand its place and purpose in society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Explain how public relations evolved from its earliest origins 53 (cid:1) Describes the pioneering role of the fathers of modern public relations like Ivy Lee, Edward Bernays, Rex Harlow in the growth of public relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Origins of Public Relations The practice of public relations has been on since the dawn of recorded history.
According to Patrick Jackson, public relations evolved from the basic need to build and improve human relationships which existed immediately God created Adam and Eve.
Public relations is essential to human existence and communal living.
Although modern public relations evolved in the 20th century it has ancient roots.
In virtually every great society through history, the leaders understood the importance of influencing public opinion through persuasion.
Seitel (2001) recalls that archeologists found a farm bulletin in Iraq that told farmers of 1800 B.C.
the latest techniques of harvesting, sowing and irrigating.
The aim of the persuasion was that the more food farmers grew, the better the citizenry are and the wealthier the country became.
This was planned persuasion to reach a specific public for a particular purpose, in other words, public relations.
As Edward Bernays has observed, ‘the three main elements of public relations which are informing people, persuading people and integrating people with people are practically as old as society.
The force of public relations was visible in ancient Rome.
This can be deduced from the common phrase, Vox Populi, Vox Dei (the voice of the people is the voice of God).
Julius Caesar, one of the greatest of the Roman emperors, is said to be a particularly master in the persuasive technique.
When faced with an upcoming battle, Caesar would rally public support through assorted publications and staged events (typical of modern public relations techniques).
In ancient Greece, a high premium was placed on communication skills.
The best speakers were generally elected to leadership positions.
Greek politicians enlisted the aid of sophists (individuals with rhetorical prowess) to help fight verbal wars.
This can be likened to the lobbyists of today who attempt to influence legislation through effective communication techniques.
Cutlip, Centre and Broom state that rudimentary elements of public relations appear in descriptions of the king’s spies in India.
Apart from espionage the duties of the Spies included keeping the king in touch with public opinion, championing the king in public and spreading rumours favourable to the government.
Equally, public relations was used many centuries ago in England where the kings maintained Lords Chancellor as “keepers of the king’s conscience”, as there was an acknowledge need for a third party to facilitate communication and adjustment between the government and the people.
54 .
The spread of Christianity in the middle ages could be linkened to the use of public relations in modern times.
Under the leadership of Pope Gregory XV, the Catholic Church established a college of propaganda to help propagate the faith.
The committee of cardinals known as Congregation de Propaganda Fide (the congregation for the propagation of faith).
The church simply wanted to inform the public about the advantages of Catholicism.
This was the origin of propaganda and it has been suggested that the roots of public relations lie in the development of propaganda.
Efforts to communicate with the force of public opinion go back to antiquity, only the tools, degree of specialization breadth of knowledge, and intensity of effort are relatively new.
In the words of Cutlip, Centre and Broom public relations has existed since the drawn of mankind.
From crude methods in primitive society, PR has followed trends in civilization advancement in culture has resulted in more sophisticated method of PR.
3.2 Factors that have contributed to the development of modern public relations.
Attempt a write up on how public relations has evolved over the ages several factors contributed to the development of modern public relations.
Starting with the United States, the American Revolution and the civil war and the transition from an agricultural to an industrial society have close links with the development of modern public relations.
As Cutlip Centre and Broom have observed, today’s patterns of public relations practice were shaped by innovations in mobilizing public opinion developed by Adams and his fellow revolutionaries.
The industrial revolution and its attendant changes in social relations, created challenges in the relationship between businesses, government and the people.
The industrial revolution brought about the birth of mass media and modern public relations which were natural outgrowths of the monumental changes in that era.
Through the use of mass media governments and organisation were able to communicate with relevant publics (groups) essential to their success.
Seitel (2001) has observed that the confluence of four factors aid the development of modern public relations.
Let us examine these factors in detail.
The Growth of Large Institutions The industrial revolution resulted in the emergence of big companies.
Massive developments in industry, rail-roads and utilities in America’s post-civil war led to the rise of powerful monopolies the concentration of wealth and power and roughshod tactics of the robber barons brought a wave of protests and reforms in the 1900s.
Contemporary public relations emerged out of the melee of the opposing 55 forces in this period of America’s growth.
Following the brutal massacre of protesting workers of the Carnegie-Frick Steel Company Plant in Pennsylvania in 1892 and its attendant aftermath, industry owners began to realize that for continued success, they have to curt favourable public opinion, both among their workers and the general public.
According to Cutlip, Centre and Broom, “much of public relations history is woven into the unending struggle between employer and employees.
There was the need to counter the activities of the crusading, “muck racking journalists” who made it as national duty to expose the exploitation and scandalous business activities of the robber barons.
As Reqier observed, muckraking was the inevitable result of decades of indifference to the allegations and immoralities attendant upon the industrial development of America.
Business of every size came to recognize that aggressive communication of corporate products and positions can help win public receptivity and support and ward off government intrusion.
Change, conflict and confrontation among interest groups in society.
Disenchantment with big institutions peaked in the 1960’s.
It has been said that the conflict during this period between private economic institutions, especially large corporations and various disenfranchised elements of society arose from long- standing grievances.
One commentator had suggested that “their rebellion was born out of the desperation of those who has nothing to lose”.
Social activists of every kind began to challenge the legitimacy of large institutions.
It was also the period when women began to mobilize for equal rights in the workplace and elsewhere.
Ralph Nader’s consumerist movement was also active during this period.
These conflicts and attendant changes meant that large institutions would desperately need professional communication help.
Heightened Public Awareness The government regulatory interventions in the form of affirmative action forced business organizations to contribute to charities.
In consequence, managers began to consider community relations a first-line responsibility.
The policy of confrontation was abandoned by business corporations in favour of a policy of compromise and conciliation.
A new policy of social responsibility evolved as corporations came to realize that their reputations are a valuable asset to be protected, conserved, defended, nurtured and enhanced at all times.
Global Expansion of Democracy With the expansion of democracy worldwide, there was need for effective communication with the activities of civil rights groups worldwide like the Human 56 Rights Watch in defence of the hitherto marginalized the public relations challenge has grown in intensity.
As a result of the increasing importance of persuasion and consensus in the era of globalization public relations became an integral part of the democratic process.
Growth of the Internet and the World Wide Web The technological innovations and revolution in communication has contributed to the growth of public relations.
The advent of radio and television in the first half of the 20th century revolutionized communication and social interactions.
Revolutions in satellite and computer technology in the later part of the 20th century has changed the way people communicate and the emergence of the internet and world wide web have radically intensified the spread of communication even further.
The impact of the web on public relations practice has been phenomenal.
E-Mail now dominates internal communications high-tech public relations firms is now a common phenomenon to meet the challenge of communicating with the diverse publics.
The technological revolutions and innovations in communication has contributed to the growth in social advocacy.
Civil rights groups, pressure groups, and other forms of advocacy for rights of the vulnerable members of society and minority groups have led to an increase in the use of public relations.
3.3 Pioneers of Public Relations As we discuss the growth of public relations at the global level, it is necessary to examine the early pioneers who played prominent roles in its development.
We shall look at three important personalities whose pioneering roles contributed significantly to the growth of public relations.
Ivy Ledbetter Lee Historians of the evolution of public relations have recognized Lee as one of the most famous of the early public relations pioneers.
Lee is recognized for the major role he played in the development of the profession.
A native of Georgia and Princeton graduate, Lee was initially a reporter covering the business world.
In 1903, he quit his job as a reporter to work in the campaign of Seth Law for Mayor of New York and this led a job in the press Bureau of the Democratic National Committee during the 1904 presidential campaign.
Lee recognized that good corporate performance was the basis of good publicity.
He advocated open and honest communication between an organisation and its clients.
Lee firmly believed that the only way business could answer its critics convincingly was to present its side honestly, accurately and forcefully.
57  [W[ hen Lee was hired by the anthracite coal industry in 1906, he issued a Declaration of Principles to newspaper editors.
This is not a secret press bureau.
All our work is done in the open.
We aim to supply news.
This is not an advertising agency; if you think any of our matter ought properly to go to your business office, do not use it.
Our matter is accurate.
Further details on any subject treated will be supplied promptly, and any editor will be assisted most cheerfully in verifying any statement of fact… In brief, our plan is frankly and openly on behalf of business concerns and public institutions, to supply to the press and public of the United States prompt and accurate information concerning subjects which are of value and interest.
Lee worked for two major clients: John D. Rockefeller and the Pennsylvania railroad.
Lee gave the policies of Rockefeller a public hearing.
He tried to humanize them that the Rockefeller family came to be known as the nation’s finest example of philanthropy.
As Seitel (2001) has observed, today’s billionaires, from Bill Gates to Warren Buffet and Ted Truner have attempted to emulate the Rockefellers in terms of generosity.
For Lee, the key to business acceptance and understanding was that the public be informed not be fooled.
Lee was credited to have given public relations credibility by his emphasis on ethical conduct and openness and thus helped raise the profession in its infancy.
However, there were later criticisms that Lee did not maintain the ethical conduct he prescribed for others when he accepted to work for a German Trust which turned out to be an agent for the policies of Adolf Hitler who restricted religious and press freedoms.
Lee was branded a “traitor’ for his involvement with the Dye Trust’ by members of Congress.
Despite his unfortunate involvement with the Dye Trust which earned him criticisms, Ivy Lee is recognized as the individual who brought honesty and candour to public relations.
Lee more than anyone before him, transformed public relations from a questionable field into a professional discipline designed to win public confidence and trust through communications based on openness and truth.
One of his greatest legacies is that Lee contributed many of the techniques and principles that practitioners follow today.
He was among the first to realize the fallacy of publicity unsupported by goods works and to reason that performance 58 determines the publicity a client gets.
He propelled the growth of publicity departments and trained publicity advisers in many institutions.
Edward L. Bernays (1891-1995) Bernays was an author, educator and public relations pioneer He started his wok I public relations in 1913.
Prior to World War I, Bernays had worked as a press agent.
While he worked for the creed committee during the war, Bernays envisioned the possibility of making a life’s work of what he called “engineering of public consent”.
He coined the term, public opinion counsel in crystallizing public opinion, the first book on public relations in 1923.
He broke more new ground in the same year when he taught the first public relations course at New York University.
Bernays published two other books on public relations; Propaganda (1928) and Public Relations (1952).
Bernays claimed that he invented the phrase Public Relations Counsel because of the negative connotations attached to such terms as propaganda, publicist and press agent because he wanted something broader than publicity and press agent.
In his words, “I wanted to direct the actions of a client in desired publicity.
Bernays married Doris E. Fleischman in 1922.
Together, they ran their firm, Edward L. Bernays, Counsel on Public Relations until formally retiring from active practice in 1962.
They counseled major corporations, government agencies and U.S. presidents from Calvin Coolidge through Dwight Eisenhower together with his wife Doris, they coined the phrase I counsel on public relations.
In his words, we recognized that all actions of a client that impinged on the public needed counsel.
Bernays was also indirectly responsible for encouraging the emergence of women in the field of public relations.
Edward Bernays has been referred as the father of Spin by his biographer Larry Tye (1998).
Bernays had his critics also.
He has been criticized as encouraging smoking by women who were seeking to advance feminism.
He died in 1995 at the age of 104 Life’s magazine in 1990 included him in the 100 most important Americans of the 20th century.
Rex F. Harlow Rex F. Harlow began a lifetime carrier in public relations in 1912 in Oklahoma city when he was hired by an elder brother to promote Harlow’s weekly.
Harlow’s career spanned the evolution of public relations to its maturity in the 1980’s and helped to shape today’s practices.
In 1939, Harlow founded the American Council on Public Relations (ACPR) while teaching public relation courses at Stanford University.
He also started the Public 59 Relations journal.
The journal is today published by the Public Relations society of America (PRSA) Harlow contributed immensely in advancing public relations education and practice and professional associations.
He died on April 16, 1993 at the age of 100 years.
4.0 CONCLUSION The field of public relations, like other professions and fields, has had a chiquered history as a look at the literature on the growth and development of public relations reveals.
Various pioneers have contributed to the growth of the profession.
We have tried to highlight their contributions in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taken a look at how public relations began.
We saw that public relations has grown with human development we noted the role of the Romans, and Greeks as well as the church in contributing to the development of public relations.
We noted also certain factors that contributed to the development of modern public relations.
We also considered the contribution of ivy Ledbetter Lee, Edward L. Bernays and Rex Harlow, to some of the pioneers to the growth of public relations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the social and economic factors that influenced the spread of modern public relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cutlip, S.M, Centre, A.H and Broom, G.M.
(1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliff N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Daramola, A.C (2003).
Fundamentals of Professional Public Relations A Global Overview.
Lagos, Certified Marketing Communications Institute of Nigeria (CMCIN).
Harlow, Rex (1981).
“A Public Relations Historical recalls the First Days”.
Public Relations Review (Summer) 39-40.
Hiebert, Ray, Elden (1966).
Courtier to the Crowd: The Story of Ivy L. Lee and the Development of Public Relations.
Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall.
60 Tye, Larry (1998).
The Father of Spin: Edward Bernays and The Birth of Public Relations.
New York: Crown Publishers 61 UNIT 2: HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Development of public relations in Nigeria 3.1.1 Role of government 3.1.2 Corporations and Agencies 3.1.3 Role of the private sector 3.1.4 Role of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations 3.1.5 Role of Consultancy Firms 3.2 Achievements of public relations in Nigeria 3.3 Challenges of public relations in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the preceding unit, we took a look at the historical development of public relations on a global level.
Nigeria is not insulated from developments in other parts of the world.
We shall therefore examine how the profession has evolved in Nigeria as well as the roles or key players in its evolution.
We shall also examine the achievements of public relations in the country as well as the challenges facing it as a fledging profession.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Narrate the history of the development of public relations in Nigeria (cid:1) Enumerate the achievements of public relations in the Nigerian environment (cid:1) Identify the major challenges public relations face in Nigeria.
62 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Development of Public Relations in Nigeria Public relations has been in existence in Nigeria since the creation of man.
It was practiced in rudimentary forms by traditional rulers through town criers who disseminated information from the traditional authority to the people.
Even during the colonial era, the colonial government resorted to liaising with traditional rulers so as to maintain touch with the people.
As Daramola (2003) has suggested, the indirect rule system employed by the colonial government in Nigeria was a crude or primitive form of public relations practice.
Formal public relations was said to have been introduced in Nigeria in 1924 when Major Lawrence Thorp planned and staged Nigeria’s exhibition during the Empire day.
He was said to have used propaganda and information to publicize Nigeria’s involvement as well as mobilize Londoners to visit its stand.
3.1.1The Role of Government in Development of PR in Nigeria The development of public relations practice in Nigeria originated from the government.
As a result of the unpopularity of government policies and measures (conscription, taxation, scarcity of essential goods, etc) and growing tension among the populace, the British colonial government felt the need for an organ to create a favourable local image for its war efforts.
During the colonial period, a lot of government activities were shrouded in secrecy, which made the words and actions of the government very suspect.
Consequently, it established the first information office in Lagos in1942 with the aim of disseminating war news in which many Nigerian service man were involved.
As a result, the colonial government thought it necessary to establish its own public relations.
It started with the use of publicity as a channel to mobilize the Nigerian soldiers who participated in the war as well as their relations and it was known as the War Information Office.
In 1944, the Information Office was renamed Public Relations Office under the leadership of Mr. D.C. Fletcher.
In 1947, the Public Relations Office was renamed Public Relations Department under the Leadership of Mr. Harold Cooper.
The was after the introduction of the Richards Constitution in 1947 and the establishment of the Public Relations Department reflected an expansion in the scope of government public relations efforts.
The Public Relation Department introduced regular press briefings and issued news releases frequently.
It also published magazines such as the Nigerian Review, etc.
The public relations department established branch offices in the regional capitals of Ibadan, Kaduna, and Enugu in line with the regional set-up brought about by the Richards constitution.
The aim of the Public Relations Department was to use publicity as a vehicle for reaching the people.
During this period, it recruited 63 Nigerians (most of whom were former journalists) as publicity officers.
They included Cyprian Ekwensi, Peter Enahoro, Ayo Lijadu, Dr Sam Epelle among other notable figures.
In 1954, the Public Relations Department metamorphosed into the Nigerian Information Service and this was the predecessor of the present day Ministry of Information.
3.1.2 Role of Statutory Corporations and Agencies The government led the way in setting up Public Relations practice in Nigeria.
This was closely followed by statutory corporations and Agencies, The Electricity Corporation of Nigeria (ECN) now Power Holding Company of Nigeria (PHCN) was one of the first government parastatals and agencies to establish a public relations unit when in 1950 it established a Public Relations Department.
The Nigerian Railway Corporation set up a Public Relations Department with late Dr. Samuel Epelle as the Public Relations Officer.
Other government institutions that contributed to the development of public relations in Nigeria included the University College Hospital, Ibadan (1956) with Mr. Scott Emuakpor as the first PRO, the Customs and Excise (1960) with Mr. Alex Akinyele as the PRO.
3.1.3 Role of the Private Sector Within the private sector, the United Africa Company (UAC) played the pioneering role in establishing a Public Relations Department.
In 1949, it created the first information office in a private business in Nigeria.
At its inception it was headed by Mr. Charles Newman, and the office supplied company news to produce buyers and merchants.
The department was located at the Old Niger House, Marina Lagos, and from there, it spread out to other branches of the company at Kaduna and Enugu.
As Victoria Ajala (1993) has observed the contributions of UAC to the growth of public relations is reflected in the fact that most of the public relations gurus in Nigeria and who can be referred to as the foundation members of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations once worked for UAC.
Shell Petroleum Development Company (SPDC) followed suit by creating a public relations department to foster and sustain positive and cordial relationships with all the institutions, host communities the media and other publics.
The name of the department was later changed to Public Affairs.
Although it started public relations activities in the 1940’s it was in 1969 that it set up a full-fledged public relations department.
The pioneering efforts of these private sector organisations and the achievements they recorded, spurred other private institutions like banks, industries and multinational companies to join the trend in setting up in-house public relations units.
64 Many of these organisations have been active in executing corporate social responsibility programs such as award of scholarships to students, development projects such as agriculture, construction of schools, community halls, hospitals and water supplies The Guinness eye clinic in Kaduna is a case in point.
Some private sector organisations have actively sponsored sports activities such as the Mobil Track and Field events, etc.
The popularity and importance of public relations in Nigeria can be testified to by the fact that most major corporate bodies in the country have a public relations department, though they sometimes make use of public relations consulting firms when the need arises or for specialist functions.
3.1.4 Role of Nigerians Institute of Public Relations The enviable position public relations has attained in Nigeria today can be ascribed to the efforts of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations.
To help create ethical standards in the fledging profession Dr Samuel Epelle, one-time Director of Information and a few others who included Tonye Willie-Harry, Ikhaz Yakubu, H.K Offonry and Bob Ogbuagu founded the Public Relations Association of Nigeria (PRAN).
With the formation of PRAN, public relations developed and assumed professional status.
After PRAN was launched in Lagos in 1963, it gradually spread to the regional headquarters, beginning with Enugu and Port Harcourt.
The effort started by Dr. Sam Epelle in 1961 when he initiated the formation of a body that would “professionally think, plan, practice and live Public Relations in Nigeria” finally bore fruit with Sam Epelle as the Cordinator of PRAN.
As the number of practitioners increased and the their objectives and functions became under, PRAN wider Epelle developed into the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations, again with Dr. Sam Epelle as the first president.
From 1963 to date, the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations has been headed by the following notable public relations practitioners.
1963 – 1968 - Dr. Samuel Epelle 1968 – 1972 - Chief Henry Kanu Offonry 1972 – 1976 - Mr. Tonye Wllie-Harry 1976 – 1980 - Mr. Ikhaz Yakubu 1980 – 1984 - Chief Bob Ogbuagu 1984 – 1988 - Chief Alex Akinyele 1988 – 1993 - Mazi Mike Okereke 1993 – 1998 - Mr. Sabo Mohammed 1998 – 2001 - Chief Ajibade Oyekan 2001 – 2005 - Mr Senibo Bobo Safiri Brown 2005 – Date - Professor Ikechukwu Nwosu 65 3.1.5 Role of Consultancy Firms A discussion of the history of public relations in Nigeria cannot be complete without looking at the development of PR consultancy Firms.
Public Relations Consultancy practice is young in the country.
According to Toye Ogunmorin, public relations consultancy was pioneered in Nigeria in the late sixties and early seventies.
According to him, the following practiced public relations consultancy on individual basis - late Ebun Adesioye, Otunba Kunle Ojora, Peter Hospidales, Chief Dotun Okunabjo, Dr. Clarkson Majomi, Chief Gab Fagbure and Mr. Olu Ademulegun.
In 1983, four practitioners got gother to form the nucleus of the Public Relations Consultants Associations of Nigeria (PRCAN).
The consultancy firms with their chief executives officers who pioneered the PRCAN included: 1.
Bloomed Public Relations Practitioners - Mr Lanre Oginni 2.
Good Contact Public Relations Services - Mr Kunle Oyalowo 3.
Philips Johnson and Associates - Mr. Olu Johnson 4.
Progan Promotions - Mr. Toye Ogunmorin Later, some consultancy firms all over the country joined the association.
PRCAN was launched on 30th May, 1984, at the Nigerian Institute of International Affairs, Victoria Island Lagos, by the then Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters, Bbrigadier Tunde Idiagbon.
PRCAN has continued to upgrade the standards of public relations practice among members through lecturers publications and providing facilities for professional associations.
At present, the association publishes a journal, PR Review aimed at raising PR consultancy practice standards and discipline among members in line with global trends.
PRCAN is supported by Bye-Law No.
3 1993 of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations.
The primary objective of PRCAN is the promotion of professional reputation management in Nigeria within the public and private sectors.
It also maintains professional standards and discipline among members through the enforcement of the code of Professional Conduct.
As at 2006, PRCAN had more than 20 registered corporate members.
3.2 Achievement of Public Relations in Nigeria The achievements of public relations in Nigeria cannot be divorced from the role of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR) in the practice of public relations in the country.
66 The achievements can be discussed under the following parameters 1.
Professionalism: Within a few decades of its existence, the NIPR has raised the profession to enviable heights.
The perception of public relations has continued to improve, and the public and private organisation (including the uniformed services) have come to recognize the importance of public relations in the success of their organisations.
2.
Education and Training: The MPR has started a globally recognized examination in public relations.
This has helped to improve the standards of public relations practitioners as well as new entrants into the profession.
Presently, NIPR runs a masters degree programme in public relations in conjunction with the University of Nigeria Enugu Campus.
This has helped to raise the standards of practitioners and help to eliminate quacks from the profession.
3.
Legal Recognition: With the promulgation of Decree No.
16 of 1990 which empowers the institute to determine the standards of knowledge and skills to be attained by persons seeking to become registered members of the public relations profession, public relations have been given legal recognition and mandate to regulate the conduct of its members; and enforce the ethics of the professions.
4.
There has been greater recognition by the governments of various levels on the importance of their image and reputation management.
Since the days of the second republic under the leadership of President Shehu Shagari, the Federal Ministry of Information has been in the vanguard in recruiting well trained practitioners and posting them to various ministries and departments.
As at date, the highest concentrations of practitioners are employed by the federal, state and local governments in the country.
As noted earlier, the Ministry of Defence the police and other paramilitary agencies new accord public relations a strategic place in their organisation set-up.
5.
Nigerian public relations practitioner are recognized world-wide and have been playing prominent roles in the Federation of African Public Relations Practitioners (FAPRA) and hosted the 1st Commonwealth Public Relations Conference which brought together international experts to brainstorm on the topic “The World in Transition.
With these developments, one can safely say that public relations has come of age in Nigeria and the sky is the limit.
It has earned its motto: Professionalism and Excellence.
3.3 Challenges and Constraints of Public Relations in Nigeria In spite of the achievements enumerated above, it should be noted that there are many challenges and constraints that still confront the profession of public relations and these continue to inhibit its growth and development and public acceptance.
67 Firstly, in spite of the efforts of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations to screen the members and calibers of practitioners, many unqualified and experienced persons still parade themselves as public relations practitioners.
Even in organizations, the tendency to assign officers with ill-defined duties to public relation functions is still common place.
This has continued to have adverse effects on the public perception of qualified professionals as the activities of there “Jack of all trades” lower the image of the profession.
Secondly, many organisations do not deem it fit to place their public relations executives on the management board of the organisation where they should be strategically placed to counsel the organisations in the polices and programmes of the organisation as it affects their publics.
The implication is that most decisions are taken without the knowledge and contribution of their public relations executives who are forced to implement these decisions.
Invariably they are blamed when such policies fail or run into trembled waters.
Government agencies are very much guilty of this.
In addition the Nigerian government places greater reliance on foreign public relations consultants at the expense of local ones.
Each time the Nigerian government, be it civilian or military has been faced with one crisis or image problem, it has usually engaged a foreign PR consultant.
The government still thinks of public relations in terms of getting advertorials in foreign media especially prestigious global media such as the Cable News Network (CNN).
This practice robs off on local PR practitioners who are denied of opportunities to utilize their skills and knowledge of the local environment to promote the image of the country, not to mention the financial losses involved.
This lack of confidence in local talents is also being demonstrated by big multi-nationals who also go for foreigners when their management needs image laundering.
Corporate bodies in Nigeria have not always lived up to their social responsibility with regard to their host communities, especially in the oil producing communities.
Various government officials have from time to time blamed the incessant unrest and youth restiveness in Nigeria’s oil rich Delta region on the insensitivity of oil producing companies.
Memorandum of understanding freely entered into with host communities are haphazardly implemented or ignored until the communities rise up in violent confrontation before basic issues are resolved.
This attitude tends to portray public relations in bad light or at worst not contributing to organizational stability.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, we could say that the practice of public relations has recorded some enviable leaps in its evolution in Nigeria, more needs to be done by all the 68 stakeholders to give it the pride of place.
The profession needs to build on its past achievements if it is to contribute meaningful to the social, political and economic development of the country.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has examined the history and development of public relations in Nigeria.
We noted the roles played by the government private sector corporations and agencies the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations as well as PR consultancy firms in this evolution.
We also examined the achievements of public relations.
The challenges and constraints inhibiting the development of the profession were highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the roles played by the government and private sector organisations in the development of public relations in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajala, V.O.
(1993).
Public Relations In Search of Professional Excellence.
Ibadan: Afrika-Link Books.
Daramola, A.C. (2003).
Fundamentals of Professional Public Relations: A Global Overview.
Lagos: ICMCIN.
Eke, Benedict (1993).
“Government Public Relations”.
In 30 Years of Public Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nigerian Institute of Public Relations.
Ogunnorin, Toye (1993).
“Public Relations Consultancy Practice in Nigeria – The Future”?
In 30 Years of Public Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nigerian Institute of Public Relations.
Osuji, Chuks (1990).
Principles of Public Relations Practice (The Nigerian Approach).
Owerri: pinion Research and Communications Ltd. Oyekan, J.
(1993).
“NIPR 30 Years of Growth”.
In 30 Years of Public Relations in Nigeria.
Lagos: Nigerian Institute of Public Relations.
PR Review No.
3, 2004.
Lagos: Public Relations Consultants of Nigeria.
69 UNIT 3: MEDIA AND TOOLS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is a medium of public relations?
3.2 Media and tools employed in PR practice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Unlike advertising, public relations employs a wide range of media in communication with its publics, besides the mass media.
This is in recognition of the diverse functions and activities of public relations and publics it has to relate with.
Some media are appropriate to certain public relations activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Identify specific media used to communicate to specific publics (cid:1) Explain the uses of various tools of public relations 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is a medium of public relations?
The media of public relations are the tool which are available to the PR practitioner to reach their target publics with messages and information about their organisation in their day to day interactions with their these tools are used to achieve the desired mutual understanding.
The news media represented by newspapers, magazine, radio, television film, publications and the internet constitute the major medium used by public relations practitioners to communicate with their various publics.
However, in view of the diverse activities and functions of public relations practitioners use a wide variety of media in communicating with their various publics, besides the media of public relations are the tools which are available to the PR practitioner to reach their target 70 publics with messages and information about their organisation in their day to day interactions with them.
These tools are sued to achieve the desired mutual understanding.
3.2 Media and Tools employed in PR practice As stated earlier, the diverse nature of the activities and functions of public relations demands that appropriate media and tools be used to communicate to the relevant publics.
These consist of PR Marketing Media A variety of media is employed in public relations marketing, ranging from the following: (cid:1) The mass media – The mass media is used to reach various segments of the organisation’s public with messages about the product of the organisation, new products and product innovations, etc (cid:1) Publications – This consists of annual reports, brochures, articles, audio- visual materials, company news letters and magazines as well as documentary films.
(cid:1) Events – These includes news conferences, seminars, outings, exhibitions, plant tours, contests, competitions, anniversaries, sports, cultural events, etc.
(cid:1) News – news releases about products and services, editorial materials, sponsored feature articles, as well as new product or service information.
(cid:1) Speeches – Spokespersons, speaker’s bureau, reprint of previous speeches etc constitute a veritable medium to interact with an organisation’s publics.
(cid:1) Public service activities – organizations utilize opportunities to contribute money and time to charitable and good causes, such as participating in blood donation campaign organized by the Red Cross, Road Safety campaigns, etc.
(cid:1) Identity media – Organisations utilize visual identity media to communicate with their publics.
These include company’s logo, stationery (letter heads, envelopes, etc) brochures, business cards, sign poster, uniforms, buildings, etc.
Employee Relations Media As, in PR marketing a variety of media is used to create and maintain mutual relations between an organisation and its workers.
These include: (cid:1) Employee publications of various types 71 - House journals (both for internal and external circulation) - Annual report/newsletters - Employee policy manuals, guide books these are used to explain the policy guidelines which staffs are expected to conform to in their interaction with the organisation and its various stakeholders.
The guide books are used as a form of indoctrination to build loyalty and cohesion within the organisation.
(cid:1) Music (public address systems) and atmospheres.
Public address systems are useful in large organisations when the chief executives need to have direct interpersonal intercourse with staff to give them first hand explanations and to build morale necessary for productivity in the organisation.
(cid:1) Exhibitions (in house) (cid:1) Meetings, conferences, workshops, etc - Bulleting boards, suggestion boxes, information racks, pay inserts, etc.
These are used to pass information to the staff and obtain necessary feedback.
Suggestion boxes are used to encourage staff to contribute ideas for the running of the organisation.
- Service awards: They are used to reward staff for meritorious services rendered to the organisation and to encourage staff to emulate the awardees.
Long service awards, (10 years, 20 years, 25 years etc) are used to project the organisation as a stable place to work in and be recognized.
- Induction programmes: These are used to familiarize news staff with the orientation and cultures of the organisation.
Newcomers are introduced to the ways the organisation conducts its affairs so that they fuse into the organisation team spirit.
(cid:1) Management/employee committee: These meetings provide opportunity to listen to staff complaints and grievances as well as suggestions for future programmes.
It helps to reduce conflict and acts as a conflict resolution mechanisms.
(cid:1) Direct Mail” An important medium used to communicate to staff is the direct mail.
Messages from the Chief Executive Officer can be reproduced and mailed to each staff in a personal human tone.
This helps reduce the distance between the top management and the staff as well as provide opportunity to enlighten the staff on the policies and programmes of the organisation.
End of year greetings and felicitations to individual staff helps to build in them a sense of belonging, with the wide use of the internet facilities in organisation, electronic mail message (e-mail) has become an important facet of direct mail.
72 (cid:1) Pictures: Organisations use pictures of events in which the organization is involved to reach the staff with information on the goings on in the organisation.
These pictures are used to supplement text information.
Community Relations Media (cid:1) The press and mass media: These are used to pass information about the organisation to the general public as well as the position of the organisation on current issues, particularly environment.
Oil companies for example can use the mass media to explain its position on the youth restiveness on the Niger-Delta, the plans to reduce environmental pollution, amnesty plan for repentant militants as well as the company’s corporate social responsibility development programmees and projects to improve the standard of living of its host communities.
(cid:1) Open house, factory visits and tours: Organisations utilize houses and factory visits to familiarize their publics with the goings on in the organisation or institutions.
This helps to increase the knowledge of the public on the activities of the organizations and their positive impact on their lives.
(cid:1) Opinion leader meetings: These provide forum to interact with the leaders of the community who are expected to influence other members of the community in their attitude to the organisation.
(cid:1) Involvement of company’s employees in civic activities: Companies encourage their staff to participate in community development activities, contribute their expertise and experience in project execution and generally partake in socio-cultural activities.
This helps endear the organisation and its employees to the community as well as project them as socially responsible members of the community.
(cid:1) Publicity vans and photo exhibitions: These are used to mount publicity campaigns to promote the organisation’s activities and generally enlighten the community.
Film shows and photo exhibitions are particularly useful medium in community relations.
Social and Economic Projects Public relations as we noted earlier, consist of good deeds which are subsequently communicated to gain acceptance and approval.
Social and economic projects undertaken in communities have the capacity to win organisation enduring friendship.
Programmes such as award of scholarship to deserving indigenes, construction of schools roads civic centres, health centres, 73 sponsorship of cultural festivals, youth sports competition provision of water, etc are medium used in community relations to win the hearts of the community and show understanding and support to the organisation.
Supplier/Dealer Relations Media (cid:1) Visiting representatives: These are used to interact with dealers and suppliers, find out their problems, offer suggestions where necessary and generally build cordial relationships necessary for success of the organisation.
(cid:1) Open House between company and dealers/suppliers is used build rapport between these two critical publics.
The suppliers and dealers are taken through the processes and operations of the organisation to assure of the quality of the products they deal in or how the components they supply are utilized.
This interaction helps to solidify the relationship.
(cid:1) Correspondence: Organization employ various forms of correspondence to reach out to their dealers and suppliers to communicate new product lines or innovations, new distribution programmes as well as price changes and up- coming promotion activities and campaigns.
These correspondences are helpful in building dealer loyalty and cooperation from suppliers.
A letter of commendation from the Chief Executive of a company to the dealers goes to demonstrate the high regard and recognition that the organisation accords them.
Special events (dealers and suppliers awards) Organisation utilize the occasion of special events such as awards to outstanding dealers to show-case its business and reward dedicated and hard-working partners.
Awards to dealers usually has the effect of motivating other dealers to put more effort in promoting the organisation’s product and build mutually rewarding relationships.
Financial PR Media (cid:1) Corporate and institutional advertising: This medium is used to project the total image of the organisation among the general public.
Corporate advertising is utilized to explain the policies of the organisation, its future growth potentials and capability.
It is also used to show-case its achievements, explain its constraints and challenges and generally to court public understanding especially among the institutional regulators and the investing publics.
(cid:1) Facts behind the figures: This forum is used to present the organisation’s performance to the Stock Exchange, stock brokers; etc to highlight the salient 74 details of the organisation’s operating circumstances which brought about the increase or decrease in its performance during the financial year under review.
At this forum, the company is able to respond to the concerns of stock-brokers and other critical stakeholders whose activities impinge on its quotation at the stock exchange.
(cid:1) Annual General Meetings (AGM): This is the forum where the directors of the company meet and interact with the shareholders and present to them the results of the company’s operations in the preceding year.
A well attended and well managed AGM haw the capacity to generate good publicity for the company Annual General Meetings is also used to build loyalty among the stakeholders who are afforded an opportunity to comment and receive answers on any aspect of the company’s operations, especially as it affects the shareholders interests.
The publicity given to AGM’s goes a long way to project the organisation as a good place to invest and do business.
(cid:1) Annual Reports: Public quoted companies (Plc) are required by law to publish and circulate to their shareholders and the statutory regulatory authorities as well as tax authorities annual reports of their business activities.
Annual Reports are useful in analyzing how the organisation has employed its human and material resources to generate the revenue accruing to it, how it has made its obligations and generally how well the business is being run.
The level of disclosure and transparency as contained in the annual report goes a long way to win the sympathy and understanding of the organisation as an ongoing concern, responsible corporate citizen and reference point for its bankers, and investment analysts.
(cid:1) Press Luncheons: This forum is used to interact with business editors, economic and financial analysts who influence media coverage of the business press.
At press luncheons, the executives of the organisation who are usually for removed from the prying eyes of financial journalist have the opportunity to build bridges which can be useful in time of need.
(cid:1) Shareholders correspondence: Apart from the annual general meetings, shareholders have little opportunity to influence the direction of affairs in their companies.
Regular correspondence however can be handy to an organisation to keep in touch with its share holders: to exp-lain to them exceptional plans and progress of the organisation as well as events as they affect the organisation.
Regular correspondence contributes to build better understanding which is vital in their relationships.
(cid:1) The Mass Media: Finally, it is important to note that the mass media is indispensable in any communication programme that public relations 75 involves.
Through the mass media, an organisation gets access to all the critical publics discussed above.
Without the mass media communication efforts will at most secure limited publicity, or non at all.
In this modern day and age, the mass media plays a pivotal role in reaching virtually all the publics of an organization efficiently and at a lesser cost.
As we earlier stated, if public relations is seen as doing good works and getting recognition for it, the mass media is indispensable in publicizing our good deeds that can win us public acceptance.
Public Affairs and Government Liaison Media Lobbying – In the modern democratic dispensation, lobbying has become an accepted method of influencing legislative and executive officials.
Lobbying is employed by interest groups such as trade associations, trade groups, etc to push for favourable legislation or government intervention on certain issues.
For instance, the oil industry group regularly use public relations professionals to lobby members of the national assembly to vote against the Oil Industry Reform Bill some of whose provisions they see an constituting obstacles to genuine investment in the upstream sector of the oil industry.
Women and Child Rights support groups have regularly employed the medium of lobbying to fast track legislation on the Rights of the Child and other related matters.
Personal Visits Another medium employed in government affairs is personal visits.
Heads of organisation’s and institutions organize visits to important government functionaries like the President, Vice-President, Senate President, Speaker of the House of Representatives, State Governors, etc.
These high level personal visits afford the visitors the opportunity to interact with the officials at the highest level of government.
The opportunity is usually utilized to make requests for one matter or another or to reassure those in government of the continued support of their organizations.
This is no way modern business can survive without government support; or at least understanding.
The opportunity offered by personal visits can as well be used to create better understanding between the organizations and those in charge of the government affairs.
Business patronage, gifts, parties: An important medium of communicating with public officials is through some form of patronage.
Organisations can target government functionaries who they can support their projects.
From the Better Life Programme to Women and Youth Empowerment Foundation and to other projects embarked upon by wife of President and governors there are ample opportunities for companies to “buy in” into these programmes by supporting some aspects they 76 chose to identify with.
Such patronage has the effect of improving the image and reputation of the donors among the general public and the promoters of such projects.
Organisations use seasonal gifts such a Christmas hampers, Sallah rams, end of year bonuses, etc to show appreciation to staff, customers and friends of the organisation.
It is commonplace to give these seasonal gifts to government officials, legislators and other bureaucrats to create familiar relations between them and the organisation.
End of year parties are also used to bring staff and friends of the organisation together to socialize and build enduring relationships.
Public opinion campaign: Organisations can sponsor public opinion campaigns to present to the authorities the views of the public on a given issues.
Such campaigns are designed to involve the public to participate in the formulation of public policies.
It is hoped that the force of public opinion will make the government pursue certain policies or alter some it had earlier contemplated on.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, it should be noted that while the mass median is an important medium of communicating public relations messages and information, the diverse nature of public relations activities makes it necessary to employ a variety of media to reach the different public relations publics.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has examined the various media and tools used by public relations to communicate with their various publics.
It has noted the diversity of the media and tools which consists of communication and non-communication media.
The tools offer the public relations practitioner a wide choice of means to create and maintain mutual understanding between an organisation and its various publics.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate and discuss the media and tools used in public relations marketing and community relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cultip, S.M, Centre, A.H and Broom, G.M.
(994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Prentice Hall.
Black, Sam.
Practical Public Relations.
4th ed.
London: Pitman Publishing.
77  Daramola, A.C (2003).
Fundamental of Professional Public Relations A Global Overview.
Lagos: Certified Marketing Communications Institute of Nigeria.
Seitel, F.P.
(2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle Power, N.J: Prentice Hall.
78 UNIT 4: ORGANISATION OF PUBLIC RELATIONS FUNCTIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Setting up a Public Relations Department 3.1.1 Functions of a public relat6ions department 3.1.2 Advantages/disadvantages of internal public relations department 3.2 Public Relations consultancy 3.2.1 Organisation of PR consultancy 3.2.2 Advantages and disadvantages of a PR consultant 3.3 Budgeting in PR 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The practice of public relations is organized along two main structures the internal department and the external consultancy.
The choice of which mode to use is determined by the resources and size of the firm and the special needs it may have from time to time.
In this unit, we shall examine the advantages and disadvantages of each type.
Whatever the type chosen, the functions largely remain the same.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this you should be able to (cid:1) Explain the functions of a public relations department.
(cid:1) Distinguish the advantages and disadvantages of choosing an internal PR department as against an outside consultancy 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Setting up a Public Relation Department.
The practice of public relations has developed along two main lines.
Many industrial companies, trade and professional associations, governments at both federal, state and local level have set up public relations departments within their 79 organisations.
Others however prefer to use the services of public relations consultants.
Some, use a combination of the two.
The key functional areas of responsibility of a Public Relations department includes: External relations – This involves communicating with people outside the organisation including customers, dealers, suppliers and community leaders.
It includes arranging promotional activities like exhibitions, trade shows, conferences and tours lobbying government agencies and legislators as well as keeping organisation abreast of government regulations and legislation.
In hospitals and non-profit organisations, the PR function may include recruiting and scheduling volunteer workers.
Internal relations – This involves developing optimal relations with employees, managers, unions, shareholders and other interest groups.
Media relations – It is only through the mass media that communication with large groups of people outside the organisation is possible.
The press officer of an organisation responds to enquires and queries from the news media, arranges news conferences and also issues news releases.
The press officer also coaches executives for news interviews, and sometimes serve as the spokesperson of the organisation.
3.1.1 Functions of a Public Relations Department Six principle functions of a public relation department identified by Idemili (1990) are: 1.
Research An important function is the conducting of opinion surveys of the organisation’s various publics such as employees, shareholders, consumers, dealers, clients, distributors, suppliers and the community.
Opinion research enables an organisation to find out what the public really wants to know about it.
The public relations department also undertakes studies and political trends in the country and on the international scene as well as the effects of such trends on the organisation.
(This is known as issue management).
2.
Advising Management (Counselling) It is the responsibility of the organisation’s public relations department to interpret public opinion to the management and board of directors by gathering information about the attitude and opinions of the company’s various publics concerning its policies and practices.
It is the duty of the head of the public relations department to 80 advise the management and board of directors on public relations aspects of the policies and practices of the organisation.
3.
Planning It is the function of the public relations department to determine basic public relations policies, establish objectives and determine methods of communications, timing of programmes and budgets for all public relations programme.
All these activities fall under the planning function of the PR department.
4.
Providing Comprehensive Information Services The public relations department should be an information center for the organisation.
It should provide the public information about the organisation, its history, its achievements and its problems.
It should keep for reference, all official company publications, biographies and photographs of members of the board of directors, general managers, heads of departments and other principal functionaries of the organization.
5.
Production i.
Publicity: The public relations person ahs responsibility for planning, creating and placing publicity material, holding press functions, arranging press conferences for the chief executive, answering press acquires, distributing press releases contracting editors, and serving all departments with corporate publicity for newspapers, magazines and trade papers.
ii.
Pictures and slide films: The public relations department undertakes the production and distribution of public relations firms to further relations with employees, consumers, educators, shareholders, dealers and distributors.
iii.
Publication: It is the duty of the public relations department to produce and distribute all company publications such as house journals (internal and external, 3.1.2 Advantages of Internal PR Department As we noted earlier, the internal department is the most common structure for serving the public relations needs of organizations.
This arrangement has many advantages as identified by Cutlip, Centre & Broom which include: Team membership: It is the greatest advantage of the internal PR.
There is frequent contact between the public relations department and top management.
Confidence trust and support of management can result from this frequent contact and facilitate team, work with other departments 81 Knowledge of the organisation: As a member of the organisation, the internal practitioner has intimate current knowledge of his organisation he/she know the relationships among individuals and departments and can call on key people to make decisions.
The inside practitioner can offer needed advice and provide full range of services.
Economy: There is lower overhead costs and efficient integration in an organisation.
A full-time permanent staff is usually more cost effective than outside consultants.
Availability of staff practitioners: In emergencies or crisis situations, the staff is easily available for face to face meeting with other staff of the organisation.
The inside practitioners know the background and have credibility with the news media.
He understands the dangers of mishandling news, especially in crisis situation.
3.1.3 Disadvantages of Internal PR Department While the internal PR department has many advantages as enumerated above, it also has some disadvantages which includes:- Loss of Objectivity – Loyalty to the organisation can lead to loss of objectivity.
This is because the practitioner may unwittingly become part of the team and tend to be compromised in his views while trying to support the other members if staff.
Subservience – The inside practitioner may become a yes man or woman and may be diverted from goals, planning and strategy to run errands for others.
An inside practitioner may constantly walk the thin line of rendering professional service and rendering low-level support that is easily replaced.
Confused roles and mission – Being readily available can result in confused roles as practitioners who may be forced to stand in for the Chief Executive Officer or other senior management may find themselves playing roles not made for them with attendant public embarrassments Boredom – Involvement of routine activities with little or no change over time may result in boredom for the practitioner, which is not good for morale.
Self Assessment Exercise Briefly identity and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the internal public relations practitioner.
82 3.2 Organizations of Public Relations Consultancy Organizations that do not have in-house PR units usually engage the outside PR consultants.
External PR units can consists of the following: (cid:1) Freelance writers/consultants (cid:1) PR departments of advertising agents (cid:1) PR subsidiaries of advertising agents (cid:1) Independent PR consultants (cid:1) PR counselors.
The outside PR consultant not only fills the gap when an organisation does not have its own PR unit, the consultant can still be engaged for ad hoc work or for special services which would not justify expansion of the internal department.
These services might be the ones in which certain consultants specialized such as events organizing, financial PR, or advance PR for exhibitors.
In certain cases, pure consultancy or counseling may be required to advise an organisation from an unbiased standpoint.
Chester Burger has listed six reasons why organizations retain outside consultant, even though some have internal departments.
1.
Management has not previously conducted a formal public relations programme and lacks experience in organizing one.
2.
Headquarters may be located away from the communications and financial centers 3.
A firm maintains a wide range of up-to-date contacts.
4.
An outside firm can provides services of experienced executives who would be unwilling to move to other cities or whose salaries could not be afforded by a single organisation.
5.
An organisation with its own public relations department may be in need of highly specialized services that it cannot afford on a permanent basis.
6.
Crucial matters of overall outside policy dictate a need for the independent judgement of an outsider.
It may be useful to examine in some detail, the public relations services provided or available from outside PR consultant.
1.
Freelance Writers/Consultants This may consist of individuals or group of individuals who are skilled in producing PR features articles, skilled professionals who prefer to operate on their own and 83 prematurely retired well-known who want to continue practicing and can therefore offer the benefit of years of experiences.
They may operate from their own homes or do not possess the usual PR office equipment and facilities.
2.
PR Departments of Advertising Agencies This outside services can range from a small press office handling only product publicity to augment advertising campaigns to a large comprehensive PR departments like the agency set-up itself.
These departments enable the advertising agency to pass on the cost of PR services to the client instead of having to provide free PR services as part of the advertising.
3.
PR Departments of Advertising Agencies This outside services can range from a small press office handling only product publicity to augment advertising campaigns to a large comprehensive PR departments like the agency set-up itself.
These departments enable the advertising agency to pass on the cost of PR services to the client instead of having to provide free PR services as part of the advertising.
4.
PR Subsidiary of an Advertising Agency A PR subsidiary can operate like an independent consultancy except that the advertising agency provide it a source of useful business.
It ca and should service client’s independent of the Ad agency, although the very fact that it is owned by an advertising agency may limit the consultancy’s opportunities to gain independent business.
A big advantage of a PR subsidiary is that it can be departmentalized and staffed to undertake full range of PR activities.
A subsidiary’s association with an advertising agency can have benefits through shared services such as accounts, art studio, and production provided the agency is prepared to sell its services at a reasonable rate to the sister PR Company.
5.
Independents PR Consultants’ With few exceptions, the majority of independent consultants is small and operate little teams rather like solicitors and consulting engineers.
Independent consultants have some distinct advantages.
Which includes: i.
Freedom from advertising bias: The independent consultant owes no allegiances to an advertising agency or to an advertising campaign.
His advice is therefore impartial.
However small, its sheer impartiality could be its major selling point.
ii.
Able to work with advertising agents: Not all advertising agents can offer associated PR services and it is possible for a client to appoint an advertising 84 agency, and PR consultancy, which are independent of each other.
This has the merit of providing three part discussions, while the consultants can devote himself to a PR programme unlimited by the dictates of the advertising agency.
The client can therefore expect the best possible services from both, knowing that each is anxious to retain the account on its own behalf.
Also, if the consultant feels strongly about some point of policy, relinquishment of the account will not be disastrous to the agency to suffer loss of the account.
iii.
Choice of specialist, consultancy possible: Independent consultants are the ones, which are most likely to specialize in a particular class of business, and clients can take advantage of this for ad hoc, short-term or full annual contract services.
There are consultants specializing in almost everything.
iv.
Financial PR consultants: Financial PR is a service offered by some general consultants but others specialize in this activity alone.
Financial PR is concerned with relaying information and viewpoints on a company’s industrial and commercials activities to the wider financial and investment communities financial PR builds bridges and carries the good and bad company news alike from Boardroom to the outside bustling world.
Provided the company is soundly run, has reasonable prospects and has sensibly and widely communicated itself to the financial and investment communities it will find that it is able to raise funds without difficulty and at the keenest rates.
It is the experienced financial public relation’s man who will ensure that the merits of the company are brought to the attention of the investment public at large.
v. PR counselors: A public relations practitioner who undertakes creative and productive work is more nearly on a par with an advertising agent.
A consultant should therefore ideally advise only, and leave the execution to the PR practitioners.
The true consultant is the PR counselor.
He is the practitioner who investigates reports, advises and recommends but does not execute the agreed proposals.
This kind of PR counselor normally works quite independently of other PR units and have no interest in a consultancy or PR agency.
The PR counselor is more usually a senior practitioner, who is sought for because of the wealth of experience he possesses.
Advantages of Outside PR Consultant The outside PR consultant has many advantages over the internal practitioner.
Daramola (2003) has identified such advantages to includes: 85 Objectivity The outside consultant is not directly involved with the internal politics of the client.
He is therefore in a good position to render objective and impartial advice.
In addition, the client’s problems or needs may be analysed from a different perspective.
Pool of Expertise and Skill The outside consultant’s agency may have a wide variety of skills and experts on a part-time bases this will be useful when working on special projects or specialized field.
Extensive Experience and Reputation The experience and reputation of an external consultant with former or old clients can be useful and advantageous to a new employer.
This is because as the consultant has worked on my accounts and related problems in the past, he will be better equipped to tackle the current problem.
Self Employment External consultancy provides opportunity for self-employment as many of them are essentially one man business.
Because they are not tied down to one organisation they may provide flexible services which may be needed by an organisation.
The cost has direct relationship to the work commissioned, and the budget can be varied early year by year.
If the results are not satisfactory, the PR contract can easily be terminated by giving due notice.
Disadvantages of External PR Consultancy While the external counsellor has several advantages, it has disadvantages as well.
The disadvantages include: Resentment by Internal Staff Most outside consultancies run the risk of internal opposition.
These can range from non-acceptance to antagonism.
The internal staffs see an external consultant as a threat and an indication that they are incompetent.
The resentment may at times result in sabotage as his recommendations may be downplayed.
Lack of Information and Confidence The employees of a client are usually unwilling to share information, especially negative information with an outside PR consultant.
This may reduce the effectiveness of the consultant.
The outside consultant may only have a superficial understanding of the client’s problems or needs.
This is in contrast to a deep, intimate and thorough grasp of the problems of the organisation which an insider possesses.
The outsider may require detailed briefings at the outset and at every 86 development as he has no practical knowledge of the organisation’s policy or day to day activities.
There may be lack of continuity in operations due to the high staff turnover typical of many PR consultancies.
Queries from the press of any complexity have to be usually referred to the organisation.
This hinders provision of speedy service to the press, and this can constitute a serious problem especially in crisis situations.
3.3 Budgeting in PR Four basic elements constitute the PR budget, both from the points of view of the staff PRO and the outside consultant.
They are labor, office overheads, materials and expenses.
Labour: This consists of salaries of other supporting staffs (secretarial, clerical and accountancy staff), fees to freelance, constancy and other outside staff.
Office overheads: These include rent, rates, light, telephone, office services, and client liaison.
Materials: All stationary, photograph, postage, print, visual aids, exhibition stands, films and other items.
Expenses: All out-of-pocket expenses incurred by staff such as fares, hotel bills and entertainment of guests, including catering costs for functions and events.
The budget needs of PR will normally vary from one organisation to another depending on their need.
In the case of a consultant, he charges retainer fees in addition to meeting the above listed costs to meet up his profits.
4.0 CONCLUSION Any organisation has choice of organizing its public relations activities, it may set up an internal public relations department or it may contract the activity to an independent outside consultancy.
It may also combine the services of an internal department with an external consultant with an external consultant depending on need.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have taken a close look at the functions of a public relations department, we also compared the advantage and advantages setting up an internal public relations department and hiring an external consultant.
87 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT A commercial organisation that does not have a public relations department has approached you for advice on running their public relations activities.
Prepare a recommendation to them, highlighting the benefits and demerits of setting up an internal department to engaging an outside Consulting Agency.
Give a brief rationale for the recommendations you have proposed.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Black, Sam (1976).
Practical Public Relations.
London: Pitman Publishing.
Cutlip, Centre & Broom (1994).
Effective Public Relations.
Idemili, S.O.
(1990).
“Public Relations principles”.
In Okigbo Charles (ed).
Advertising and Public Relations.
Nsukka: Communication Research Projects in Association with Department of Mass Communication, University of Nigeria.
Seitel, F.P.
(2001).
The Practice of PR.
88 UNIT 5: RESEARCH IN PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 What is Research 3.2 Types of Research: Informal research and formal research 3.3 Methods of Data collection 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignments 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Research is the systematic collection, and interpretation of information to increase understanding.
The first step in public relations process is research.
It is a fact-finding exercise that enables a practitioner to assess public perceptions of an organisation.
Research provides us the tools to solve problems.
It eliminates guess work trial and error and use of intuition in dealing with an organisation and its publics.
Research is very essential at the various stages of a public relations programme.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Explain the procedure for carrying out public relations research.
(cid:1) Conduct a public relations research on any area of your choice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Relations Research principles What is Research?
We have earlier defined Public Relations as “the art and social science of analysing trends, predicting their consequences… which will serve the public interest.
Public relations deals with human begins.
Human beings and the society in which they live are changing and dynamic.
The public relations practitioner must find ways to update his knowledge of man and his society.
Research is the systematic collection and interpretation of information to increase understanding.
It is therefore important to state that the first stage in the public relations process is research.
For example, a 89 company must acquire enough accurate relevant data about its products, publics to plan how to communicate effectively with all its constituent publics.
In spite of its importance, many publics relations practitioners tend to down play its significance and insist on intuition and guesswork, believing that they are dealing with intangibles which are not easily measurable.
They think they already know as much as necessary on the issues and problems at hand, and should not bother themselves further.
Do you see how misplaced that view can be in this scientific age?
May be many people avoid research because they do not know what use research could be.
At every step of the public relations process, research is required to formulate strategy, to test messages, to influence opinion, get publicity and evaluate success or otherwise of our efforts.
Research can be done to preempt a problem or prevent crisis from developing.
We need research to track issues before they develop into a full blown problem.
Public relations research is conducted to do three basic things.
(cid:1) Describe a situation, process or phenomenon (cid:1) Explain why something is happening, what are its causes and what effect it will have.
(cid:1) Predict what will probably happen if we do or do not take action.
It is clear that the price of not doing research is enormous.
Precious resources and finance is expended without clear cut idea of the outcomes or expected results from the endeavour.
Research is the very essence of successful PR activity.
Research has a vital role to play in each stage of the public relations process.
At the planning stage, it is used to identify the problem, refine the problem, and identify the relevant publics as well as the prevailing perceptions of the organisation.
Research should provide answers to such questions as: what exactly is the problem and its source?
When did the problem start, who is affected or involved by the problem and how are they affected.
Before the implementation of the recommended action; research is used to identify the audience trusted media channels that can be used to get them.
The message must be pre-tested to determine if they will be understood by the target public.
At the implementation stage research is sued to measure message distribution message exposure as well as audience acceptance.
At the evaluation stage research is used to measure audience awareness, attitude and behaviour change, infact the impact the campaign has made on the target publics.
90 3.1.2 Public Relations Research Principles Certain principles guide public relations research endeavours.
The Institute of Public Relations Research (1997) has provided us with some principle for measuring public relations research effectiveness.
They include: Clear programme objectives and desired outcomes tied directly to business goals should be established.
Measuring of PR ‘outputs’ which are short term such as amount of press coverage received or expressive of a particular message should be differentiated from measuring ‘out comes’ such as changing awareness, attitudes and even behaviour which are long term and have far reaching impact.
Measuring media contact should be a first step in the PR evaluation process.
This is because media content measures are limited as it cannot establish clearly whether a target audience actually saw a message or responded to it.
No single technique we can evaluate PR effectiveness.
Evaluation requires a combination of techniques from media analysis, focus groups to poll surveys’.
Public relations effectiveness should not be compared with advertising effectiveness.
This is because while advertising placement and messages can be controlled, public relations cannot.
The organisation should precisely identify its key messages, targets and desired communication channels.
This is because unless an organizations is clear about its targets, its public relations measurements will not be reliable.
Self-Assessment Exercise Why it is necessary to undertake research in public relations?
3.2 Types of Public Relations Research Most public relations research can be classified under two broad types: Applied research and theoretical research.
Applied research is strategic or evaluative and is used to solve practical problems.
On the other hand, theoretical research generates studies that aids understanding of the public relations process.
Let us examine the two types of research further to give you deeper understanding of how the two interrelate.
Applied research in public relations as stated earlier, can be either strategic or evaluative.
They are designed to provide answers to specific practical problems.
91 Strategic research is used in developing PR programme objectives, such as what we intent to achieve, what we need to achieve it and how we can achieve it.
It can be used to develop message strategies which addresses the question of what is to be said, how it is to be said, the emphasis to be adopted and how and when to reach the audience with the message strategic research is also used to establish programme benchmarks on what can be achieved by the programme that is measurable, the goals of the programme.
On the other hand, evaluative research is conducted primarily to determine whether a public relations programme has achieved its goals and objectives.
On the other hand, theoretical research is used to develop a body of knowledge which helps the work of the public relations practitioners.
It helps build theories in such areas as why people communicate, formation of public opinion and how a public is created.
Knowledge of theoretical research is also important as it provides a framework for persuasion and understanding why people do what they do.
It can also enable practitioners understand the persuasive limits of communication.
Generally, knowledge of theoretical research can help PR practitioners to understand the basis of applied research findings as well as moderate the expectations of management on the results of public relations programmer.
3.3 Methods of Data Collection After the public relations problems that requires attention has been identified and the specific target public clearly determined, the next important step is to select the method of data collection.
Two basic methods are used: informal and formal methods.
3.3.1 Informal Methods This is also referred to as exploratory method.
This method is useful to detect and explore problem, situations, pretest research and programme strategies, etc.
Some of the informal methods identified by Cutlip, Centre and Broom (1994) include: Personal Contacts It is a very reliable method of reaching sources of information and the respondents is more likely to provide a candid opinion of a situation.
The practitioner has the opportunity of a one-to-one situation discover people’s disposition towards an issue or policy of an organisation.
Key Informants Knowledgeable opinion leaders influential and experts can be consulted.
Such influential could include authors, editors, reporters, ministers or commissioners, 92 labour leaders professors, civic leaders, bakers, taxi drivers.
They can be selected based on their perceived knowledge of an issue and their ability to represent others.
Focus Groups and Community Forums Focus groups and community forums are used to explore how people will react to proposals and to gather information useful for developing questionnaires to be used informal research methods.
The use of focus groups and community forum can be seen as an extension of the personal contact method.
A typical example of community forums is the town meeting.
In the relaxed atmosphere of a focus group, people are often more willing to express their feelings and discuss ideas.
A focus group can cost of about six to 12 carefully selected representatives from a target public.
Advisory Committees and Boards A standing committee or panel can help win understanding.
Advisory committees and boards provide information and guidance.
They are useful particularly, for long-running programmes and issues.
if their advice is honestly considered, they provide effective forums for increasing interaction, participation and in-depth probing of issues.
Ombudsman The ombudsman collects complaints and provide feedback mechanisms.
The existence of an ombudsman serves to reduce tensions that could otherwise result in crisis and litigations if there were not handled, in many non-government organizations the ombudsman has proved useful in providing feedback and ideas for solving problems while they are still manageable.
Call-in-Telephone Lines They are used by radio and television stations, during programmes to enable callers who hold strong views or are affected by the problem being discussed.
A practitioner working for a specific organisation can use it to gather useful information.
Toll-free lines installed by organisations for use by customers are a good examples Mail Analysis Letters serve as early warnings.
They can serve as good information sources and is another economical way of colleting information is periodic analysis of incoming mails they reveal areas of criticisms or ill-will or problem relationships.
They could point to a clear direction in their disposition towards an organisation or client.
Field Reports Many organizations have district agents, sales representatives who live in and travel the territories they cover.
If these agents are trained to listen and observe and given 93 regular means of reporting their observations, they can serve as the “eyes and ears” of an organizations.
Their “intelligence” reports, so to say can be a useful source of information to a public relations practitioner.
3.3.2 Formal Research Methods Formal methods are designed to gather data from scientifically representative samples.
Formal methods help provide answer to questions about situations that cannot simply be adequately answered using informal approaches.
For formal methods to yield useful results, the research questions and objectives should be clearly determined before the research design is selected.
Formal research methods are used when objective, systematic and scientific data gathering devices are crucial for decision making.
They are preferred even though they cost a lot of money and time.
Formal research methods commonly used in public relations include: Surveys – Survey research is one of the most commonly used research methods in public relations.
This is because surveys gives first-hand information and it is relatively inexpensive.
Surveys are very useful method of generating information on the opinions and attitudes of people and patterns of past behaviour.
Surveys use two major approaches questionnaires and in-person interview.
Questionnaire can be mailed or self-administered.
Respondents are requested to fill in the responses.
Questionnaires may be structured (closed ended) or unstructured, (open-ended) to allow the respondents offer more explanations on their views.
Interviews can be person-to-person or via telephone.
Communication audits Communication audits are used to analyse the standing of a company with its target publics like employees on community neighbours’ and to re-examine an organisations performance as a corporate citizen it is also used to assess the reading and understanding of an organisation’s communication vehicles such as news releases, annual reports, etc.
The findings of a communication audit is used provide benchmarks against which future communication programmes can be applied and measured.
It is useful in telling the organisation where they sand in the perception of its relevant publics, and whether its communication activities has fulfilled the organisation goals.
Conte[[ nt Analysis Content, analysis is another method used to make an objective examination of what is reported in the media.
These contents include editorials, letters to the editor and the issues the press are harping on.
Press clippings and monitor reports are used as the basis for content analysis.
One drawback of content analysis however, is that it 94 only indicates what has been printed or broadcast; it does not give indication as to what is read or heard, nor does it measure whether or not the audiences learned or believed the message content.
Secondary (Library) Research Secondary research uses materials generated by others.
These include library references and sources, newspapers and magazine articles, internet data, public records by government agencies like the Bureau of Statistics, the Census Office.
In the electronic age, some of these information can be sourced on the web.
Universities also maintain survey research centers which provide published materials at a very minimum change and this is available to public relations practitioners for research purposes.
PR Research Writing in “International Public Relations Review”.
James Anderson notes that ‘PR can no longer rely on more instinct, intuition and learning through failure… A more scientific approach is essential to gain top management trust and commitment.
Cited by Larry Agoseh – Public Relations Digest Vol 5.
Wilcox, Ault and Agee have listed six reasons why research will be necessary in tomorrow's complex world.
1.
The increasing fragmentation of audiences into groups that have specific interests and concerns.
2.
Increasing isolation of top management from personal contact with the public.
3.
Research will prevent organizations from wasting time, effort and money in attacking perceived image problems that are not readily solved by extensive public relations programmes.
4.
Research will provide the fact on which a PR programme is based.
5.
Surveys can generate publicity through the dissemination of the research results 6.
Research can establish a base line for determining the success of a programme.
4.0 CONCLUSION Research for public relations ensures that there is a good basis for professional jobs in public relations, instead of relying solely on guesswork and hunches.
Any effort and money expended on research is a worthwhile one as it provides the basis for sound public relation decisions.
95 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the need for research in public relations.
We saw the role of research in all the aspects of the public relations process.
We also noted that the various methods of conducting research which consist of formal and informal approaches and the type chosen for a study is dependent on the specific situation on hand.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and discuss the informal methods of data collection used in public relations research.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajala, V.O.
(1993).
Public Relations, in Search of Professional Excellence.
Ibadan: Afrika-Link Books.
Cutlip, S.M, Center, A.H and Broom, G.M.
(1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall Inc. Seitel, F.P (2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall.
96 MODULE 3 – PUBLIC RELATIONS PRACTICE Unit 1 Planning and Executing a Public Relations Programme UNIT 2 Public Relations for non Organisations profit Unit 3 Writing and Speaking in Public Relations Unit 4 Law and Ethics in Public Relations Unit 5 Public Relations and Society UNIT 1: PLANNING AND EXECUTING A PUBLIC RELATIONS PROGRAMME CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Planning a PR Programme 3.2 Executing a public relations Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public Relations as we explained at the beginning of this course, is the deliberate, planned and sustained effort to establish and maintain mutual understanding between an organisation and its publics.
This implies that the establishment and maintenance of this mutual understanding must be planned and provided.
The axiom proper planning prevent poor performance holds true in all public relations situations.
Good and effective public relations involves good planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of thus unit, you should be able: (cid:1) Identify the importance of planning public relation activities and programmes.
(cid:1) Enumerate three public relations process planning models and their usefulness.
(cid:1) Outline the steps involved in public relations planning.
97 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning a Public Relations Programme There is no better way to understand the place of planning in public relations than to recall the definition of the British Institute of Public Relations which refers to public relations as the deliberate, planned and….Frank Jefkins also defines PR as consisting of all planned communications both inward and outward… These definitions clearly emphasize that public relations is not a haphazard activity.
It must be carefully planned to achieve certain objectives, using certain predetermined strategy.
Generally, when we plan we intend to achieve certain objectives or goals: (cid:1) To contribute to the overall success of our activities.
(cid:1) To help define the direction we intend to follow so that our actions can be focused.
Planning helps us to direct our energy in one direction instead of dissipating it in various directions.
(cid:1) Planning enable a public relations practitioner to be proactive instead of reacting to situations.
(cid:1) Planning helps to keep public relations activities in line with the organisations missions, goals and objectives.
(cid:1) When we plan, we are able to secure management support and approval for all the activities undertaken by public relations practitioner.
This improves the effectiveness of the public relations activities as all sections of the organisation are aware of the programme.
(cid:1) Planning helps to determine in advance what is needed and how to tackle the problem.
It helps us to determine from the beginning, what we intend to achieve.
There is a programme to work on instead of muddling through which reduces effectiveness.
(cid:1) Finally, planning helps us to project a long term view of our activities it helps to identify likely problem areas and issues which we can proffer prior solution instead of waiting to take fire-brigade action when they are full- blown.
Planning reduces the cost of carrying out public relations actions in particular and management in general.
98 Self Assessment Exercise Make a two-page write up on the need to plan a PR campaign to create awareness on polio eradication in your state.
3.1.2 Planning Models in Public Relations Scholars and practitioners of public relations have provided us several models of planning in public relations.
Models represents a guide or a blue print in carrying out a given task.
It can be seen as a simple way of describing a complex process to enhance better understanding.
For instance, if you pass by the National Arts Theatre in Iganmu, Lagos, you will see a model or miniature of the National Arts Theatre.
It shows you at a glance how the main object looks like.
These models can be seen as the basic steps to solving PR problems.
The models of public relations commonly discussed include John Marston’s RACE Model, Frank Jefkins six-point model and Cutlip, Centre and Broom’s “Four –step Process Model.
The John Marston’s RACE model has been pervasive and popular in the study, practice and teaching of both basic and applied public relations.
Marston postulates that public relations process should follow the underlisted four steps namely: For the Marston Model R stands for Research A stands for Action C stand for Communication E stand for Evaluation Research should be used to gather.
Information that would enable the practitioner discover the strength, weaknesses, opportunity and threat (SWOT) of the organisation image, the publics and their perception of the organisation.
The information gathered will help assist in taking the right decision.
After information has been gathered, appropriate actions should be taken to decide what is to be done and how it should be done.
Communication follows action.
Here the public relations practitioners directs messages to specific publics to support the objectives earlier identified.
While the organisation speaks to the public, it should also activate the mechanism to listen to the public to ensure a two-way flow of communication.
99 Evaluation is used to evaluate the effectiveness of the method(s) used, the level of success and carry out necessary modifications in future programmes.
Evaluation helps to find out how effective was the strategies used.
It can be seen that the RACE model is a public relations solving or campaign planning-oriented model that prescribes what should be done at any stage.
It adopts a sequential or step by step approaches.
The Frank Jefkins 6-point model is almost similar to the RACE model.
It envisages the process as consisting of; - Appreciation of the situation or problem - Definition of objectives - Definition of publics - Selection of media and techniques - Planning a budget - Assessment and evaluation of Results Cutlip, Centre and Broom’s Four-Step Process are; - Defining the problem (situation analysis) - Planning and programming (strategy) - Taking action and communicating (implementation) - Evaluating the programme (assessment) Defining the PR problem involves probing and monitoring knowledge, opinions, attitudes and behaviours of those concerned with and affected by the acts and policies of the organisation which is research and fact-finding.
In essence, this is an organisation intelligence function as it requires determining “what is happening now?” what are the issues?” and what are the problems we face?”.
Thinking in terms of strategy is at the heart of public relations planning.
A strategy is a plan to use selected means in predetermined ways to attain a desired result.
Strategy involves deciding what should be done and how it is to be done to achieve or fulfill the objectives it is to be noted that planning can be for the purpose of making something happen or preventing it, for exploiting a situation or remedying an existing problem.
Taking action and communicating involves the implementation of the strategy that has been adopted and putting them into action to reach the publics.
It is similar to the Marston Model.
The evaluation component of the model involves an assessment of the results of our current action with a new to identifying areas that require corrective action in future.
100 3.2 Executing a public relations programme Seitel (2001) has noted that the public relations campaign puts all the aspects of public relations planning – objectives.
Strategies, research, budgeting, tactics and evaluation into one cohesive framework.
This entails that the blue print for the public relations campaign should follow any of the models or approaches discussed – RACE, Jefkins, Four Process, etc.
According to him, a typical PR campaign plan should follow the following pattern: - Background of the problem (situation analysis) - Preparing a proposal (strategy) - Activating the plan (operating tactics) - Evaluating the programme (Assessment) When we are faced with any PR problem or the organisation of a PR campaign, we should start with research or fact finding, design and execute some actions, communicate our actions well with the relevant publics and evaluate or assess what we have done for necessary adjustments where necessary or to see how well or badly we have done no matter the model adopted.
Planning the PR programme generally involves the following series of activities.
(cid:1) Identifying the relevant publics (cid:1) Identifying alternative communication programmes and costs (cid:1) Developing message strategy and tactics (cid:1) Selecting media channels (cid:1) Devising programme timetable (cid:1) Setting budgets for the choice of strategy (cid:1) Writing the PR programme.
In writing a programme, the goal must be specified.
The more specific the institutional goals, the more specific and effective the PR plan can be.
In the words of Cutlip, Center and Broom.
“Specificity is a golden word in communication”.
Care must be taken to ensure that the programme does not end up over promising only to deliver little.
The third step in the PR process is plan implementation, which is taking action and communicating.
Once a problem has been defined and a plan.
Evaluating the programme or assessment is the fourth and final step in the PR process.
The purpose of evaluating is to examine how well in plan has been executed.
It is to seek through research answer to questions such as “how did we do?
Did the programme reach the target audience?
Was the programme effective in advising its intended goals; or did it have some unintended effects?
Effective feedback provides the source with information concerning his success or failure in accomplishing his objectives.
Feedback helps us to modify and tailor our future messages to suit our audience.
101 Evaluation research reminds the communicator that dissemination does not equal communication.
Evaluation research may be conducted by public relations practitioners themselves or obtained through commercial research services.
Measuring the impact of PR programme The effectiveness of a specific public relations programme can be evaluated by measuring audience coverage, audience response, communications impact, and processes of influence.
1.
Audience Coverage In order to produce results, PR message must first reach the target audience.
The size and nature of the audience reached and the proportion of the desired audience they represent should be ascertained.
For example following methods can be use to measure audience in the broadcast media for a PR programme.
a.
The diary method: This requires that some members of the household keep a written record of programme exposure.
b.
The recorder: This method electronically or mechanically records automatically frequency, channels or station.
c. The personal roster real: Respondents are shown a list of programme and stations.
They are asked to indicate which they were exposed to during the measured time span.
d. Personal unaided recall: Personal interviews are made during which respondents are asked about programme exposure for a preceding time span.
Unlike the roster, the personal unaided recall uses no list of programmes or stations it depends entirely upon the respondent’s unaided memory for exposure information.
e. The telephone coincidental: Telephone interviews are made throughout the duration’s of a given programme or time period.
Respondents are interviewed regarding exposure at moment of call.
In the print media (Newspaper and Magazines), circulation figures helps to give rough estimates of audience coverage.
2.
Audience Responses This measures how members of the audience respond to the content of the message.
Does it strike them favourably or unfavourably?
Does it arouse their interest or does it bore them?
Audience response can be measured by the number of telephone calls and letters from the members of the audience commending or condemning a specific programme.
102 3.
Communication Impact The real test of a communication program is its results.
The impact, which a message has on its audience, must be considered.
Impact assessments seek answers to such questions as “Did the message result in the desired modification of a group’s attitudes?” Actual results offer a sure test.
In addition to observation of result obtained other ways of getting at the impact include; a.
The focused interview: This involves interviewing recipients of communication and getting them to relate their experiences to various parts of a programme.
b.
Impact analysis: This involves studies to determine short-term and long- term effects of a given programme.
It includes determining the effects on individuals and on group and subgroups.
c Experimental studies: This involves comparing two groups which are exactly alike except for the fact that one group has been exposed to a programme whereas the other has not.
The critical feature is in matching two groups so they are identical in every respect except the exposure to a specific programme.
In such experiments it is essential to control influences.
4.
Process of Influence In this method several factors are assessed.
For instance, what is the process by which a communication operates to influence its target audience?
Through what channels of influence and mechanisms of persuasion does the message finally affect the individual?
How effective is the programme in setting into motion the social processes necessary to influence the opinions and behaviour of its target audience?
4.0 CONCLUSION We have seen that for success, public relations requires adequate planning and regarded as a routine activity.
It is important for a public relations practitioners to understand the role and implications of planning as it would then achieve better results.
Adequate time and resources should be given to the process of planning in any public relations programme.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we examined the importance of planning our public relations programmes as a prerequisite for success.
We also considered the various models of public relations planning that sets out the steps that should be followed in planning our programmes.
We also saw the usefulness of strategic plan as an aid to effective public relations programme.
103 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the various ways in which the effectiveness of a specific public relations programme can be evaluated.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cutlip, S.M Centre, A.H and Broom, G.M (1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs: New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Jefkins, Frank (1977).
Planned Press and Public Relations.
London: International Textbook Company Limited.
Ogundeyi, E. Babs (1999).
“Strategic Planning for Effective Government Relations”.
In Public Relations Digest Vol.
5: 34-46.
Osuji, Chuks (2000).
“Planning Political Public Relations Campaigns”.
In NIPR Public Relations Journal Vol.
2 No.
1.
April, 2000 p. 10-13.
Seitel, F.P (2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall.
104 UNIT 2: PUBLIC RELATIONS FOR NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Non-Profit Organisation 3.2 Role of Public Relation in Profit of Non-organizations.
3.3 Targets audiences of non-profit organisation.
3.4 Fund-raising for non-profit organisation 3.5 Use of Public Relations in non-Profit Organisation.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public relations serve the same purpose for any organisation, irrespective of the goals or objectives of the organisation.
Most of the public relations techniques we have discussed in the previous units of this course apply essentially to companies, corporations and government.
We shall in this unit take a look at a special area of public relations; public relations in a non-profit or non-commercial organisation.
A non profit organisation can be described as an organisation whose purpose is to serve the public and not organized for profit making.
In other words, the primary motive of their existence is service and not for profit to their owners.
Non-profit organisations are active in areas that are usually not attractive to the public or private sector.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Explain what is a non-profit organisation.
(cid:1) Enumerate the objectives of public relations in non-profit organisations.
(cid:1) Discuss the use of public relations in non-profit organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Non-profit Organisations Non-profit organisations work in all areas of public life ranging from universities, hospitals, churches, charitable organisations like the red Cross and Red Crescent, foundations, security agencies and welfare bodies and non-governmental agencies.
105 The developments and expansion of social activities has led to the growth in size and activities of non-profit organisations in the last three decades.
Kotler and Andreason have identified non-profit organisation under two broad types: private non-profit organizations and public non-profit organisations.
Private non-profit organisations involve in social and charitable services.
These types of organizations include churches, mosques, social clubs and voluntary organisations libraries, museums and arts groups philanthropic groups like the Ford Foundation, the Mac Arthur Foundation, Jimmy Carter’s Global 2000, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Yakubu Gowon Foundation.
Others are political and pressure groups women’s groups, students union.
It also includes labour unions, trade association and professional societies who exist to achieve the interest of their members.
Public Non-profit Organisations Public non-profit organisations are owned by governments at various levels federal, state and local government.
They provide social service for the good of society, without the profit motive.
Even though users of some of these services pay some token for aspects of the services, such charges, are for the maintenance of the organisation and not to make profit public non-profit organisations include educational institutions, police, fire brigade, public libraries, health institution.
Others includes customs service, immigration and specialized agencies like National Agency for Food, Drug Administration Control (NAFDAC), Standards Organisation of Nigeria, (SON), Economic and Finances Crimes Commission (EFCC) National Broadcasting Commission, (NBC) among others.
Even organisations like customs and immigration collect some dues on behalf of the government they do not as an organisation profit from such payments.
3.3.3 Roles of Public Relations in Non-profit organizations.
Cutlip, Centre and Broom have noted that the role of public relations in non-profit organisations is to establish and maintain relationships necessary to secure organizational autonomy and necessary resources needed to achieve their humanitarian missions.
To this end they explain that public relations in most nonprofit organisations aims: (cid:1) To gain acceptance of an organisation (cid:1) To develop channels of communication with those an organisation serves (cid:1) To create and maintain a favourable climate for fund-raising.
(cid:1) To support the development and maintenance of public policy that is favourable to the mission of an organisation; and (cid:1) To inform and motivate key organizational constituents (such as employees, volunteers, and trustees) to dedicate themselves and work productively in support of an organisation’s mission, goals and objectives.
106 It is clear that while these missions are common to most nonprofit organisations, the tactical approach and scale of public relations activities differ greatly.
3.3 Target Publics of non-profit organisations The type of target publics that nonprofit organisations relate with would give you an idea of what makes them unique when compared to commercial or profit-oriented enterprises.
However, some target publics like employees may be common to both types of organisations.
Let us take a look at the key publics of a non-profit organisation like a university as identified by Ajala (1993).
They include: *Students, *Lecturers and administrative staff, *Parents, *Alumni, *Potential students, *Potential employers of graduates, *Governments (federal, state and local), legislators, *Research Councils, *Education Funding Bodies (like, ETF), PTDF), *Examination boards (JAMB, WAEC, NECO), *Potential donors, philanthropists, industry, commerce and the professions, media personnel, National Universities Commission (NUC).
Self Assessment Exercise Explain the difference between the goals and objectives of private and public non- profit organisations.
3.3.4 Fund Raising for Non-profit Organisation Fund raising programmes are the major sources of funding non-commercial organizations.
A public relations practitioner may be charged with raising funds for the following causes.
Community development: The community may be in need of certain infrastructure, and the idea is to appeal to people who are well-off within or outsider the community to contribute to such a cause.
Health facility: To equip hospital and probably build more buildings.
Victims of natural disasters: Floods or war victims may have lost all they have in war or flood and need to be rehabilitated.
Sports: Like raising money for the Olympic games, e.t.c.
Religious purpose: To raise funds to build church mosque or worship center.
To aid a cause: The cause may include entertainment or mass mobilization.
107 A contemporary view of why people give donations asserts that [people give to get.
The concept of transaction is based on the belief that people give because of some kind of expectations.
The PR implications of this is that for effective-fund-raising, the PR practitioner must ask himself what does the donor get in return for giving.
To this end, nine types of reason/motives have been identified.
Reason for giving 1.
The need for self-esteem: To satisfy a psychological need.
This means that individuals may give because they want to boost their self-image or ego.
2.
The need for recognition from others.
To satisfy a sociological need.
This means that individuals may give to win recognition from others or the need to belong based on class or social status.
3.
Fear or insecurity/guilt: May be donating out of guilt over deeds of the past- treating on others while climbing up the ladder etc.
4.
Habitual giver: These give because it has become a normal thing, especially done by small donors.
5.
Nuisance givers: Those who give to get rid of the seemingly noisy or inconvenience from callers.
6.
Giving under pressures: These give only when they are required or compelled to like being compelled to give at the office or club by virtue of ones membership there.
7.
People to people givers: These individuals give because of a sense of solidarity.
Those who believe that must be good to man or humanists.
8.
Faith-giving: Giving based on the requirements of ones faith-giving for moral or religious reasons.
9.
The captive givers: These give because of a real sense of sorrow-emotionally and sympathetically involved.
It is this reason for giving that the fundraiser should exploit to get each group to give programmes, which will exploit or satisfy these motives, should be developed to achieve effective participation.
Fund raising is purely a PR activity.
The idea behind fund raising is to appeal to the minds of the people to open their wallet to support a cause.
The strategy must be 108 persuasive, deliberate and visionary.
If the practitioner falls to appeal enough to the mind of the people to support a cause, he may not win the support of such people again.
In fund raising, the media must be carried along.
The media must be adequately briefed.
If necessary a facility visit must be organized for press to visit the place or site or center that the money is needed.
A press kit should be given to the press, where they can source information when they want editorial material.
In case of fund raising for charity like the Motherless Babies Home or refugees, use of photography is very important to bring vivid images of the condition of the beneficiaries to appeal to people to donate.
Fund raising for nonprofit organisation has to be a continuous activity if they are to remains in business and render the services for which they were set up.
As a result, donor development strategies have to be cultivated to keep donations coming in on a consistent basis.
Donor development requires identifying and classifying donors based on the motives described above.
Donors could be large, medium or small donors.
Large donors could include funding agencies like the United States Agency for International Development for International Development (DFID) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) among others.
Public relations techniques and skills should be employed to interact consistently with the donors so that they can give regularly.
Small and medium donors can be encouraged to increase their donations by careful cultivation of the relationships with them.
Donors are always looking for integrity, transparency and judicious use of funds.
Good public relations after successful fund raising can be deployed to assure donors that the resources they made available are being put to good use.
3.5 Use of Public Relations in Non-profit Organisations We have earlier explained that public relations aims to build good and mutual understanding between an organisation and its publics.
Goodwill is very critical in the relations between a non-profit organisation and its publics, especially among donors who provide the resources needed to keep them going.
Using public relations in non-profit organisations requires a lot of creative effort.
The ever recurring crisis in the higher educational sector in Nigeria in the last twenty years is a big challenge to the use of public relations.
Nigerian universities have been plagued by one crisis or another which involved students and university management, staff unions versus federal government, the menace of cults and other social vices in the university system have affected the image of the Nigeria tertiary institutions not only within the country, but internationally.
109  To use public relations effectively in non-profit organisations, experts have recommended the following steps: (cid:1) A good plan should be created to give the practitioner a clear idea of the work that is required to be done.
Research should be used to establish clearly the publics of the organization and how to relate with them.
A good plan must be workable within available resources and time available.
(cid:1) Realizable goals should be set for public relations activities these goals should serve as a sign post to direct activities.
These goals should be measurable and achievable.
It is no use to set goals that cannot be attained with the resources and time available.
(cid:1) The target publics should be clearly defined.
Like all public relations activities, messages exposed to wrong publics is a waste of resources.
Non- profit organisations cannot afford fritter away scare resources in targeting publics who are not relevant to its survival.
There is keen competition for funds among nonprofit organisations as most of them direct their request almost to the same donors.
Well targeted publics will ensure that you direct your messages where they will yield maximum results.
(cid:1) The messages should be strategically designed and delivered to achieve maximum impact.
The content of the message and the language of communicating them should be of vital importance in other words, the message must be tailored to the appropriate audience.
The persuasiveness of your message goes a long way in convincing your publics and winning the sympathy and support that the organisation needs.
(cid:1) Finally, as the late Canadian scholar, Marshal McLuhan postulated, “the medium is the message”.
The well crafted messages must be delivered through the correct medium.
As communication scholars have noted, any message disseminated through the wrong medium can only result in waste exposure and dissipation of effort.
An appropriate medium and tactics should be chosen to deliver messages to the relevant audience.
There is no gainsaying that good public relations is the life blood of nonprofit organisations.
For instance, voluntary organizations like the Red Cross whose activities involves intervention in conflict situations have not only the arduous task of securing regular donations to keep its activities going, it has the more added burden of wrong perceptions and misgiving, of its activities and operations by combatants in the various armed conflicts it tries to intervene.
Good public relations is required to earn the confidence and trust of say combatants in a war situation.
110 4.0 CONCLUSION The need for good public relations strategies cannot be over emphasized as nonprofit organisation increase by the day.
Their peculiar and unique orientation requires that in addition to the standard public relations methods used in other organisations, nonprofit organisations have to be creative in their approach in using public relations to achieve maximum result in their undertakings.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has examined the unique and peculiar nature of nonprofit organisations.
It also looked at the various types of nonprofit organisations and methods of raising funds to meet the needs of the organisations.
We also looked at the role of public relations in nonprofit organisations as well as the motives of donors to these organisations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the methods you will employ to promote a foundation that offers health services in rural areas of the country.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajala, V.O.
(1993).
Public Relations, In Search of Professional Excellence.
Ibadan: Africa-Link Books.
Cutlip, S.M, Centre, A.H, and Broom G.M (1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall.
Kotler, P. and Alan, R.A (1987).
Strategic Marketing for Nonprofit Organisations.
4th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Prentice-Hall.
111 UNIT 3: WRITING AND SPEAKING IN PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Writing in Public Relations 3.1.1 Phases of Writing 3.1.2 The Process of Writing 3.2 The Press Release 3.2.1 Writing a Press Release 3.2.2 Types of Press Release 3.3 Speaking in Public Relations 3.3.1 Preparing the speech 3.3.2 Presenting the speech 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODCUTION Effective writing and speaking is the essence of the practice of public relations as it is in communication generally.
The ability to write and speak well improves your prospects with any employer and your progress in your career.
This is because writing is one of the key survival skills in communication in general and public relations in particular.
Good writing requires practice and hard work.
In the course of writing in public relations, the public relations practitioner will be required to write press release, speeches, features, facts sheets, biography and other messages that relate to his various audiences.
Speech writing and delivery has assumed an important place in modern business and governance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Describe the process of writing (cid:1) Identify the phases of writing 112 (cid:1) Write a press release for an event (cid:1) Describe the process of planning, writing and delivering a speech.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Writing in Public Relations Writing occupies an import aspect of the work of a public relations practitioner.
Writing is a conscious effort.
Unlike speaking which is picked up effortlessly from the environment, writing has to be learned.
It involves a formal learning process.
Few people are born writers.
Writing is very important because it performs several basic communication functions for us; (cid:1) It is used to preserve our thoughts, observations and experiences.
(cid:1) It enables us to keep records of what we have done or intends to do in a permanent form (cid:1) Writing is a basic skill of communication.
Writing takes patience and hard work.
The more you write, the better skilled you become.
This is true of the adage: “practice makes perfect”.
To develop good writing skills, you must master some basic fundamentals of writing which include: Develop ideas before writing - Writing requires ideas that relate to the reader, engage the reader’s attention, concern the reader and be in the readers’ interest.
Ideas will help you establish, the purpose of communication.
Prepare a draft - Every writing, no matter how good, can always be improved with a second look.
A draft helps you to organize the ideas before they are put in a final form.
Simplicity and clarity – Simplicity and clarity are very important in any writing.
The simpler your writing, the more people will understand you.
Clarity ensures that the meaning the reader gets is the meaning the writer intended.
In other words, the reader does not have to guess to get the meaning of the message.
Every word or paragraph that is superfluous should be eliminated.
Aim at a particular audience – To message must be tailored to reach the target audience you have in mind.
A writer cannot aim for all audiences.
Your message must aim at your specific target.
A writer must identify his/her audience.
Knowledge about the audience will help the writer tailor his/her writing to meet their needs.
Rudolf Flesch a renowned writer has provided writers the key to good writing which he referred to as the A’s and B’s 113 They are: (cid:1) Avoid big words (cid:1) Avoid extra words (cid:1) Avoid cliches (cid:1) Avoid latinisms (cid:1) Be specific (cid:1) Be active (cid:1) Be simple (cid:1) Be short (cid:1) Be organized (cid:1) Be convincing (cid:1) Be understandable A good public relations writing generally follows the inverted pyramid structure which is popular in news writing.
This style presents the facts in descending order of importance.
3.1.1 Phases of writing As we earlier explained, good writing is a function of good organisation of thought.
Good organisation follows a defined process.
Writing involves a series or phases of activities both mental and physical.
There are various phases or stages that constitute the process of writing.
Let us look at them briefly.
Prewriting – This stage involves generating and conceiving ideas of what to write research, planning, drawing and outline; setting goals and objectives of your writing.
Writing – This has to do with selecting/rejecting words, sentences, paragraphs and writing units.
Rewriting/Editing – This involves putting finishing touches to your work.
It entails checking and correcting the grammatical and other errors.
This is the stage where you fine tune, smoothen, polish and edit your material and it is crucial in producing a well written material.
Evaluation/Product Assessment This involves going through the whole piece to evaluate if the objective or purpose of the writing has been achieved.
3.3.2 The Process of Writing A process is a series of ongoing activities designed to achieve an objective or a purpose.
114 The writing process encompasses various activities which include: Selecting or finding a subject Any good writing begins with selecting a good subject.
In selecting a subject we try to get something that is manageable.
We try to delimitate, to set a boundary around what we shall deal with.
Here we determine the scope of the subject.
Determining the purpose What is the aim of the writing?
What do we want to say about it.
Eradication of child labour or women empowerment.
In determining the purpose, we select the title.
A good title must tell the readers what the writer is dealing with.
Planning the message In planning the message, we are trying to be very sure of what our purpose is, what is our goal in the writing exercise is.
We take a look at the ideas we shall use to achieve our need.
Researching the topic/generating ideas We need to find out information because as mortals, we are limited in our knowledge.
In research, we gather facts, generate ideas to write and this is involved in research.
Organizing the message In organizing the message, you draw an outline of what is to be written, how to articulate the ideas that has been generated.
The headline or the title must capture the essence of what you are writing about.
A title must be interesting, you must think about the readers, audience or listener.
The title of your work must connect properly to the body of the piece of writing.
Executing the plan The writer must settle down to put into paper all that he/she has organized, based on the objectives and purpose.
This process involves the action to actualize the exercise.
Evaluating the piece The final process is to assess the final product to ensure that the outcome is in line with the expectations of the writer.
3.2 The Press Release The press release is said to be the heart of public relations.
It is the most common public relations tool.
This is because it is used to generate information about the organisation and get it across to the various publics through the mass media.
Press 115 release is issued on a variety of issues.
it is the original voice of the organisation because it affords the organisation the opportunity to tell their story by themselves.
Newspaper editors and reporters use it to write their news.
Not all press releases are used by the editors because unlike advertising which is paid for, public relations is “prayed for”.
Several reasons ranging from newsworthiness, time and space determine whether a news release is used or not.
But for many newspapers and broadcast stations, press releases are a veritable source of news and a public relations practitioner should exploit it to get his message access.
3.2.1 Press Release Writing a Press Release in every organisation a press release must be written on the letter heading of an organisation.
The PR unit has to ensure that there is a benefiting letter heading for the organisation.
The information that ought to be a letter headed paper.
1.
Organisations name, big bold clear.
Its colour and style must harmonize with the general image of the organisation.
2.
The address, both location and correspondence address should be in small letter.
There should be phone number telex or fax number if there is one.
Press release is a written material for publicity which is not paid for.
It is usually written in the style of a news report hence it can be called a news release.
Press release must be written in a newsworthy manner so that editors can accept and use them.
The release must have a release date which a date which you want the release to be published.
The objectives of press release are to inform the public about organisational events, to promote a good corporate image and to establish mutual understanding with their publics.
A press release is usually written by a public relations officer or practitioner.
To write a good release the following points should be noted; There is a need for good writing skill a first draft should be written.
Then write a second draft, edit the second draft rigorously, improve and perfect the copy.
It is helpful to use probing questions in writing press-release and such probing questions begin with who, what, why, when and how.
Materials which are not relevant to the probing questions should be eliminated.
Produce different press releases to suit the different newspapers, magazines, radio and TV stations to suit the orientation of their audiences.
116 Avoid loose and verbose writing.
Write a journalistic news report style.
In writing for the print media make sure that the main points are contained in the first paragraph.
Organize the content of the release so that the most newsworthy points are at the top.
The structure of a press release is like that of an invested pyramid which is heavy at the top and light at the bottom hence, if there is no space to publish the entire release, an editor can cut off the lower part without eliminating crucial information.
After writing the final draft, get someone to read it for accuracy and completeness of information before forwarding it to the media.
Factors of press release Newsworthy – A writer must look for device or scheme for a news angle or a news peg which can stimulate an editor or give him justification to publish a press release without the writer having to pay for the publicity.
Facts – This means that a press release should contain facts and not fiction.
Attractive headline – This means that the headline must attract attention to the release.
Summary introduction – This means that the introduction paragraph should contain the main points of the release.
Short sentences – This means that sentences should be clear and straight to the point.
There should be no beating about the bush.
Say what you mean and mean what you say.
Coherent paragraphs – This means that one paragraph should naturally flow into another, the paragraph should not be disjointed.
Short message – This means that the overall message of the release should be short because there is not much space to publish long releases.
Structure of press release The structure of a good press release has prescribed by Frank Jefkins in the form of SOLAADS = S = Subject.
0 = Organisation, L = Location, A = Advantages A = Applicants, D = Details, S = Source 117 Subject – Means what is the story of the release about.
Organisation – what is the name of the organisation.
Location – where is the organisation located?
Advantages – This means what is new about the organisation or its product or its services what are the benefits to the consumers.
Application – What are the uses and who are the users.
Details – What are the sizes, colorus, prices performance figures or other details.
Source – Is the source different from the location of the organisation.
3.2.1 Types of Press Release Announcements Announcements herald such occurrences as personnel appointments, promotions and changes, new products or services (if they are really new and interesting), reports or sales, earnings, acquisitions, mergers, events, awards, honours, policy changes, employment opportunities, anniversaries, price changes, hirings, lay offs, construction, openings and closing of facilities, contracts received (or cancelled) and legal actions.
The news must be important or interesting to the readers or listeners of the medium for it to be used in general it is a good idea to have announcements made by the highest ranking person in the organisation.
Spot Announcement When things that are due to some outside action or influence happen to an organisation, a spot news release may be in order.
When a storm disrupts the services of a public utility (like say PHCN) a fire accident stops work, a strike closes a factory or flood closes a railroad, - all such incidents can lead to the issuance of a release that tells the public what has happened and what effect it is having.
If the affected organisation doesn’t give the news to the media, reporters will write a story and may do a poor job because they don’t have all the facts.
In many cases, follow-up stories must be released on later days.
These may carry additional detailed information and reports on progress made in solving the problem.
Reaction Releases Reaction releases are used when something is done or said that may harm an organisation.
The release is used to explain in detail the correct position of things or restate the organisation’s policy on the issue.
118 Bad News Some news may not be favourable to an organisation.
Some organisations try to suppress the news.
This is a sure way to make things worse.
People will talk, rumours will spread and investigative reporters will try to get the news.
There will be talk and even published charges of cover-up.
The only way to make the best of such a situation is to tell the truth.
A release giving the facts clearly and completely should be drafted immediately.
If reporters ask for information, it should be given to them.
3.3 Speaking in Public Relations Speech writing has become one of the most coveted skills in public relations.
This is due to the importance executives in government and business place on making speeches.
Due to the need for greater openness in modern societies, government and business leaders are regularly required to explain their policies and positions on given issues.
Therefore the tasks that require speaking are as numerous as the activities of the organisation.
These include community and social events, press briefings, annual general meetings, product launch, appeal for funds, political rallies, business luncheon, fairs and exhibitions, presentation, anniversaries, etc.
A public relations practitioner may sometimes be expected to deliver speeches.
At other times, his/her task will be to prepare the speech for his or her boss.
Seitel (2001) has identified fire man characteristics that a speech possess.
1.
It is designed to be heard, not read 2.
It uses concrete language 3.
It demands positive response.
It should evoke a response from the audience.
For this reason, the speech should possess special vitality.
4.
It must have clear-cut objectives, the speech and the speaker must have a point, a thesis.
5.
It must be tailored to a specific audience.
An audience needs to feel that it is hearing something special.
The speech writing process can be broken down into four components: preparing, interviewing, researching and organizing and writing.
3.3.1 Preparing the Speech Like all activities of public relations, successful speech writing requires adequate preparation.
In preparing your speech, you have to define your purpose.
Is it to inform, to educate or to entertain?
Many of the business and government speeches are essentially to inform.
The purpose is determined by the goal.
If you are to launch a product or introduce an idea, your purpose is to persuade your audience to get some specific action, in this case to endorse your product or idea.
119 In planning your speech, you try to establish the main idea, organize an outline, and the length of the speech.
The main idea is the themes around which the speech is centred.
Again, Seitel (2001) has provided us a checklist for preparation of speeches known as the 4W checklist.
They consists of identifying the who, what, where and when.
(cid:1) Who represents the speaker and the audience.
The writer must known all about the speaker and the audience.
This is became the more familiar the writer is with the “who” of the speech, the easier the writing will be.
(cid:1) What refer to the topic.
Knowledge of the topic will enable the writer make appropriate research for the speech.
(cid:1) Where refers to the setting.
The location of a speech can enhance a message.
A large hall requires a more formal talk than a roundtable forum.
(cid:1) When refers to the time of the speech, the time of the day or year.
A speech can always be linked to a special celebration.
The time may determine the length of the speech.
When the writer is writing the speech for a boss, or someone else, it is essential to interview the speaker in advance.
The interviews help the writer t6o determine the object of the talk, determine the speaker’s main points and capture the speaker’s characteristics.
Researching the speech would involve digging into all literature, books, articles, speeches, pamphlets and other writings on the subject of the speech.
Bring personal thoughts to topic and seek the opinion of others on the topic.
You must also research into your message and the predispositions of your audience.
Presenting the Speech Successful planning and writing will no doubt aid successful presentation of your speech.
Every speech has essentially three segments: (cid:1) The introduction (cid:1) The body of the speech (cid:1) The conclusion The introduction is used to capture attention, preview the contents or establish contact with the audience.
It is therefore an opportunity to establish rapport and confidence with the audience.
120 Once the speaker has opened his/her speech and attracted the audience attention, he/she should promptly move to the body of the speech.
Usually the main body of the speech is devoted to a discussion of the main points of the speech.
Here, the speaker is expected to give the reason that support the statement made, furnish statistics, facts and figures to clarify or expatiate the ideas contained in the speech.
The conclusion of the speech is as important as the beginning.
The conclusion is used to summaries all the major points of the presentation and give the audience a felling of satisfaction.
It is advisable that the conclusion should be blunt, short and to the point.
On appropriate occasions it is advisable to utilize visual aids to enhance both the clarity and emotional impact of the speech.
Visual aids should be carefully handled so as not to distract the audience.
Visuals aids has several advantages.
For instance, a speaker on road safety habits can demonstrate to the audience traffic situations that an average driver encounters on the road.
Speech delivery does not come easy.
One improves after several events or speech making.
For inexperienced speakers, speech anxiety is often the first problem they have to over come.
Experts counsel relaxation, especially in front of a large audience as to overcome nervousness.
Speakers are also advised to establish eye contact with members of the audience.
Looking directly at individuals in the audience enables the speaker to be more conscious of feedback from the audience so that he/she can modify his/her approach if necessary.
Generally, experts have recommended these vital points on speech delivery; 1.
Be eloquent 2.
Brevity is of utmost importance 3.
Points should be organized so that the audience can follow the speaker 4.
Apply appropriate emotional gestures to demonstrate your feelings 5.
Pay attention to the gestures of your listeners or audience.
They may help you keep in tandem with their reactions.
6.
Memorise your first sentence on the tip of your tongue.
7.
Don’t panic if your audience is reacting negatively.
Try to pull them back by involving them in the action.
An important element of speech delivery is evaluation.
It is necessary that a speaker does an evaluation of how well he/she performed in the speech.
It will help the public relations practitioner in his job of helping his boss or clients to become better speakers.
The public relations practitioners can ask colleagues or even friends to offer a sincere assessment of the speech, in addition to asking himself/herself vital questions on his/her performance.
Criteria for evaluating speech contents can include appropriateness of focus, quality and quantity of material, organisation and languages.
121 It is necessary to restate the fact that speech is very important in contemporary public relations.
The wise words of veteran public relations expert/practitioner, Sam Black (1989) comes quite handy in restating this fact.
He observes: A good speech can have a more lasting effect than any other medium of public relations.
It is therefore worth a considerable amount of effort to ensure that it is the right speech for the right occasion delivered by the most able orator in his or her best manner and under the most propitious circumstances.
This is the counsel of perfection which if seldom achieved is nevertheless well worth striving for.
4.0 CONCLUSION Good writing is essential for success in all communication activities.
This is no less true of public relations writing.
Good preparation and attention to details ensures that your writing improves with every subsequent attempt.
With good writing skills a public relations practitioner will turn out remarkable speeches and press releases.
5.0 SUMMARY We have in this unit considered the ingredients of good writing skills which are necessary to produce the important tools used in public relations work: press release and speeches.
We also looked at the structure of a press release.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT As a public relations consultant you have been requested to deliver a talk to the Rotract Club of FESTAC on “The Dangers of Aids in Society”.
Prepare a brief speech in not more than 350 words for this purpose.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Black, Sam (1989).
Introduction to Public Relations.
London: Modino Press Ltd. Hutchison, E.R.
Snr) (1986).
Writing For Mass Communication.
New York: Longman.
Lucas, Stephen E. (2001).
The Art of Public Speaking.
7th ed.
Bostom: McGraw- Hill.
Nwosu, I.E and Idemili, S.O (1992).
Public Relations, Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: ACENA Publishers.
122 Onwunali, C.C.
(2006).
Business and Organisational Communicatio.
Lagos: Nile Ventures Press.
Seitel, F.P.
(2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Wilcox, D.L.
& Nolte, L.W.
(1995).
Public Relations Writing and Media Techniques.
2nd ed.
New York: Harper Collins.
123 UNIT 4: LAW AND ETHICS IN PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Public Relations Laws and Regulations 3.1.1 Role of Law in Public Relations 3.1.2 Public Relations and the law 3.2 Ethics in Public Relations 3.2.1 Definition of Ethics 3.2.2 Ethical valued applied to PR 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are some vital issues any public relations practitioner should address himself/herself to.
How do as a practice public relations be in the good books of the law and society.
What are the legal sides to public relations practice?
How do I relate with my colleagues in the profession.
These questions are addressed in this unit when we consider the role of law and Ethics in public relations practice.
This unit will look at how the practice of public relations is regulated in Nigeria and other parts of the world.
There are two modes of regulations in public relations.
The first is formal regulations set by the government for the protection of its citizens and is referred to as the law.
The second is professional regulations designed to enhance the practice of public relations and it is referred to as code of ethics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Discuss the role of law in public relations practice (cid:1) List and discuss important laws in public relations practice (cid:1) Explain the importance of ethics in public relations practice (cid:1) Identify some of the ethical values of public relations practice.
124 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Relations Law and Regulations The field of public relations comes under the purview of legal regulations which practitioners that desire to keep out of trouble must be familiar with.
As a form of mass communication, most of media laws in Nigeria’s statute books equally apply to public relations.
Such laws include defamation (libel and slander), copyright, and trademarks, and privacy, contract and cinematography.
Laws are official rules and regulations used to govern a society or group and to control the behaviour of its members.
It is in the interest of the public relations practitioner and that of the organisations he/she works with or the client to familiarize himself/herself with these regulations to keep out of legal problems and avoid costly litigation.
3.1.1 Role of Law in Public Relations The activities of a public relations practitioner affects the society in general and his/her organisation or client in particular.
The public relations practitioner does not live or practice his profession in isolation from society.
Law is meant to regulate the relationship of members of society, in the other words it serves as an instrument to regulate and control human activities.
The role played by law in public relations practice can be identified as follows: (cid:1) To protect the rights of individuals and the society from the excess which may arise in the practice of public relations.
(cid:1) Promote national security and development by providing means for peaceful resolution of conflicts between practitioners and the society.
(cid:1) Maintain professional standards by prescribing criteria for practice of the profession, thereby enhancing the professional standing of the practice.
3.1.2 Public Relation Laws Public relations laws can be categorized into two broad segments.
Law of Tort which consists of civil laws for which there are remedies for breach and law of contract which regulates the relationship between a practitioner and his/her client.
Let us consider the more significant ones here.
Defamation – Defamation includes statements or communication in words, pictures or symbols that diminish the respect, goodwill, confidence, or esteem or produce other adverse feelings about a person or institution.
It can therefore be seen that defamation is the act of damaging the regulation of a person through false and malicious communication that exposes that person or institution to contempt ridicule 125 hatred or social ostracism or lowers him in the estimation or right thinking members of the community.
Defamation consists of libel which is published or printed defamation and slander which is distributing spoken defamation.
Public relations practitioners who issue press releases, write speeches, corporate reports, newsletters, house journals or other communication should constantly watch for pictures and statements that might defame persons or institutions.
Conditions for establishing libel Four basic conditions must be met before a statement is held to be legally libelous.
(cid:1) The words are defamatory (hurt someone’s reputation) (cid:1) Identification of the victim by name or some other way obvious to others (cid:1) The defamatory statement was published or broadcast to an audience other than the victim.
(cid:1) The person making the statement was malicious or negligent.
Defences available in a libel suit The following defences are variable to any one sued for libel (cid:1) Justification (truth).
The plaintiff (victim) must not only prove that the statement is false, but that it was made with malice or negligence.
(cid:1) Privilege otherwise libelous statements can be protected if they were fair and accurate account of judicial court proceedings or legislative proceedings.
(cid:1) Fair comment which includes opinions which are clearly labeled as such on the performance of public figures, celebrates, actors musicians, etc.
Slander Slander is defamation in words put in oral form like vulgar abuse curse, etc.
In spite of this distinction, most of conditions for establishing offence and defences earlier mentioned for libel also apply to slander.
Privacy Privacy laws are to protect the right of the plaintiff “to be let alone”.
Four categories of privacy violation include; Intension upon the individual’s seclusion or into his or her private affairs, usually through intrusion illegal entry or electronic eaves dropping Public disclosure of embarrassing private facts about the plaintiff that can cause the person mental anguish Publicity that places the individual in a false light in the public eye, and is made to appear other he or she is.
False light results when mental personal humiliation and 126 mental anguish for example, a wrong caption is used to give false impression of people in the picture.
Appropriation, for the defendant’s advantage of the plaintiff’s name or likeness, like using the name or picture of another for advertising or trade purposes without consent or permission.
Copyright and Trade Marks As public relations practitioners, you may have to use the words and pictures of others in news releases, brochures, pamphlets, reports and speeches.
You may have to use the excerpts of others work by yourself or you hire outside contractors to write copy or take pictures.
The copyright and Trade Marks Law exist to protect the publishing and selling the creative work of others and generally protecting their intellectual property against any infringement.
The copyright law provides that the copyright owner “shall have exclusive right” to reproduce, distribute and use original works of expression fixed in a tangible medium.
The copyright protects the copyright material from being used without the consent of the original copyright owner.
In the same vein, the trade marks law protect trade marks, words, names, and symbols used by companies to identify and distinguish their goods or services from those of another.
Any infringement of copyright or trade mark will attract severe sanctions from the law courts.
It is therefore necessary that you in the course of your public relations work take adequate care to ensure that due permission is obtained before any of these materials is used by you or your client/organisation.
Self Assessment Exercise Explain the role that the law plays in public relations practice.
3.2 Ethics in Public Relations In the first segment of this unit, we have considered the role that law plays in public relations practice.
We note that an essential function of law is to punish offenders and provide remedy for any member of society who is adversely affected by the conduct of another.
The laws are enacted by the government to regulate the conduct and interactions of members of society.
An essential point you should know is that law is punishment after the action or offence must have been committed and the law provides for punishments or remedy to mitigate the effects of the offence.
However, another segment of regulations that guide public relations is Ethics.
Ethics operate to take care of areas not patrolled by law.
While the law employs- 127 coercion or sanctions to secure compliance ethics employs moral persuasion or moral-suasion to secure compliance.
Virtually professions all over the world have code of ethics that guide their members in the performance of their job and this also applies to PR.
Definition of Ethics There are many definitions of Ethics as there are authors and school of philosophy.
Generally, Ethics is the branch of philosophy that deals with issues of right and wrong in human affairs.
Another definition states that ethics can be described as standard or conduct and behaviour based on moral duties and virtues derived from principles of right and wrong.
The Greek philosopher Socrates defines ethics as ‘How we ought to live’.
One of the factors identified by Aristotle as under the direct control of the speaker is Ethics which has to do with the character of the speaker.
This is the origin of source credibility in modern communication.
Aristotle had in his work ‘Rhetoric’ focused on the persuasive power of an individual’s character.
To Aristotle the speaker’s character may almost be called the most effective means of persuasion he possesses.
To him it adds much to an orator’s influence that his own character should look right.
He recognized that good sense, good moral character and goodwill inspire confidence in the orator’s own good character.
Melvin Sharpe has pointedly said that ethical harmony is essential for social stability and social stability is the mission and product of public relations in other words strict adherence to ethical principles is key to harmony in human relations.
3.2.1 Ethical values applied to public relations As we earlier explained, ethics can be described as the moral standards that are followed in relationships with others.
Ethics is important in public relations because most of the problems that public relations is called upon to solve usually arise not from illegal acts, but from unethical conduct or behaviour.
Both the public relations practitioner and the organisations for whom he/she works must emphasize the observance of ethical values in their conduct.
The major religious in the world emphasize moral values as foundation for harmonious living in society.
The Christian maxim “Love your neighbour as yourself”.
Ethics therefore is about the values each and everyone of us holds dear as a moral obligation The values can be personal, social or community, and national values, those things that an individual holds dear and feels worth defending.
Philosophers have suggested that personal values form the foundation of other value that an individual exhibits.
For instance an individual that values wealth so much would not mind to engage in any dishonest act to make money or injure the good of his/her community.
Being ethical minded means that you weight the implication of your actions before you do things.
128 The Josephson Institute for the Advancement of Ethics has identified universal ethics that an ethical minded individual would embrace.
They form the foundation for building ethical values in other areas of human life.
They are: * Honesty * Integrity * Promise-keeping * Fidelity * Fairness * Caring for others * Respect for others * Responsible citizenship * Accountability * Pursuit of Excellence Like our conscience, each individual has personal ethical values, that the question of what is right or wrong is not an easy one to define and varies from society to society.
For this reason, professions provide a code of conduct to guide their members on how to behave in their relationship with fellow members and the general public.
The essence of the code of International Public Relations is that honesty and fairness lie at the heart of public relations practice.
The code underscores the importance of members promoting and maintaining high standards of public service and ethical conduct.
Truth must not be sacrificed for expediency.
For a public relations practitioner working for an organisation or client it is his duty to emphasize the ethical practices be observed in the following areas.
- Product line - dangerous products, product performance and standards, packaging and environmental impact - Marketing practices - sales practice, consumer complaint policies advertising content and fair pricing.
- Pollution – Control projects, adherence to environmental standards, and evaluation procedures for new packages and products.
- Employee safely and health – Work environment policies, accident safeguards, food and medical facilities.
- Corporate philosophy – Contribution performance, encouragement of employee participation is socials projects and community development activities.
It is the duty of the public relations practitioner to counsel management not to pursue profit at the expense of any of these ethical practices.
A chief executive of an oil company in Nigeria (name withheld) who is ethical minded had this piece of advice for contractors working for his organisation.
“If we made $2 billion profits in a year and lose a single life in the course of our operations, we have suffered a loss”.
In other words, our ability to preserve human life should be the yardstick for measuring organisation success, and not met financial profit.
129 The Lockheed Corporation in the United States has defined six virtues which form the plank of ethical business conduct.
They are Honesty, Integrity, Respect, Trust, Responsibility and Citizenship.
Honesty: To be truthful in all endeavours, to be honest and forthright with one another and with customers, communities, supplies and shareholders.
Integrity: To say what we mean.
To deliver that we promise, and to stand for what is right.
Respect: To treat one another with dignity and fairness, appreciating the diversity of the workplace and the uniqueness of each employee.
Trust: To build confidence through team work and open candid communication.
Responsibility: To speak up without fear or retribution and report concerns in the work place, including violations of laws, regulations and company policies, and seek clarification and guidance whoever there is doubt.
Citizenship: To obey all the laws of the country and the other countries in which we do business and to do our part to make the communities in which we live better.
(Source: Seitel F.A.
The Practice of Public Relations (2001) Page 86).
The Public Relations Society of America has among its codes the following: (cid:1) A member shall deal fairly with clients or employers – past, present and potential, with fellow practitioners and with the general public.
(cid:1) A members shall adhere to truth and accuracy and to generally accepted standards of good taste.
(cid:1) A member shall conduct his/her professional life in accord with the public interest.
(cid:1) A member shall not intentionally communicate false or misleading information and is obligated to use care to avoid communication of false or misleading information.
(cid:1) A member shall not engage in any practice that tends to corrupt the channels of communication or the processes of government.
(cid:1) A member shall exemplify high standards of honesty and integrity while carrying out dual obligations to a client or employer and to the democratic process.
(For details see the Appendix) In the words of a renowned American PR scholar the success of public relations in contemporary society will depend largely on how the profession responds to the issue of ethical conduct.
To him, public relations professionals must have 130 credibility in order to practice.
They must be respected by the various publics with whom they interact.
To be credible and achieve respect PR professionals must be ethical.
He counsel that the key job for public relations professionals is to “advise clients to adapt to changing conditions and societal expectations rather than try to manipulate the environment for the good of the organisation”.
This is the same way to earn the respect and remain credible.
This is the greatest challenge that public relations practitioners face.
There is often pressure from the boss or the client to compromise one’s moral principles.
Occasionally public relations practitioners may be under pressure to lie for their employers, write press releases that are misleading, withhold information and cover up potentially harmful situations as well as accept or offer gifts and bribes to secure favours.
In the real world, there is a continuing conflict between the loyalty a practitioner owes his/her organisation/client and sticking to ethical principles.
The challenges is not an easy one given what the eminent management expert Peter Drucker has identified as one of the challenges facing public relations practice.
In his words “To this day, most institutions still look upon public relations as their “trumpet” and not as their “hearing aid” whereas it’s got to be both”.
4.0 CONCLUSION The role of Law and Ethics is very crucial in the practice of public relations.
Like any area of mass media communication, public relations is guided by some laws and regulations, which every practitioner must abide with to stay out of trouble.
Violations of laws knowingly or not will earn the practitioner and his organisation sanctions and costly litigation.
In addition to these laws, the professional has a Code of Ethics which a practitioner must abide with to earn the respect of his peers in particular and the society in general.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have carefully examined the substantial issues in public relations and the law.
We have tried to identify the role of law in public relations and the key elements of the laws that govern public relations.
We have also carefully gone through the issues of Ethics in public relations.
We noted that the key to earning credibility and respect for the profession is for the practitioners to exhibit high standards of ethical conduct in all their activities, in spite of pressures to serve various loyalties.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the conditions a claimant seeking damages in a defamation suit must meet to sustain the claim.
What are the defences available to a defendant in a defamation suit?
131 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cutlip, S.M, Center, A.H and Broom, G.M.
(1994.)
Effective Public Relations.
7th edn.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Osibajo, Y. and Fogam, K. (1991).
Nigeria Media Law.
Lagos: Gravitas Publishers.
Post, J.E, Lawrence, AT.
And Weber, J.
(1991).
Business and Society, Corporate Strategy, Public Policy, Ethics.
9th ed.
Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Seitel, F.P.
(2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
132 UNIT 5: PUBLIC RELATIONS AND SOCIETY CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Impact of Public Relations on Society 3.2 Positive Impacts of PR on Society 3.3 Negative Impacts on PR on Society 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Module 2, Unit 2, we tried to trace the historical origins of public relations.
We noted that public relations is as old as human history.
It therefore follows that the relationship between public relations and society is one that existed long ago.
From the earliest crude methods of public relations to the modern form, the practice of public relations has had one effect or other in society.
This is because public relations practitioners are members of the society and they carry out the profession in the society.
The society is therefore the laboratory where PR practitioners experiment their policies and programmes.
It therefore follows that the practice of public relations affects society positively and negatively.
Due to the power that has been ascribed to communication in general and public relations in particular, a lot of concern and controversy has been generated on the influence of public relations on society whether for good or for bad, or what we can refer to as minus and plus of PR.
Debates on public relations and society are equally as old as the practice of public relations.
A lot of concerns have been expressed by society and practitioners themselves.
In a bid to address some it these concerns, the profession has adopted various codes of ethics worldwide to guide the practice of public relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Identify the impact of public relations on society.
(cid:1) Explain the benefits and harmful effects of public relations in society 133 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Impact of Public Relations on Society As a subset of communication, public relations functions to inform people, to persuade people or integrate people with people.
Public relations affects people and is equally affected by people.
Public relations can be said to influence society two perspectives.
One perspective sees it as impacting positively and adding value and progress to society.
The other perspective sees public relations as influencing society in negative ways.
This is true of anything in society.
Anything in society should have its high and low points.
Those who argue in favour of the positive influence of public relations point to many values it credits its work to society, whereas critics are quick to point to its negative sides on society.
This is to be expected on any activity that is undertaken by human beings which must have its good and bad sides.
These arguments must be judgemental but ultimately the use of public relations to society must form the basis on which its pros and cons must be weighed.
Let us consider some of its uses.
(cid:1) Public relations is expected to be useful to society through the promotion of free competition of ideas and institutions through means that are wholesome.
(cid:1) If publics relative campaign performs the function of suppressing counter ideas, then the social utility of public relations can be diminished.
(cid:1) Public relation serves useful role when it is used to ventilate public opinion as issues of concern to the public.
(cid:1) Public relations serves public good when public communication is conducted in open and transparent way and not on the basis of hidden motives.
To the extent to which public relations has succeeded in fulfilling the expectations of society or falling short of this expectations could form the basis of praises or criticisms of its impact on society.
One thing is however clear, in the information age that society is, public relations is having a profound influence on how people in society relate to one another.
The social responsibility aspect of public relations reminds us that both individual practitioners and the profession as a whole are entrusted with the wellbeing of larger society as a condition on how they serve their clients.
3.2 Positive Impacts of PR on Society It would be an understatement to claim that public relations has impacted positively on society.
In the last three decades, public relations has contributed greatly to 134 building cohesion in society or what an American author refers to as the “Creation of Consent”.
Public relations has been utilized by governments, big organisations and economic systems to maintain mutual relationships with their various publics.
It has been used to prevent or minimize crisis situations, provide conducive environment for investment and profit for investors.
It has helped to create a more harmonious employee relations that resulted in more stable jobs for employer as well as facilitating the smooth flow of goods for the consumer.
The feedback mechanism provided by public relations has been useful in drawing the attention of governments to issues affecting the people.
It has also created channels for governments, organisations and other well endowed people to contribute to uplifting the conditions of the less privileged in society through activities of non-profit organisations and societies.
In sum, we can credit public relations with those positive impacts on society.
(cid:1) Public relations minimizes friction and conflict in society.
This helps to provide conducive environment that engenders progress and development.
Social stability is the mission and product of public relations.
(cid:1) Public relations promotes mutual adjustments and adaptation between institutions and groups.
These adjustments help establish smoother relationships that benefit society.
(cid:1) Public relations provides avenues through which organisations and government speak to the people.
It also creates avenues through which the public conveys its desires and interest to the government and corporate organisations.
(cid:1) Public relates helps to enhance social change by providing the communication needed to lubricate the challenging complexities and effects of these changes.
(cid:1) Public relations have played an important role in the communication system by enabling individuals to be informed on several aspects of subjects affecting their lives.
(cid:1) Public relations stresses the need for public approval.
This helps improve the conduct of organisations in their relations with the public.
3.3 Negative Impacts of Public Relations As there are claimed positives sides of public relations, there have been criticisms about public relations and conduct of public relations practitioners.
135 Cutlip, Centre and Broom have identified three major ‘minuses’ of public relations in its relationship with society.
They are: 1.
Public relations gains advantages for and promotes special interests, sometimes at the cost of the public well-being.
2.
Public relations clutters already chocked channels of communication with debris of pseudo events and phony phrases that confuse rather than clarify.
3.
Public relations corrodes our channels of communication with cynicism and “credibility gaps”.
Critics have argued that too often, the thrust of public relations is to obfuscate and obscure rather than to clarify complex public issues.
Heilbroner recognized public relations as a social force that has contributed to the debasement of our communication.
Writing on public relations: the invisible sell, he says: No one can quarrel with the essential function that public relations fills as a purveyor of genuine ideas and information.
No one denies that many public relations men, working for corporation as well as for colleges or causes, honestly communicate things which are worth communication.
Nor can anyone absolve public relations for loading the communications channels with noise.
We read the news and suspect the behind it ties the “news releases”.
We encounter the reputation and ascribe it to publicity.
Worst of all, we no longer credit good behaviour with good motives, but cheapen it top the level of “good public relations”.
Expressing concerns that practitioners clog communication channels with noise and clogging them with the clutter of manufactured stories, historian Daniel Boorstin argues that “pseudo-event” blur, rather than clarify public issues.
In his book the Image, Boorstin writes: The disproportion between what an informed citizen needs to know and what he can know is even greater.
The disproportion grows with the increase of the officials’ power of concealment and contrivance.
The news gathers’ need to select, invent, and plan correspondingly increase.
Thus inevitably, our whole system of public information produces always more “packaged” news, more pseudoevens” 4.0 CONCLUSION The debate on the influence of public relations on society is a continuous one.
The relationship between society and public relations will continue to attract diverse comments for sometime to come.
This is because public relations will continue to 136 affect society positively and negatively.
While the positive said can be encouraged, the negative side can be ameliorated through the high professional standards and ethical conduct on the part of practitioners.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the minuses and pluses of the influence of public relations on society.
We also saw that while practitioners have influence on society, society can also influence public relations by continuously harping on the need to exhibit sound ethical conduct in their practice.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT The impact of public relations on society can be said to be both positive and negative.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cutlip, S.M, Cebnter, A.H and Broom, G.M.
(1994).
Effective Public Relations.
7th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall.
Heilbroner, Robert (1967).
“Public Relations: The Invicible Sell”.
In Rec M. Christenson and Robert O. McWilliams.
Voice of the People.
2nd ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Seitel, Fraser, P (2001).
The Practice of Public Relations.
8th ed.
Upper Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall.
Wright, Donald K. (1989).
“Special Issues: Ethics in Public Relations”.
Public Relations Review 15, No.
2 (Summer 1989).
137 APPENDICES Professional Codes In Module 3, Unit 4, we discussed the subject of ethics in public relations.
One of the highlights of that unit is that it is a code of Ethics that separates a profession from other skilled occupations.
The Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR) has a code of practice that public relation practitioners must abide.
For you to practice public relations in Nigeria, you must be a registered member the NIPR.
It behooves on you as a practitioner to study these various codes and apply them in your practice.
APPENDIX ONE NIGERIAN INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS (NIPR) CODE OF ETHICS CODE OF ETHICS SECTION 3 (v) of the Constitution of the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations provides for a Code of Ethics that is recognized as a declaration of principles for the guidance of members of the Institute in the practice of their profession as follows: i.
Respect the moral principles of the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” and the freedoms entrenched in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in the performance of his/her duties.
ii.
Recognize that each person has the right to reach his/her own judgment of himself/herself.
iii.
Respect the right of parties in a dispute to explain their respective points of view.
iv.
Encourage the free circulation of public information and preserve the integrity of channels of communications.
v. Put truth and honesty of purpose before all other consideration.
vi.
Safeguard the confidences of his/her present and previous employers or clients.
vii.
Represent only interests which are not in conflict.
viii.
Refuse to enter into any agreement which requires the attainment of certain results before the payment of professional fees.
ix.
Protect the professional reputation or practice of another member, but make it his duty to report unethical behaviour on the part of any member of the institute.
138 x.
Not seek to displace any other member with his/her employer or client, except with the mutual agreement of all parties concerned.
xi.
Not operate any ‘front’ organisation.
xii.
Co-operate with other members upholding and enforcing this code.
APPOVED BY THE EXTRA-ORDINARY GENERAL MEETING HELD AT THE BRISTOL HOTEL, LAGOS, NIGERIA ON THE 30TH DAY OF JANUARY, 1981.
139 APPENDIX TWO IPRA CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT “The following code of conduct was adopted by the International Public Relations Associations at its general assembly in Venice, May 1961 and is binding on all members of the Association”.
A.
Personal and professional integrity It is understood that by personal integrity is meant the maintenance of both high moral standards and a sound reputation.
By professional integrity is meant observance of the constitution, rules and, particularly, the code as adopted by IPRA.
B.
Conduct towards clients and employers 1.
A member has a general duty of fair dealing towards his clients or employers, past and present.
2.
A member shall not represent conflicting or competing interests without the express consent of those concerned.
3.
A member shall safeguard the confidences of both present and former clients or employers.
4.
A member shall not employ methods tending to be derogatory of another member’s client or employer.
5.
In performing services for a client or employer a member shall not accept fees, commissions or any other valuable consideration in connection with those services from anyone other than his client or employer without the express consent of his client or employer, given after a full disclosure of the facts.
6.
A member shall not propose to a prospective client or employer that his fee or other compensation be contingent on the achievement of certain results; nor shall be enter into any fee agreement to the same effect.
C. Conduct towards the public and the media 1.
A member shall conduct his professional activities in accordance with the public interest, and with full respect for the dignity of the individual.
2.
A member shall not engage in any practice which tends to corrupt the integrity of channels of public communication.
3.
A member shall not intentionally disseminate false or misleading information.
140 4.
A member shall at all times seek to give a balanced and faithful representation of the organisation which he serves.
5.
A member shall not create any organisation to serve some announced cause but actually to serve an undisclosed special or private interest of a member or his client or his employer, nor shall he make use of it or any such existing organisation.
D. Conduct towards colleagues 1.
A member shall not intentionally injure the professional reputation or practice of another member.
However, if a member has evidence that another member has been guilty of unethical, illegal or unfair practices in violation of this Code, he should present the information to the Council of IPRA.
2.
A member shall not seek to supplant another member with his employer or client.
3.
A member shall cooperate with fellow members in upholding and enforcing this Code.
CODE OF ATHENS IPRA members are also required to abide by a code of ethics, known as the Code of Athens as it was adopted in Athens in May 1965 by the IPRA General Assembly.
It was modified slightly in Tehran in April 1968.
(The Code of Athens was also adopted to CERP in 1965).
This code obliges every IPRA member to observe a strict moral code.
Each member: Shall endeavour 1.
To contribute to the achievement of the moral and cultural conditions enabling human beings to reach their full stature and enjoy the indefeasible rights to which they are entitled under the ‘Universal Declaration of Human Rights’.
2.
To establish communications patterns and channels which, fostering the free flow of essential information, will make each member of the society in which he lives feel that he is being kept informed, and also give him an awareness of his own personal involvement and responsibility, and of his solidarity with other members.
3.
To bear in mind that, because of the relationship between his profession and the public, his conduct –even in private – will have an impact on the way in which the profession as a whole is appraised.
4.
To respect, in the course of his professional duties, the moral principles and rules of the ‘Universal Declaration of Human Rights’.
141 5.
To pay due regard to, and uphold, human dignity, and to recognize the right of each individual to judge for himself.
6.
To encourage the moral, psychological and intellectual conditions for dialogue in its true sense, and to recognize the right of these parties involved to state their case and express their views.
Sha’l undertake 7.
To conduct himself always and in all circumstances in such a manner as to deserve and secure the confidence of those with whom he comes into contact.
8.
To act, in all circumstances, in such a manner as to take account of the respective interests of the parties involved: both the interests of the organisation which he serves and the interests of the publics concerned.
9.
To carry out his duties with integrity, avoiding language likely to lead to ambiguity or misunderstanding, and to maintain loyalty to his clients or employers, whether past or present.
Shall refrain from 10.
Subordinating the truth to other requirements.
11.
Circulating information which is not based on established and ascertainable facts.
12.
Taking part in any venture or undertaking which is unethical or dishonest or capable of impairing human dignity and integrity.
13.
Using any ‘manipulative’ methods or techniques designed to create subconscious motivation which the individual cannot control of his own free will and so cannot be held accountable for the action taken on them.
Most national public relations associations have adopted codes of professional conduct which must be observed by their members.
The Code of Professional Conduct of the Institute of Public Relations, which was adopted on 31 December 1963, is typical of these codes.
IPRA CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT The essential disciplines of good public behaviour by individuals and organizations are set out in.
This Institute of Public Relations Code of Professional Conduct.
Additionally the Public Relations Consultants Associations has a Code of Consultancy Practice which applies to these member consultancies.
As with other professional bodies accustomed to observing ethical standards, the fact that a public relations practitioner or organisation undertakes to conform with certain ground rules is an assurance of reputable business dealing.
142  It should be emphasized that IPR members undertake to observe the Institute’s Code when applying to join.
It is recommended that they should draw the attention of clients and employers to the code whenever appropriate.
Members should also make themselves aware of the Codes adopted by International groupings within the public relations profession, particularly the Codes of Athens and Lisbon which the IPR supports.
The IPR Code of Processional Practice was reviewed in 1985 and revisions adopted by special resolution at the Institute’s annual general meeting on 9 April 1986.
1.
Standards of professional conduct: A member shall have a positive duty to observe the highest standards in the practice of public relations.
Furthermore a member has the personal responsibility at all times to deal fairly and honestly with this client, employer and employers, past or present, with fellow members, with the media of communication and above all else with the public.
2.
Media of communication: A member shall not engage in any practice which tends to corrupt the integrity of the media of communication.
3.
Undisclosed interests: A member shall have the duty to ensure that the actual interest of any organisation with which he may be professionally concerned is adequately declared.
4.
Rewards to holders of public office: A member shall not, with intent to further his interests (or those of his client or employer), offer to give any reward to a person holding public office if such action is inconsistent with the public interest.
5.
Dissemination of information: A member shall have a positive duty at all times to respect the truth and in this regard not to disseminate false or misleading information knowingly or recklessly and to use proper care to avoid doing so inadvertently.
6.
Confidential information: A member shall not disclose (except upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction) or make use of information given or obtained in confidence from his employer or client, past or present, for personal gain or otherwise.
7.
Conflict of interests: A member shall not represent conflicting interests but may represent competing interests with the express consent of the parties concerned.
8.
Disclosure of beneficial financial interests: A member with a financial interests in or from an organisation shall not recommend the use of that 143 organisation, nor make use of its services on behalf of his client or employer, without declaring his interest.
9.
Payment contingent upon achievements: A member shall not negotiate or agree terms with a prospective employer or client on the basis of payment contingent upon specific future public relations achievements.
10.
Employment of holders of public office: A member who employs or is responsible for employing or recruiting a member of either House of Parliament, a member of the European Parliament or a person elected to public office, whether in a consultative or executive capacity, shall disclose this fact, also the object and nature of the employment to the Executive Director of the Institute who himself falls into any of these categories shall be directly responsible for disclosing of causing to be disclosed to the Executive Director of the Institute who himself falls into any of these categories shall be directly responsible for disclosing or causing to be disclosed to the Executive Director the same information as may relate to himself.
(The register referred to in this clause shall be open to public inspection at the offices of the Institute during office hours).
11.
Injury to other members: A member shall not maliciously injure the professional reputation of another member.
12.
Reputation of the profession: A member shall not conduct himself in a manner which is or is likely to be detrimental to the reputation of the Institute or the profession of public relations.
13.
Upholding the code: A member shall uphold this Code, shall cooperate with fellow members in so doing and in enforcing decisions on any matter arising from its application.
If a member has reason to believe that another member has been engaged in practices which may be in breach of this Code, it shall be his duty first to inform the member concerned and then to inform the Institute if these practices do not cease.
It is the duty of all members to assist the Institute to implement this Code, and the Institute will support any members so doing.
14.
Other professions.
A member shall, when working in association with other professionals, respect the codes of other professions and shall not knowingly be party of any breach of such codes.
15.
Professional updating: A member shall be expected to be aware of, understand and observe this Code, any amendments to it and any other codes which shall be incorporated into this Code and to remain up to date with the content and recommendations of any guidance or practice papers as may be 144 issued by the Institute and hall have a duty to take all reasonable steps to conform to good practice as expressed in such guidance or practice papers.
16.
Instruction of others: A member shall not knowingly cause or permit another person or organisation to act in a manner inconsistent with this Code or be a party to such action.
The IPR issues an Interpretation of this Code which can be obtained from the IPR at Gate House, 1 St. John’s Square London ECIM 4DH.
EUROPEAN CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT IN PUBLIC RELATIONS (Code of Lisbon) This code was approved by the General Assembly of the European Confederation of Public Relations (CERP) at Lisbon on 16 April 1987 and amended on 13 May 1989, Nearly all the European public relations associations are members of CERP so this code is binding on all their members.
SECTION 1: Criteria and standards of professional qualification of practitioners bound by this Code.
Clause I Every professional member of (national association) duly admitted as such in accordance with the rules of (national association) is deemed for the purpose of this Code to be a public relations practitioner, and to be bound by the Code.
SECTION II: General professional obligations Clause 2 In the practice of his profession, the public relations practitioner undertakes to respect the principles set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and in particular the freedom of expression and the freedom of the press which give effect to the right of the individual to receive information.
He likewise undertakes to act in accordance with the public interest and not to harm the dignity or integrity of the individual.
Clause 3 In his professional conduct, the public relations practitioner must show honesty, intellectual integrity, and loyalty.
In particular he undertakes not to make use of comment, or information which, to his knowledge or belief, are false or misleading.
In the some sprit he must be careful to avoid the use, even by accident, of practices or methods incompatible with this Code.
145  Clause 4 Public relations activities must be carried out openly: they must be readily identifiable, bear a clear indication of their origin, and must not tend to mislead third parties.
Clause 5 In his relations with other professions and with other branches of social communications, the public relations practitioner must respect the rules and practices appropriate to those professions or occupations, so far as these are compatible with the ethics of his own profession.
A public relations practitioner must respect the national code of professional conduct and the laws in force in any country in which he practices his profession and exercise restraint in seeking personal publicity.
Section III: Specific professional obligations TOWARDS CLIENTS OR EMPLOYERS Clause 6 A public relations practitioner shall not represent conflicting or competing interests without the express consent of the clients or employees concerned.
Clause 7 In the practice of his profession, a public relations practitioner must observe complete discretion.
He must scrupulously respect professional confidence, and in particular must not reveal any confidential information received from his clients or employers, past, present or potential, or make use of such information, without express authorization.
Clause 8 A public relations practitioner who has an interest which may conflict with that of his client or employer must disclose it as soon as possible.
Clause 9 A public relations practitioner must not recommend to his client or employer the service or any business or organisation in which he has a financial, commercial or other interest without first disclosing that interest.
Clause 10 A public relations practitioner shall not enter a contract with his client or employer under which the practitioner guarantees quantified results.
Clause 11 146 A public relations practitioner may accept remuneration for his services only in the form of salary or fees, and on no account may be accept payment or other material rewards contingent upon quantifiable professional results.
Clause 12 A public relations practitioner may accept remuneration for his services to a client or an employer any remuneration from a third party, such as discounts, commissions or payments in kind, except with the agreement of the client or employer.
Clause 13 When the execution of a public relations assignment would be likely to entail serious professional misconduct and imply behaviour contrary to the principles of this Code, the public relations practitioner must take steps to notify his client or employer immediately, and do everything possible to see that the latter respects the requirements of the Code.
If the client or employer persists in his intentions, the practitioner must nevertheless observe the Code irrespective of the consequences to him.
TOWARDS PUBLIC OPINION AND THE INFORMATION MEDIA Clause 14 The spirit of this Code and the rules contained in preceding clauses, notably clauses 2,3,4 and 5, imply a constant concern on the part of the public relations practitioner with the right to information, and however, the duty to provide information, within the limits of professionals confidence.
They imply also a respect for the rights and independence of the information media.
Clause 15 Any attempt to deceive public opinion or its representatives is forbidden.
News must be provided without charge or hidden rewards for its use or publication.
Clause 16 If it should seen necessary to maintain the initiative in, and the control of, the distribution of information, within the principles of this Code, the public relations practitioners may buy space or broadcasting time in conformity with the rules, practices and usages in that field.
TOWARDS FELLOW-PRACTITIONERS Clause 17 The public relations practitioners refrain from unfair competition with fellow practitioners.
He must neither act nor speak in a way which would tend to 147 depreciation the reputation or business of a fellow practitioner, subject always to his duty under Clause 19b of this Code.
TOWARDS THE PROFESSION Clause 18 The public relations practitioner must refrain from any conduct which may prejudice the reputation of his profession.
In particular he must not cause harm to his national association (name), its efficient working, or its good name, by malicious attacks or by any breach of its constitution or rules.
Clause 19 The reputation of the profession is the responsibility of each of its members.
The public relations practitioner has a duty not only to respect this Code himself but also: a. to assist in making the Code more widely and better known and understood; b. to report to the competent disciplinary authorities any breach or suspected breach of the Code which comes to his notice, and c. to take any action in his power to ensure that rulings on its application by such authorities are observed and sanctions made effective.
Any practitioner who permits a violation of the Code will be considered as having himself breached the Code.
148 APPENDIX THREE Code of Professional Standards for the Practice of Public Relations Declaration of Principles Members of the Public Relations Society of America base their professional principles on the fundamental value and dignity of the individual, holding that the free exercise of human rights, especially freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, and freedom of the press, is essential to the practice of public relations.
In serving the interests of clients and employers, we dedicate ourselves to the goals of better communication, understanding, and cooperation among the diverse individuals, groups, and institutions of society, and of equal opportunity of employment in the public relations profession.
We pledge: To conduct ourselves professionally, with truth, accuracy, fairness, and responsibility to the public; To improve our individual competence and advance the knowledge and proficiency of the profession through containing research and education; And to adhere to the articles of the Code of Processional Standards for the Practice of Public Relations as adopted by the governing Assembly of the Society.
These articles have been adopted by the Public Relations Society of America to promote and maintain high standards of public service and ethical conduct among its members.
1.
A member shall conduct his or her professional life in accord with the public interest.
2.
A member shall exemplify high standards of honesty and integrity while carrying out dual obligations to a client or employer and to the democratic process.
3.
A members shall deal fairly with the public, with past or present clients or employers, and with fellow practitioners, giving due respect to the ideal of free inquiry and to the opinions of others.
4.
A member shall adhere to the highest standards of accuracy and truth, avoiding extravagant claims or unfair comparisons and giving credit for ideas and words borrowed from others.
5.
A member shall not knowingly disseminate false or misleading information and shall act promptly to correct erroneous communications for which he or she is responsible.
149  6.
A member shall not engage in any practice which has the purpose of corrupting the integrity of channels of communications or the process of government.
7.
A member shall be prepared to identify publicly the name of the client or employer on whose behalf any public communication is made.
8.
A member shall not use any individual or organisation professing to serve or represent an announced cause, or professing to be independence or unbiased, but actually serving another or undisclosed interest.
9.
A member shall not guarantee the achievement of specified results beyond the member’s direct control.
10.
A member shall not represent conflicting or competing interests without the express consent of those concerned, given after a full disclosure of the facts.
11.
A member shall not accept fees, commissions, gifts, or any other consideration from anyone except clients or employers for whom services are performed without their express consent, given after full disclosure of the facts.
12.
A member shall not place himself or herself in a position where the member’s personal interest is or may be in conflict with an obligation to an employer or client, or others, without full disclosure of such interests to all involved.
13.
A member shall scrupulously safeguard the confidences and privacy rights of present, former, and prospective clients or employers.
14.
A member shall not intentionally damage the professional reputation or practice of another practitioner.
15.
If a member has evidence that another member has been guilty of unethical, illegal, or unfair practices, including those in violation of this Code, the member is obliged to present the information promptly to the proper authorities of the Society for action in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article XII of the Bylaws.
16.
A member called as a witness in a proceeding for enforcement of this Code is obligated to appear, unless excused for sufficient reason by the judicial panel.
150 17.
A member shall, as soon as possible, sever relations with any organisation or individual if such relationship requires conduct contrary to the articles of this Code.
151  APPENDIX FOUR BRITISH INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS (BIPRS) CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDCUT Clause One: Standards of professional conduct, “A member, in the conduct of his professional activities shall respect the public interest and the dignity of the individual.
It is his personal responsibility at all times to deal fairly and honestly with his client or employer, past or present, with his fellow members, with the media of communication and with the public”.
Clause Two: Dissemination of information; “A member shall not knowingly or recklessly disseminate false information, and shall use proper care to avoid doing so inadvertently.
He has a positive duty to maintain integrity and accuracy” Clause Three: Media of communication; “A member shall not engage in any practice which tends to corrupt the integrity of the media of communication”.
Clause Four: Undisclosed interest; “A member shall not be a party to any activity which deliberately seeks to dissemble or mislead by promoting a disguised or undisclosed interest, while appearing to further another.
It is his duty to ensure that the actual interest of any organization with which he may be professionally concerned is adequately declared”.
Clause Five: Confidential information; “A member shall not disclose (except upon the order of court of a competent jurisdiction) or make use of information given or obtained in confidence from his employer or client, past or present, for personal gain or otherwise, without express consent”.
Clause Six: Conflict of interest; “A member shall not represent conflicting interests without the expressed consent of the parties concerned after full disclosure of the facts”.
Clause Seven: Sources of payment; “A member, in the course of his professional services to his employer or client, shall not accept payment either in cash or in kind in connection with those services from any other source without the expressed consent of his employers or client”.
Clause Eight: Disclosure of financial interest; “A member having a financial interest in an organisation shall not recommend the use of that organisation, nor make use of its services on behalf of his client or employer, without declaring his interest”.
152 Clause Nine: Payment contingent upon achievements.
; “A member shall not negotiable or agree to terms with a prospective employer or client on the basis of payment contingent upon specific public relations achievements”.
Clause Ten: Rewards to holders of office; “A member shall not, with intent to further his interest for those of his client or employer, offer or give any reward to a person holding public office if such action is inconsistent with the public interest”.
Clause Eleven: Employment of Members of Parliament; “A member who employs a Member of Parliament, of either House, whether in a consultative or executive capacity, shall disclose the fact, and also the object of the employment, to the General Secretary of the Institute, who shall enter it in a register kept for the purpose.
A member of the Institute who is himself a Member of Parliament shall be directly responsible for disclosing or causing to be disclosed to the General Secretary any such information as may relate to himself.
(The register referred to in this clause shall be open to public inspection at the offices of the institute during office hours)”.
Clause Twelve: Injury to other members; “A member shall not maliciously injure the professional reputation or practice of another member”.
Clause Thirteen: Instruction to others; “A member who knowingly causes or permits another person or organisation to act in a manner inconsistent with this Code, or is party to such action, shall himself be deemed to be breach of it”.
Clause Fourteen: Reputation of the profession; “A member shall not conduct himself in any manner detrimental to the reputation of the institute or the profession of public relations.
Clause Fifteen: Upholding the Code; “A member shall uphold this Code, shall co- operate with fellow members in so doing and in enforcing decisions on any matter arising from its application.
If a member has reason to believe that another member has been engaged in practices which may be in breach of this Code, it shall be his duty to inform the Institute.
It is the duty of all members to assist the Institute to implement this Code, and the Institute will support any member so doing”.
Clause Sixteen: Other professions; “A member shall, when acting for a client or employer who belongs to a profession, respect the code of ethics of that other profession and shall not knowingly be a part to any breach of such a code”.
153 APPENDIX FIVE PRSA’S CODE OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE PRACTICE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS These articles have been adopted by the Public Relations Society of America to promote and maintain high standards of public service and ethical conduct among its members: 1.
A member shall conduct his or her professional life in accord with the public interest.
2.
A member shall exemplify high standards of honesty and integrity while carrying out dual obligations to a client or employer and to the democratic process.
3.
A member shall deal fairly with the public, with past or present clients or employers, and with fellow practitioners, given due respect to the ideal of free inquiry and to the opinions of others.
4.
A member shall adhere to the highest standards of accuracy and truth, avoiding extravagant claims or unfair comparisons and giving creditor for ideas and words borrowed from others.
5.
A member shall not knowingly disseminate false or misleading information and shall act promptly to correct erroneous communications for which he or she is responsible.
COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION DISSEMINATION 1.
Communication professionals will uphold the credibility and dignity of their profession by encouraging the practice of honest, candid and timely communication.
The highest standards of professionalism will be upheld in all communication.
Communicators should encourage frequent communication of messages that are honest in their content, candid, accurate and appropriate to the needs of the organisation and its audiences.
2.
Professional communicators will not use any information that has been generated or appropriately acquired by a business for another business without permission.
Furthermore, communicators should attempt to identify the source of information to be used.
154 When one is charging employers, information developed at the previous position will not be used without permission from that employer.
Acts of plagiarism and copyright infringement are illegal acts; material in the public domain should have its source attributed, not if possible, not always.
If an organisation grants permission to sue its information and request public acknowledgement, it will be made in a place appropriate to the material used.
The material will be used only for the purpose for which permission was granted.
Standard of Conduct: 3.
Communication professionals will abide by the spirit and letter of all laws and regulations governing their professional activities.
All international, national and local laws and regulations must be observed, with particular attention to those pertaining to communication, such as copyright, trade mark and libel.
4.
Communication professionals will not condone any illegal or unethical act related to their professional activity, their organization and its business or the public environment in which it operates.
It is the personal responsibility of professional communicators to act honestly, fairly and with integrity at all times in all professional activities.
Looking without adequate evidence the other way, while others act illegally and tacitly condone such acts as illegal, e.g.
copyright, plagiarism etc, whether or not the communicator has committed them.
The communicator should speak with the individual involved, his or her supervisor or the appropriate authorities depending on the context of the situation and one’s own ethical judgment.
Confidentiality/Disclosure: 5.
Communication professionals will respect the confidentiality and right-to- privacy of all individuals, employers, clients and customer.
Communicators must determine the ethical balance and need-to-know.
Unless the situation involves illegal or grossly unethical acts, even at this level, confidences should be maintained.
If there is a conflict between right- to-privacy and need-to-know, a communicator should first talk with the source and negotiate the need for the information to be communicated.
6.
Communication professionals will not use any confidential information gained as a result of professional activity for personal benefit or for that of others.
155 Confidential information cannot be used to give inside advantage to stock transactions, gain favours from outsiders, assist a competing company for whom one is going to work, assist companies in developing a marketing advantage, achieve a publishing advantage or otherwise act to the detriment of an organisation.
Such information must remain confidential during and after one’s employment period.
Professionalism: 7.
Communication professionals should uphold ABC’s standards for ethical conduct in all professional activity, and should use IABC and its designation of accreditation (ABC) only for purpose that are authorized and fairly represent the organisation and its professional standards.
IABC recognizes the need for professional integrity within any organisation, including the association.
Members should acknowledge that their actions reflect on themselves, their organisation and their professions.
ROLE OFLAW IN PROFESSIONAL PR PRACTICE In order to do a good job, as well as keep himself and his client out of legal trouble, a PR professional must be familiar with the rules that regulate the profession.
Public relations or advertising materials could be subject to legal action if the content is libelous, deceptive, misleading or indecent, or if the practitioner is unaccredited or unregistered in some countries.
The public relations professional must understand and obey universal laws of communication, as well s those of the particular society, such as the underlisted.
ACCREDITATION AND REGISTRATION If a person is dismissed from the Public Relations Society of America (PRSA), it simply means the individual is no longer a member.
PRSA has no legal authority to prohibit an expelled member from continuing to practice public relations.
But the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR) has the legal mandate to accredit and register PR professionals in Nigeria.
156 APPENDIX SIX PUBLIC RELATIONS ORGANISATIONS In this appendix the work of four organizations is considered; these are the institute of Public Relations, the Public Relations Consultants Association, the International Public Relations Association and the European Public Relations Centre (CERP).
The Institute of Public Relations This is the only organisation in the United Kingdom devoted exclusively to the study and development of public relations.
It was founded in 1948 by a group of public relations officers from commerce, industry, central and local government, all of whom felt the need for an organisation to represent the rapidly expanding profession in which they were engaged.
It was incorporated in January 1964.
The Institute’s main objects are: a.
To promote the development of public relations for the benefit of the practice in commerce; industry, central and local government, nationalized undertakings; professional, trade and voluntary organisations and for the benefit of all practitioners, and other concerned in or with public relations.
b.
To encourage and foster the observance of high professional standards by its members and to establish and prescribe such standards.
c. To arrange meetings, discussions, conferences, etc, on matters of common interest, and generally to act as a clearing house for the exchange of ideas on the practice of public relations.
The constitution of the Institute provides for Honorary Life Members, Student, Members and Retired Members.
Honorary Life Membership and fellowship may be conferred by the Council in recognition of outstanding services or of distinguished public relations work.
Admission to each remaining category of membership is subject to election by the Council which is advised by the Membership Committee.
Each application is considered carefully on its merits in order to safeguard the professional standards of the Institute.
Honorary Life Member are individuals, from within or outside the Institute, on whom the Council are empowered to confer this honour in recognition of outstanding services.
Follows are Members on whom the Council have, by secret ballot, conferred Fellowships ‘in recognition of distinguished public relations work’.
Fellows are entitled to use the suffix FIPR.
Members: membership of the institute is open to: 157 a.
Individuals who at the date of their application are 28 years of age or more and whose applications are acceptable to the Council, providing that they have had at least five year’s comprehensive experience in, and that they are qualified to undertake the practice of, public relations as defined in the memorandum of Association.
b.
Individuals who at that date of their application are 26 years of age or more and whose applications are acceptable to the Council, providing that they have had at least two year’s comprehensive experience in, and they are qualified to undertake the practice of, public relations as defined in the memorandum of association; and providing further that they shall have previously been awarded the CAM Diploma in Public Relations or (prior to 1972) that they shall have passed the Institute’s Final Examination.
Members are entitled to a Membership Certificate, to exercise full voting rights in the affairs of the Institute, and are also entitled to use the letters, ‘MIPR’.
Associates: Associate membership is open to individuals normally resident in the United Kingdom who at the date of their application are 23 years of age or more and whose applications are accepted by the Council, provided that either; a.
At the time of their application they have been professionally engaged in public relations practice for a minimum period of three year, or b.
At the time of their application they have been so engaged for minimum period of two yeas and shall have passed the CAM Certificate in Public Relations or (prior to 1972) the Institute’s Intermediate Examination.
Such persons are entitled to use the description ‘Associate of the Institute of Public Relations’, and to exercise full voting rights in the affairs of the Institute.
Retired membership: This is open to any fellow, Members or Associates who have retired from active business life and whose applications are acceptable to the Council.
Overseas Associates: overseas associate membership is open to individuals normally resident outside the United Kingdom who would qualify for Associate membership were they living within the United Kingdom, and whose applications are acceptable to the Council.
Affiliates are persons, normally residents in the United Kingdom, who are engaged in public relations work but are not yet eligible for Associate membership, or who are associated with or interested in the practice of public relations.
158 Student Membership: This is open to individual who at the time of application are taking or proposing to take a course of education or training organized or recognized by the Council, and whose applications are acceptable to the Council (for details of these courses see Appendix I).
The activities of the institutes are aimed towards the attainment of its objects they are educational and social, or a combination of both.
One of its most valuable functions is to provide opportunities for the exchange of information and active co- operation amongst its members.
In addition to the college courses, the institute arranges evening lectures, discussion meetings, debates, film shows, one-day and week-end conferences all designed to increase members’ knowledge of the theory and practice of public relations.
Monthly luncheon meetings are held in London from September until June to which are invited distinguished guest speakers from industry, government, the professions, etc.
The institute publishes a monthly newsletter, Public relations the only publication of its kind in this country devoted solely to the subject.
In addition, the institute publishes many reports and monographs on specific aspects of public relations practice.
The Institute’s Constitution provides for both vocational and regional groups.
At present, there is a group for members who are local government public relations officers, and there are eight regional groups, which arrange their own meetings and other events, in the East Midlands, West Midlands, North-East, North-West, West of England, East Anglia, Scotland, South Wales, Wessex and Northern Ireland.
Enquires should be addressed to the Director, Institute of Public Relations, 1 Great James Street, London WC1N 3DA (Tel: 01-405 5505).
The Public Relations Consultants Association The PRCA, unlike other associations, consists of corporate a opposed to individual membership.
It is a trade association, formed in November 1969, with the objectives of promoting the growth of public relations consultancy, improving the standards of consultancy practice, providing facilities for various publics to confer with consultants as a body and promoting confidence in consultancy only, it recommends individual membership of the IPR, with which it co-operates closely.
The Association is governed by a Board of Management elected by the membership and some of the Association’s activities include research on behalf of its members 159 and working parties in specialist areas of public relations whose findings are published by the Secretariat.
The PRCA has had contact with consultancies in a number of countries with a view to extending its activities worldwide or to encourage the establishment of national associations on similar lines to the PRCA.
International Public Relations Association The international idea in the field of public relations was born in 1949, when two Dutch and three British public relations men met in London.
They talked about their work in public relations, and of organizing public relations officers in collective groups with the object of raising the standard of public relations practice and enhancing the prestige as well as the efficiency of public relations men.
The next step came in 1950, when a group of public relations officers from France, Great Britain, the Netherlands, Norway and the United States of America met in Holland and issued a statement that having Considered the necessity of furthering the skill and ethics of their profession and of a clearer understanding of their work, and considered further the value of international exchange of information and co-operation they had resolved that a provisional International Committee be set up with the object of furthering such exchange and co-operation and the eventual establishment of an International Public Relations Association.
A Provisional International Committee was formed, and over the next five years held talks in England, mainly in conjunction with the Week-end Conference of the British Institute of Public Relations.
The meetings were attended by representatives from France, Great Britain, the Netherlands, Norway and the United States, and observers from Australia, Belgium, Canada, Finland, Italy and Switzerland.
Finally the International Public Relations Association was brought into being in May 1955 at a meeting at Stratford-upon—Avon, when the constitution was formerly adopted, and the first Council appointed.
The policy and purpose of the IPRA is to: a.
Provide a channel for the exchange of ideas and professional experience between those engaged in public relations practice of international significance.
160 b.
Form a Rotary in which members at any time in need of advice and guidance may be assured of the goodwill and assistance of fellow members throughout the world.
c. Foster the highest standards of public relations practice generally in all countries and, in particular, in the international field.
d. Further the practice of public relations in all parts of the world and to enhance its value and influence by the promotion of knowledge and understanding of its objects and methods both inside and outside the profession.
e. Review and seek solutions of problems affecting public relations practice common to various countries, including such questions as the status of the profession, codes of professional ethics and qualifications to practice.
f. Publish bulletins, journals or other publications, including an international Who’s Who in Public Relations.
g. Undertake such other activities as may be deemed likely to benefit members or to contribute to the advancement of public relations practice throughout the world.
Membership is open to persons devoting their full time to and being fully responsible for the planning and execution of a coherent and significant part of the whole of the activities of a corporation, company, union, government, government department or other organization in establishing and maintaining sound and productive relations with special publics or the publics at large so as to adapt itself to its environment and to interpret itself to society, provided that these activities shall possess international significance.
Members are not entitled to use any description, title or letters other than that of ‘Member of the International Public Relations Association’ to signify their connexion with the Associations.
The IPRA remains a society of individuals and has resisted attempts to turn it into a world ‘federation’.
European Public Relations Centre There have been a number of federation formed in different parts of the world by national public relations associations to provide opportunity for contacts and discussion of mutual problems.
161 One of the most successful of these federations has been the European Public Relations Centre (Le Centre European des relations Publiques (CERP).
The membership consists of professional public relations associations of European countries, and in this respect it differs from both the IPR and IPRA which are composed entirely of individual members.
CERP meets annually and has three main standing committees.
T he first, the European Conference of National Public Relations Associations (CEDAN), has the purpose of coordinating the activities of the public relations associations and membership in order to reach agreement on professional practice and ethics.
The second standing committee, the European Study Group for Public Relations and Communication Techniques (CEDET), studies problems of training, education and professional development.
The third standing committee, the European Committee for the Application and Development of Public Relations (CEDAP), is concerned with the development of public relations practice in Europe.
162
