 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE : POL 123 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION  COURSE GUIDE POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Course Team Dr. Justice Igbokwe (Writer) - NDC Dr. C. Nna-Emeka Okereke (Editor) - NDC Ifeyinwa M. Ogbonna-Nwaogu (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii POL 123 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: @nou.edu.ng URL: .nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-823-X All Rights Reserved.
iii CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………………..…… 1 Course Aims…...…………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives …………………………………………..…....... 1 Working through this Course …………………………………….... 2 Course Materials …………………………………………..…….… 2 Study Unit …………………………………………….………..….. 2 Textbooks and References………………………………………….
3 Assessment ………………………………………………………… 3 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) …………………………….….. 4 Final Examination and Grading ……………………………..….….
4 Course Marking Scheme ………………………………………….. 4 Course Overview/Presentation Schedule ……………………..…… 5 How to Get the Most from this Course ………………………..…… 6 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………... 8 Summary ……………………………………………………….…... 8 iv Introduction Welcome to POL 123: Introduction to Public Administration.
This course is a three credit unit course for undergraduate students in Political science.
The materials have been developed with the Nigerian context in view.
This course guide gives you an overview of the course.
It also provides you with information on the organization and requirements of the course.
Course Aims The aims are to help you understand new ideas and concepts of Public Administration.
Hence, there is a requirement for orienting your mind to the contemporary social situations.
The course attempts: i.
Introducing you to Public Administration and the basic principles and concepts.
ii.
Demonstrating how these principles can be applied iii.
To expose you to current affairs and iv.
To help you in widening your horizon of knowledge.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, POL 123 has overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are at the beginning of each unit.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check your progress.
Here are the wider objectives for the course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives, you count yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Define the basic concepts of Public Administration • Explain the importance of Public Administration • Differentiate Publiceness from Privateness • Relate Public Administration to other social sciences • Understanding that Politics is a key to understanding of Public Administration • Discover what has influenced the study of Public Administration • Know the basis on which departments are organized • Know the approaches to the study of public administration • Find out why Bureaucracy is greatly needed now.
POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION • Identify if the civil servants in Nigeria have honestly endeavoured to implement the policies and programmes of government.
• Express what is collective responsibility in a parliamentary system of Government • Explain why legislative control on administration is indirect.
Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: i.
Course Guide ii.
Study unit iii.
Assignments file iv.
Relevant textbooks including the ones listed under each unit Study Units There are 26 units (of 6 modules) in this course.
These are listed below: Module 1 Unit 1 Basic Concept of Public Administration Unit 2 Public and Private Administration Unit 3 The Scope of Public Administration Unit 4 Public Administration as an Art and as a Science Module 2 Unit 1 Public Administration and Other Social Sciences Unit 2 New Dimensions of Public Administration Unit 3 General Aspects of Administration Unit 4 Approaches to the Study of Public Administration Unit 5 Environment of Public Administration ii POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Module 3 Unit 1 Principles of Public Administration Unit 2 Public Administration and Bureaucracy Unit 3 The Problem and Failure of Bureaucracy in Africa Unit 4 Chief Executive Unit 5 Legislature as a Board of Directors Module 4 Unit 1 Executive Control over Administration Unit 2 Parliamentary Control Administration Unit 3 Judicial Control over Administration Unit 4 The Community Control over Administration Unit 5 Internal Controls Module 5 Unit 1 Management – A Conceptual Analysis Unit 2 Leadership Unit 3 Policy Formation Unit 4 Decision- Making Unit 5 Administration and Nigeria Experience Module 6 Unit 1 Planning Unit 2 Coordination Unit 3 Delegation Unit 4 Communication Unit 5 Supervision Textbooks and References Certain books have been recommended in this course.
You may wish to purchase them for further reading.
Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the works you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor on or before the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The iii POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) You will have to submit a specified number of the (TMAs).
Every unit in this course has a tutor marked assignment.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the (TMAs) will be used for your 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor Marked assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submission.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extensions may not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a test of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the unit all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflects the kind of self assessment exercises and tutor marked assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments (Best three assignments out 30% of four marked) Final Examination 70% Total 100% iv POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Units Title of work Weeks Assignments Activity Course Guide Module 1 1 Basic Concept of Public Week 1 Assignment 1 Administration 2 Public and Private Week 2 Assignment 2 Administration 3 The Scope of Public Week 2 Assignment 3 Administration 4 Public Administration as an Week 2 Assignment 4 Art and as a Science Module 2 1 Public Administration and Week 3 Assignment 1 Other Social Sciences 2 New Dimensions of Public Week 4 Assignment 2 Administration 3 General Aspects of Week 4 Assignment 3 Administration 4 Approaches to the Study of Week 4 Assignment 4 Public Administration 5 Environment of Public Administration 3 General Aspects of Week 4 Assignment 3 Administration 4 Approaches to the study of Week 4 Assignment 4 Public Administration Module 3 1 Principles of Public Week 5 Assignment 1 Administration 2 Public Administration and Week 6 Assignment 2 Bureaucracy 3 The Problem and Failure of Bureaucracy in Africa 4 Chief Executive Week 7 Assignment 3 5 Legislature as a Board of Week 8 Assignment 4 Directors Module 4 1 Executive Control over Week 9 Assignment 1 Administration 2 Parliamentary Control over Week 9 Assignment 2 Administration 3 Judicial Control over Week 10 Assignment 3 Administration v POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4 The Community Control Week 10 Assignment 4 over Administration 5 Internal Controls Week 11 Assignment Module 5 1 Management–A Conceptual Week 11 Assignment 1 Analysis 2 Leadership Week 11 Assignment 2 3 Policy Formation Week 12 Assignment 3 4 Decision-Making Week 12 Assignment 4 5 Administration and Nigeria Experience Module 6 1 Planning Week 12 Assignment 1 2 Coordination Week 13 Assignment 2 3 Delegation Week 13 Assignment 3 4 Communication Week 14 Assignment 4 5 Supervision Week 14 Assignment 5 Revision 1 Examination 1 Total 17 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set of books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have complete the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your textbooks or from a reading section.
The following are the practical strategies for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, contact your tutor.
vi POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this course guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Design a “Course Overview” to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work if you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your textbooks and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay vii POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • You have difficulty with the exercises • You have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary The course gives you an overview of what to expect in the course of this study.
The course teaches you the basic concepts, scope as well as the principles of Public Administration.
It will also acquaint you with the new dimensions and general aspects of Administration.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
viii POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MAIN COURSE Course Code POL 123 Course Title Introduction to Public Administration Course Team Dr. Justice Igbokwe (Writer) - NDC Dr. C. Nna-Emeka Okereke (Editor) - NDC Ifeyinwa M. Ogbonna-Nwaogu (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ix POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: @nou.edu.ng URL: .nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: 978-058-823-X All Rights Reserved.
x POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………..……… 1 Unit 1 Basic Concept of Public Administration …………… 1 Unit 2 Public and Private Administration ……………….… 8 Unit 3 The Scope of Public Administration ………………… 13 Unit 4 Public Administration as an Art and as a Science …… 20 Module 2 ……………………………………………………...… 23 Unit 1 Public Administration and Other Social Sciences …… 23 Unit 2 New Dimensions of Public Administration ………… 33 Unit 3 General Aspects of Administration …………………… 42 Unit 4 Approaches to the Study of Public Administration …… 47 Unit 5 Environment of Public Administration ……………..… 51 Module 3 ……………………………………………………….… 58 Unit 1 Principles of Public Administration ………………….. 58 Unit 2 Public Administration and Bureaucracy ……………… 65 Unit 3 The Problem and Failure of Bureaucracy in Africa ….. 71 Unit 4 Chief Executive …………………………………….… 78 Unit 5 Legislature as a Board of Directors …………………… 86 Module 4 ………………………………………………………… 91 Unit 1 Executive Control over Administration ……….…… 91 Unit 2 Parliamentary Control Administration ……………… 97 Unit 3 Judicial Control over Administration ……………….
104 Unit 4 The Community Control over Administration ……… 112 Unit 5 Internal Controls ……………………………..……….
120 Module 5 …………………………………………………….….. 121 Unit 1 Management –A Conceptual Analysis…………….….
121 Unit 2 Leadership …………………………………………… 132 Unit 3 Policy Formation …………………………………..… 141 Unit 4 Decision-Making ………………………………….….
147 Unit 5 Administration and Nigeria Experience …………….. 155 Module 6 ………………………………………………..……… 162 Unit 1 Planning …………………………………………….. 162 Unit 2 Coordination ………………………………………... 172 Unit 3 Delegation …………………………………………… 180 Unit 4 Communication …………………………………….. 188 Unit 5 Supervision ………………………………………….. 194 xi NonePOL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 1 Unit 1 Basic Concept of Public Administration Unit 2 Public and Private Administration Unit 3 The Scope of Public Administration Unit 4 Public Administration as an Art and as a Science UNIT 1 THE MEANING OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Basic Concepts of Public Administration 3.2 The Rationale for the Study 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Bureaucracy is in our bone.
Prehistoric evidence unearthed at archaeological digs suggests that the rudiments of a bureaucratic social order were in place 19,000 years ago.
Bureaucracy predates, by many millennia earliest experiments with democracy, the emergence of the globes great religions, and the dawn of civilization itself.
Bureaucracy may not be basic to the human conciliations, but it is basic to human society.
However, as soon as primitive men began to act jointly with their fellows, they started to plan, organise and coordinate.
All these make administration the oldest of profession.
But as an academic discipline of study, Public Administration is of recent growth and is still growing further with the change in the environment of Public Administration and also due to its inter-relationship with other disciplines.
Therefore, Public Administration, which deals with the science of getting things done in the most efficient ways in the Public sector, will sometime to be a popular study that will generate much interest.
And for a long time to come, government and governmental agencies will continue to dominate the scope of human activities in the country.
The other reasons which make the study of Public Administration in Nigeria a fascinating subject, is the story of an administration which since independence in 1960, has been struggling to orientate itself from a routine Law-and-order 1 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION administration to a public administration geared to results and equipped to face the challenge of the 1970s, and 1980s.
Sadly enough, while successive rulers have been so preoccupied with series of political problems and disturbances, there has been little time to ponder on the problems of public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the basic concepts of Public Administration • discuss the rationale for the study of Public Administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Basic Concepts of Public Administration Public Administration was defined for the first time by Hamilton in the Federalist Papers, No 72, just close to the end of the eighteenth century in U.S.A.
Thereafter, in 1812, Charles Jean Boning, a French wrote a book titled “Principles of Public Administration”.
After the publication of this book a number of writers jumped into the field and expressed their thoughts by writing on different aspects of Administration.
Till then, there was practically not much literature available on science and art of Public Administration.
Woodrow Wilson who largely set the tone for the early study of public Administration in an essay titled, “The Study of Administration”, Published in the Political Science Quarterly in 1887, observed that it is getting harder to run a constitution than to frame one and thus, called for the bringing of more intellectual resources to bear in the management of the State.
This essay gave a big push to the infant science of Public Administration.
Since the beginning of the Twentieth Century, a systematic study of Public Administration has begun.
During the post First World War, there arose a great interest for the study of Public Administration as a separate branch of Social Sciences.
In the late 1920s two important text books on the theory of Public Administration were published in U.S.A Via L.D.
Introduction to the Study of Public Administration (1925) and W.F.
Willoughby’s Principles of Public Administration (1927).
These two books set a trend for writing textbook on the Study of Public Administration.
Nevertheless, Wilson unquestionably posted one unambiguous thesis in his article that has had a lasting impact on the field: Public Administration is worth studying.
The next step in the direction of growth of Public Administration came about when the Second World 2 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION War in 1939 just started.
But since 1950 due to the modern trend in Administrative thought, and new development in science and technology, there stared a conflict in the philosophy of Public Administration which we find in the works on science and art of Public Administration.
Therefore, this radical change in the Philosophy of Public Administration is more conspicuous in U.S.A as compared to other countries and rightly it has been remarked that the conception of a more or less autonomous science or discipline called “Public Administration, is primarily, an American idea.
This very controversial issue has made it difficult to define the subject of Public Administration in one sentence.
Dwight Waldo, in his books, The Study of Public Administration and Administrative State (1967), says “The immediate effect of all one sentence or one paragraph definitions of public Administration is a metals paralysis rather than enlightenment and stimulation.
However, various definitions have been put forth to properly define the term “Public Administration” but so far no precise or specific definition has been given to this term.
But Administration has to exist in any organisation set up for a defined purpose or objective.
Whether you think of the church, the army, a university, an industrial or business concern or a purely social organisation, there has to be administration because each one consists of human beings brought together in a hierarchical set-up, making use of tools, equipment, human and material resources, all in the guise to attain the objective for which the organisation is established.
However, each definition has rather widened the scope of the subject.
Nevertheless, it must be borne in mind that it is not executive office or department, which alone constitutes Public Administration.
All the departments of government in one way or the other are an integral part of this administration.
It is concerned with both the formulation and implementation of public policies.
Administration simply means the activities undertaken by the government to fulfill its desired ends.
The difference, however, lies only in the ‘actions’ which are to be considered as administrative activities.
Some scholars adopt a broader view and include all governmental activities done for the purpose of fulfilling public policy, which others take a narrow view and consider only those activities concerned with the executive branch of the government.
The definitions given by eminent scholars are as follows: Hoddgso says “Public Administration comprises all activities of persons or groups in governments or their agencies, whether these organisations are international, regional or local in their scope, to fulfill the purposes of those governments or agencies while Officer and Presthus lay more emphasis on the coordinating role of administration.
In their opinion, 3 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION “Administration consists of getting the work of government done by coordinating the efforts of the peoples so that they can work together to accomplish their set tasks.” There are others who emphasize upon administrative function of implementing the law of the country.
For instance, Walker, in his view sees Public Administration as “The work which the government does to give effect to a law”.
Negro and Negro, summarize the meaning of Public Administration thus: i) A cooperative group effort in a public setting (ii) All three branches of government executive legislative and judiciary and their interrelationship, (iii) The important roles in the formulation of public policy and thus a part of the political process, (iv) More important than, and also different in significant ways from private administration.
(vi) Closely associated with numerous private group and individuals in providing services to the community.
Furthermore, Waldo sees Public Administrations, as “the art and science of management as applied to the affairs of a state.” Dimock, opines that it is the fulfillment or enforcement of Public policy as declared by the competent authorities.
It deals with the problems and powers, the organisation and techniques of management involved in carrying out the laws and policies formulated by the policy-making agencies of the government.
He further adds, “Public Administration is law in action.
It is the executive side of government.” Every organisation in modern society consists of many different groups of people woven together in a complicated process to achieve the objectives of the organisation.
Everyone has to be assigned specific functions and the contribution of each must be geared towards the attainment of the objective of the organisation likewise in any establishment in which large numbers of people are employed at different levels of authority but all working towards the achievement of the objective of the establishment.
All these situations call for organisation on a massive scale.
In short, they depend and rest on administration, because administration is the capacity of co- coordinating many and harmonizing conflicting interests in a skillful manner that the whole system shall operate in unity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why should administration have to exist in any organisation set up for a defined purpose and objective?
4 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2 The Rationale for the Study of Public Administration The importance of Public Administration has tremendously increased with increase in state activities.
The state is no longer regarded as a preserver of the status quo.
The centuries old nation of police state which was to be responsible only for the maintenance of law and order and the policy of non interference in the day-to-day activities has completely lost its relevance.
The modern state has undertaken the new role of accelerator of economic and social change as well as a prime mover and stimulator of national development.
With this change in the ends of modern state, the purposes of public Administration have also assumed a different dimension and orientation.
Its functions have enormously increased in number, variety and complexity and its methodology has grown from the trial and error stage into an orderly discipline with an organised, ever increasing body of knowledge and experience.
Today, we see great bulk of administrative departments coming into being.
For instance, a new born baby, from birth to grave, remains under the purview of Public Administration because his/her birth as well as death must be registered with the local authorities.
There are a number of welfare agencies which provide all necessary benefits to the child.
Everybody needs the services of the Post Office and we wonder at the vast organisation which is needed to provide this service.
There are employment exchanges, rationing offices, government mints, agriculture departments, industries departments, department of foreign relations, etc which affect almost every citizen in one way or the other.
What does all this indicate?
The administrator’s position within an establishment or organisation is therefore strategic and pivotal.
It is true to say that the place of administration has come to be clearly recognized in every sector of human endeavor as being the keystone to the success and indeed to the very existence of the enterprise.
Being concerned with the planning, co-ordination, supervision and control of the enterprise or establishment with which it is involved, the science of administration appears to have become an essential instrument in the uplifting of human welfare.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 From the time a child is born till his death, he remains under Public Administration: Explain.
5 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION Public Administration is the device used to reconcile bureaucracy with democracy.
It is a broad-ranging and shapeless combination of theory and practice.
Its purpose is to promote a superior understanding of government and its relationship with the society it governs, as well as to encourage public policies to be more responsive to social need and to institute managerial practices attained to effectiveness, efficiency, and the deeper human requisites of the citizenry.
In considering the significance of administration, it is interesting to reflect that the importance of planning, co-ordination and control has been recognized from very early times.
The tasks performed by modern administrators have been carried on throughout history.
5.0 SUMMARY The most fundamental public benefit in any society is the preservation of human life, and only government is responsible for safeguarding its citizens.
When government fails to protect its people, its relevance is reasserted by default.
So the point here is that, government is essential for the creation of basic public benefits.
To sum up, it may be said that Public Administration is the non-political machinery of the government carrying on its work for the welfare of the people according to the laws set up by the state.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What was Woodrow Wilson’s contribution to the development of Public Administration?
2.
Define Public Administration by Negro and Negro.
3.
Give at least, six (6) points for the study of public Administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Book Ltd. Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers & Publishers Co. Keeling D. (1972).
Management in Government.
London: George Allen & Unwin.
Nicholas, Henry (ed).
(2004).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. 6 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (ed).
(2005).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S.Chand and Company Ltd. William, Harader H. (1977).
Whither Public Administration & Public Administration Review 37.
While, L.D.
(1955).
Introduction to the Study of Public Administration.
New York: Macmillan Co. 7 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 THE DICHOTOMY BETWEEN PRIVATE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Agency 3.2 Interest 3.3 Access to Activities/Officials 3.4 Working Differences between Public Administration and Private Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Defining the “Public” in Public Administration has long been a knotty problem for academics.
In part, this is precisely because Western Culture has never completely sorted out what Stanley I. Benn and Gerald F. Gans call the “ complex –structured concept “ of “ Publicness” and “ Privateness” in society, and this large dilemma has had its effects on understanding what constitutes Public Administration.
There are some scholars who feel that there is no difference between the two and that the administrative activities and techniques are similar in all organisations, whether they be private or public.
Urwick, Fallet and Fayol subscribed to this.
Fayol in his book written in 1949, opinioned that we are no longer confronted with several administrative sciences but with one which can be applied equally well to the public and private affairs”.
These Scholars suggest various points of similarities between the two.
First, many skills, techniques and procedures adopted in private and public administration are the same (e.g) accounting, office procedure, management, etc.
However, Negro and Negro in 1973 pointed out four basic elements of similarity between public and private administration.
First is the cooperative element, second is the large organisation which he calls the “bureaucratic” element.
The third is what he calls the concepts and techniques of scientific management, lastly the human relations approach.
8 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Fortunately, Benn and Gaus provide one of the better analyses of the components of this complex structured web concept.
They contend that publicness and privateness in society are comprised of three dimensions: Agency, Interest and Access.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the following: • agency • interest • access to activities/officials • the differences between public administration and private management 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Agency In this sense, agencies refer to the basic distribution between an agent acting privately, that is, on his own account, or publicly, that is as an officer of the city/society.
What significance do your actions and decisions have for the status of other people?
Take for instance, public administration has responsibility to the public, the public administrators are expected to act in accordance with the wishes and aspiration of the people expressed through their representatives who constitute the legislature.
The legally sanctioned policies are implemented by the executive branch of the governments.
On the other hand, Private administration does not have as much great responsibility towards the public.
It is not responsible to the public in the sense in which Public Administration is.
Thus, while Public Administration is directly responsible to the people to a very great extent, private administration is only responsible to the people indirectly, and that too generally to secure its own ends and not necessarily for the welfare of the people.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Differentiate Public Service from private service 3.2 Interest Interest is concerned with the status of the people who will be better or worse off for whatever is in question.
Hence, it is the interest of the private firm to benefit only the people in it or who own it.
By contrast, the supposed end of a public enterprise is to serve every member of the community.
In essence, Public Administration is conducted with service 9 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION motive while the motive of private administration is profit making.
If the establishment of a textile mill brings more profit to the business man than the establishment of sugar mill, the former will be preferred by him and not the latter, however urgent the need of the latter may be.
But if it were the case of public Administration, the latter would have been preferred to the former.
If private administration is useful to the public, its service to it is a by-product of profit making.
It also follows from it that a private administration will never undertake a work if it does not bring profit to him.
3.3 Access to Activities/Officials This refers to the degree of openness that distinguishes ‘public ness’ from ‘private ness’.
Access encompasses access to activities – e.g.
town meetings are public because they are open to all, but corporate board meeting are private because only board members has access to them.
On the other hand in Public Administration, officials remain incognito, even the most senior officials remain incognito and their identity is not disclosed.
This is because whatever they do, is in the name of the government and not in their own name.
On the contrary, a private administration (entrepreneur) does things on his/her own behalf and is well known in the business circles.
However, it is necessary to know that Simon Taad made this distinction between the two when he wrote in 1957 that: • Public administration is bureaucratic whereas private is business like, • Public administration is political whereas private administration is non-political and • Public administration is characterised by “red-tape” whereas private administration is free from it.
These distinctions do not of course, hold water/hold sway always but they are noticeable under certain circumstances.
3.4 The Working Difference between Public Administration and Private Management Operationally, researchers have identified numerous distinctions between the words of public administration and private management.
These differences pertain to task environments, organisational missions, structural constraints and personal values.
More specifically, relatives to private managers, public administrators, must deal with more complexes, less stable and less competitive organisationally penetrating environmental forces.
Organisationally, the public sectors’ goals are more distinctive, more numerous, and less 10 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION autonomy.
Finally, public administrators themselves are less materialistic, less loyal to their organisations, and, more committed to serving the public interest and facilitating social change.
In fact, public administration is consistent in procedure and uniform in dealings with the public.
The official has to have a settle line of policy and to stick to it.
He cannot show favour to some people and disfavour to others.
A private administration need not worry very much about uniformity in treatment.
Public and private administrators also differ on the principle of public relations.
This principle has been borrowed by public administration from the business world where it was first developed as a method of winning customers.
It is also seen by some scholars that private administration is conducted upon a level of efficiency superior to that of public administration.
Though the principle of organisation is relevant to both public and private administration, yet it has greater social consequences in the sphere of the former than in the realm of the latter because a defect in organisation in public administration will do more harm to the public than a lacuna in private administration can do, and if even any harm is done by it, it would be of so little significance that it would be negligible.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Why is it that in Public Administration, officials remain incognito?
4.0 CONCLUSION It is aptly worthwhile to conclude that both the public and private administrations are placed in different surroundings.
But this differences are more apparent than real.
Waldo opined that, “the generalisations which distinguish public administration by special care for equality of treatment, legal authorisation of, and responsibility for action, public justification or justifiability of decisions, financial probity and meticulousness and so forth are of very limited applicability”.
The two are, in fact, of the same species of the same genus.
But they have special values and techniques of their own which gives each other its distinctive character.
11 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 5.0 SUMMARY Traditionally, when public administrators think about what the public administration mean at all, they think about it in institutional terms.
This in other words, means the management of tax-supported agencies that appear on government organisation charts – the government bureaucratic agencies that constitute the locus/position of public administration that hold sway over the fields focus during the period of paradigms.
Public administration can be likened to a state made of a glass house, we see what it tries to do, and all its failures, the partial or total, are made the most of.
But private enterprise is sheltered under good opaque, bricks and mortar.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Public administration is riddled with bureaucracy and red-tapism: Comment.
2.
Explain why the motive of private administration is profit making?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Beard, C.A.
(1937).
The Role of Administration in Government: The Work Unit in Federal Administration.
Chicago: Public Administration Service.
Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers & Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry, (ed).
(2004).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. Negro F.A.
and Negro, L.G.
(1973).
Modern Public Administration.
New York: Hamper and Row Publishers.
Stanley Benn I. and Gerald, Gans F. (1983).
The Public and the Private: Concepts and Action.
New York: St. Martins.
12 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 THE SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1 Purpose of Study 3.2 Integral View 3.3 Managerial View 3.4 Scope in Relation to Peoples Expectation from the Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The diversity of opinion regarding the definition of public administration confronts us with the problem of understanding the scope of the study of public administration.
As it is evident from the definitions, the difference of opinion centres around the crucial point whether public administration is managerial aspect of the government work or the entire complex of activities of any executive branch or of all branches i.e.
executive, legislative and judicial.
In the course of these dialectical/divergent views regarding the scope of the study of public administration, two different views emerged, and these are (i) Integral view (ii) Managerial view.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • the point whether public administration becomes the managerial aspect of the government work • the entire complex of activities of any executive branch or of all branches i.e.
executive, legislative and judiciary.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Purpose of Study The keynote in the study of the scope and purpose of public administration is the emphasis on the concept of efficiency.
It is 13 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION sometimes wrongly assumed that public administration is a mere conveyor belt which mechanically executes the instructions passed to it by the policy-makers.
This view may have been plausible, even if never true, in the early days when the tasks of government were few and the machinery required was simple.
As late as the mid-nine-teenth century, Andrew Jackson, President of the United States, asserted that the tasks of government were sufficiently simple so much so that any person of intelligence could perform them without preparation or training.
Even in modern times when the responsibility of government for social and economic development has assumed great magnitude and demands exacting standards of efficiency, the impression still persists that the functions of public administration are not to be taken too seriously.
This erroneous impression is particularly true of countries like Nigeria which, for the most part of their lives had been under foreign tutelage to the extent that the generality of the public regarded work in the public service as drudgery in the service of foreign overlords.
Thus, the study of public administration grew out of awareness that the machinery of government was inadequate and sometimes totally unsuitable to perform the function of a modernising government.
Notable among the scholars and policy-makers who were quick to notice the deficiencies in the government administration of their day, and to urge the need to improve the system, was Woodrow Wilson.
In 1887, when he was Professor of Political Science at Yale in the USA, he stressed the importance of studying the administrative institutions of government.
He stressed that the task of public administration was to straighten the paths of government, to make its business less un-business-like, to strengthen and purify its organisation, and to crown its duties with dutifulness.
Therefore, it must be borne in mind that since Wilson’s time, many writers on public administration first in the USA and in recent times in Britain and Europe have sought to emphasize the importance of the concept of efficiency in the functions and processes of governmental administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain what led to the growth of Public Administration.
3.2 Integral View According to this view, public administration is a sum total of all the activities undertaken in pursuit of and in fulfillment of public policy.
These activities include not only managerial and technical but also manual and clerical.
Thus, the activities of cell persons working in an organisation from top to bottom constitute administration although they are of varying significance to the running of administrative machinery.
14 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION In other words, public administration is conceived in a comprehensive sense to include all activities of the government whether they are performed in the executive, legislative or judiciary branches of the government.
White is in agreement with this view of public administration.
According to him, public administration “consists of all those operations having for their purpose, the fulfillment or enforcement of public policy”.
This definition covers a multitude of particular operations in many spheres – • The delivery letter, • The sale of public land • The negotiation of a treaty • The award of compensation to an injured workman • The quarantine of a sick person • The removal of litter from the park • Manufacturing plutonium and • Licensing the use of atomic energy 3.3 Managerial View According to this view, the works of only those persons who are engaged in the performance of managerial functions in an organisation constitute public administration.
It is this person who shoulders the responsibility of keeping the enterprise going smoothly and run it most efficiently.
Their job is to plan programme and organise all the activities in an organisation so as to achieve the desired end.
Simon et al, subscribed to this view of administration.
They observed, “the term administration is also used in a narrow sense to refer to those patterns of behaviours that are common to many kinds of cooperating groups and that do not depend upon either the specific goals towards which they are cooperating or the specific technological methods used to reach these goals”.
The above two views differ from each other in many ways.
The integral view includes all the activities of all person engaged in administration whereas, the managerial view restricts itself only to the activities of a few persons at the top.
The integral view postulates all types of activities from manual to managerial, from non-technical to technical whereas, managerial view makes us court only managerial activities in an organisation.
Administration, according to the integral view, would differ from one sphere to another depending upon the subject-matter whereas this will not be the case according to managerial point of view, because the managerial view is identified with the managerial techniques common to all the fields of administration.
Gulick and Urwick promoted seven principles of administration and, in so doing, gave students of public administration that snappy anagram, summing up these managerial techniques in one word “POSDCORB”.
15 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Each letter of the word stands for different administrative principles/techniques, i.e.
P – Planning O – Organising S – Staffing D – Directing CO – Coordinating R – Reporting B – Budgeting i.
Planning: The first important activity of public administration is planning.
Planning means the working out in broad outline the things that need to be done, the methods to be adopted to accomplish the purpose set for the enterprise.
For example, Nigeria makes five year plans or rolling plans for socio-economic development of the country.
ii.
Organising: This is the setting out of the formal structure of authority and flow of work in such a way that the work in the various subdivisions, sections and branches is carefully arranged, clearly defined, and effectively co-coordinated in order to accomplish the objective of the organisation or department.
iii.
Staffing: After creating the formal structure of authority, suitable persons are appointed to the various posts in the organisation.
The activities here cover the whole of personnel management.
iv.
Directing: This is the continuous task of making decisions, embodying them in specific and general instructions and setting the pace as the leader of the organisation instructions or orders issued might be in the form of circular letters, memoranda or verbal.
v. Coordinating: This feature bothers on interrelating various parts of the work and, thus, eliminating overlapping and conflict in different activities of an organisation.
Thus, this is a very important function of an administrator, as he must continually ensure that the various branches of the organisation are working smoothly.
vi.
Reporting: This is a means of keeping both the supervisors and subordinates informed of what is going on and arranging for the 16 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION collection of such information through inspection, research and records.
vi.
Budgeting: This particular function is the hallmark of an administrator’s position, since finance and administration are inseparable.
Every administration has its financial implications.
The management of finance is therefore one of the first, and one of the inescapable responsibilities of administration.
The above list of functions attempts to outline the basic tasks and responsibilities of an administrator.
The precise emphasis to be given to any one set of administrative duties or another would vary from time to time, but essentially the same list of managerial duties are performed by executives at all levels of administrative responsibility.
The list also has certain elements common to the various items, but which do not appear so obvious on the surface.
The point being made here is that every administrative or chief executive spends a considerable portion of his/her time in conversations, correspondence, conferences and interviews.
In carrying out any of the items listed in POSDCORB s/he has to devote a large proportion of his/her time to consultations with his/her staff and with members of the public.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the acronym “POSDCORB”.
3.4 Scope in Relation to People’s Expectations from the Government Public administration is only a means to the attainment of the objectives of the state itself – i.
The maintenance of peace and order, ii.
The progressive achievement of justice, iii.
The instruction of the young iv.
Protection against diseases and insecurity, v. The adjustment and compromise of conflicting groups and interest.
White called all these, “The attainment of good life” Thus, the scope of public administration varies with people’s expectations of what they should get from the government.
It is obvious however; that though public administration studies the administrative branch of the executive organ only yet its scope is a very wide one as it varies with the people’s conception of a good life.
17 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain why the scope of Public Administration varies with people’s expectations?
4.0 CONCLUSION Public administration is a distinct field of administration, expectedly there are certain functions and processes which are peculiar to it which are additional to the common processes found in other sphere of administration.
This peculiarity arises out of the fact that public administration is the action part of government, the means by which the purpose and goals of government are realized.
Thus, the scope of public administration varies with people’s expectation of what they should get from the government.
A century ago, the expectation was chiefly that of remaining solitary however, the expectation now is a wide range of services and protection.
5.0 SUMMARY It is obvious that the scope and purpose of public administration is for efficiency, what white termed as, “attainment of good life”.
In essence, the scope of public administration is very wide and all encompassing.
However, the administrative dichotomy between the scholars of integral view and managerial view was put to rest with the intervention of eminent scholars Gulick and Urvick (1973), in the field of administration who had suggested a list of functions falling into an administrator.
This list of snappy anagram or acronym is commonly called, POSDCORB.
POSDCORB was public administration in 1937.
Gulick and Urwick clearly understood that their principles were not immediate facts of nature, but were simply helpful touch points in conveying an understanding of how organisations worked.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Public administration is conceived in a comprehensive sense – comment.
2.
What does the “concept of efficiency” mean?
3.
Describe the concept of good life.
4. Who were these eminent scholars – Gulick and Urwick?
18 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Book Ltd. Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers & Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (ed).
(2004).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. Vishnoo Bhagwan and Vidya Bhushan, (ed).
(2005).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S.Chand and Company Ltd. Woodrow, Wilson.
(1987).
The Study of Public Administration, Political Science Quarterly, Vol.
2.
19 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 PUBLIC ADMINSTRATION AS AN ART AND AS A SCIENCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Main Content 3.1 Public Administration as a Science 3.2 Public Administration as an Art 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are divergent views among scholars on whether public administration is a science or an art.
It is quite clear that subjects that deal with the natural phenomenon do not find it difficult to build up a system of sound laws or principles which may predict the future happenings or events with exactitude.
On the other hand, public administration as an art is practiced daily in all governmental organisations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss why Public Administration is referred to as science • discuss how Public Administration constitute an art.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Administration as a Science Since in public administration one studies the governmental organisation and relationship of human beings in the organisation, therefore, the researchers in the field of public administration are trying their best to build up a science of public.
Moreover, it has been seen that any discipline which is involved in the studying of social affairs gains legitimacy and respectability if it can be established as a science.
The early writers on the study of public administration like Woodrow Wilson called it the “Science of public administration” Willoughby in 1926 asserted, “In administration there are certain fundamental principles of general application analogous to those characterising any science”.
20 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Moreover, in the case of physical sciences they have the features of exactness, precision and predictability.
The advocates of science of public administration had been classified into three main categories.
Accordingly, the writers falling into the first category claim that there is a fair degree of exactness and certainty of the principle of public administration.
The second group of writers does not agree with the view point put forward by writers of the first category.
Merson and White who presented the second category do not agree with the argument given by the writers who fall into the first category and further say that there is not and can never be exact science of public administration, yet they assert that public administration is science.
The writers went further to argue that science is the investigation and observation, followed by tabulation, classification and correlation.
It is further emphasised that the subject-matter of exact science is measured and consists of facts which can be isolated and generally have a relative uniformity.
According to the view expressed by writers belonging to the third category, the present state of development, public administration may not earn the name of a science, but in due course of time it will become a science.
At the present state of affairs, its study presents only a framework of connected ideas which provides a basis for further study and analysis of its subject-matter.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why did the early writers call Public Administration as the “Science of public Administration”?
3.2 Public Administration as an Art The second part of the discussion which relates to public administration as an art is practiced daily in all governmental organisations.
Moreover, it has been seen that it is not only concerned with building of programmes and projects but also with their efficient execution by applying the principles of public administration.
It has further argued that an administrator has to face the challenges of administration while implementing the policies and programmes of the government.
So an administrator must be fully trained in administrative skill or art to face such challenges.
Nowadays a pertinent question which is faced by the administrators is: can the art of administration be acquired?
Some are of the opinion that administration as an art is a natural gift hence in other words the implication is that it cannot be acquired.
But the opposite view of the above is that the art of administration cannot be acquired quickly.
It requires a constant and concerned effort.
Public administration as an art 21 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION has been in practice since ancient times.
The aim and objectives behind the art of public administration is most efficient utilisation of resources at the disposal of officials and employees.
Therefore, like the art of music, the art of administration can also be acquired and improved upon through the continuous practice in that art.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain how Public Administration constitutes an art?
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, to the discussion on the question of science and art of public administration, there is not yet any final answer.
However, it could be said that since public administration is a growing science, hence it is at present more an art than science.
5.0 SUMMARY To sum up the above discussion, it is observed that public administration cannot be called as a science until the following conditions are fulfilled.
In the first place it is very much imperative that the place of normative value should clearly be identified and made clear.
Secondly, greater emphasis on human element in public administration should be laid for understanding the subject-matter of this science of administration.
Lastly, principles of public administration should be developed on the basis of cross-cultural studies which may not suffer from being culture bound.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
In your own view, is public administration a science?
2.
Can the art of administration be acquired?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principle and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Books Ltd. Ekhater, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Hodgson, J.S.
(1969).
Public Administration.
Canada: McGraw Hill.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (ed).
(2005).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S.Chand and Company Ltd. 22 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 2 Unit 1 Public Administration and Other Social Sciences Unit 2 New Dimensions of Public Administration Unit 3 General Aspects of Administration Unit 4 Approaches to the Study of Public Administration Unit 5 Environment of Public Administration UNIT 1 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND OTHER SOCIAL SCIENCES CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
Main Content 3.1 Public Administration and Political Science 3.2 Public Administration and History 3.3 Public Administration and Economics 3.4 Public Administration and Sociology 3.5 Public Administration and Psychology 3.6 Public Administration and Law 3.7 Public Administration and Ethics 3.8 Influence of Science and Technology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In a wide sense, all knowledge is one integrated whole, and the different branches into which it has been divided is a convenient device for purpose of study.
We have known the fact that Public Administration is a social science.
It deals with one aspect of human behaviour, i.e.
administrative, just as other social sciences deal with certain other aspect of human activity.
But it cannot study administrative behaviour without drawing upon the contributions made by other social sciences in the study of human behaviour.
As such, it is closely related to other social sciences as much as other social sciences are related to it.
Not only this, public administration scores over other social sciences because of its relationship with pure sciences and technology as well.
23 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe public administration is closely related to other social sciences • explain the influence of science and technology on public administration • discuss why an understanding of politics is the key to understanding of public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public Administration and Political Science Public administration is very closely related to the study of political science.
The very fact that public administration has been and still continues to be a part of brand of the study of political science bears ample testimony to their close mutual relationship.
It is still a fact that “an understanding of politics is the key to an understanding of public administration; politics and administration are the two sides of a single coin”.
Most of the authoritative writers on the subject have found it difficult, even impossible to make a distinction between politics and administration.
Pfiffner has rightly said that in some cases, politics and administration ‘are so inter-mingled and confused that a clear distinction is difficult”, and he further adds that “the line between the two should be shaded from black to various shades of grey, finally merging almost imperceptibly into the white”.
However, some earlier writers on the subject made a sharp distinction between politics and administration.
In their view, politics was concerned with laying down of policies, whereas administration was concerned with executing these policies economically and efficiently.
Woodrow Wilson was the first person who pointed out in 1887 that both these disciplines were quite separate from each other with their own specialized field.
In his article on “study of administration”, he said “the field of administration is the field of business”.
Administration lies outside the proper sphere of politics.
Administrative questions are not political questions.
Although politics sets the tasks far administration, it should not be suffered to manipulate its offices.
The field of administration is a field of business, it is removed from the hurry and strife of politics, it at the most, stands apart even from the debatable ground of constitutional study”.
24 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Among the modern writers Pfiffner’s enumeration of the points of distinction between political and administrative officers is very interesting.
These are: Political Officers Administrative Officers Amateur Professional Non- Technical Technical Partisan Non- Partisan Temporary Permanent More Public contacts less public contacts More legislative contacts less legislative contacts More policy formulating less policy formulating More Decisions More advisory More co-ordination more performing Influence by popular opinion Influence by technical data collected from study and research.
Political processes of election, legislation and of defining the broad objectives of administration as well as the manipulation of political power provide the motivating force for the wheels of government.
On the other hand, administration and administrators are mainly concerned with the administrative processes of gathering and digesting data, offering, suggestions based on facts for the purposes of policy formulation and helping to implement same.
Therefore, for harmonious co-existence between politics and public administration which are two species of the same genus, there must be a lot of give-and-take between the politicians and the administration.
Politics when it loses sight of what is administratively feasible degenerates into mere building castles in the air, and administration, shorn of its political context, becomes an empty nothingness.
The relationship between public administration and political science can be summed up remarking that the two disciplines are in fact species of the same genus.
There is a great give and take between the two.
But in spite of the intimacy between them we should not over-look the limits of their fields.
Finally, let’s borrow the words of John M.Gaus that “there is no denying the fact that there is difference between the duties of political officers and those of administrative officers, but the differences is more of a degree rather than of a kind.
If we look to the top administrators, we will find that most of what they do is political in nature”.
Although, apparently, policy-making is the function of the ministers and legislatures, yet most of the ground work is done by the administrators behind the scenes.
It has been rightly said that if a minister is unable to reply or cuts a sorry figure in the parliament/house 25 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION of representative, it is not he/she but his/her secretary who is to blame.
Generally, the top officers are so well familiar with policy-making that it takes them little time to adjust in the political arena if ever they decide to quit administration.
As far as practice goes, most of the Nigerian diplomats posted abroad have, at one time or another, been top-officials in the governmental administration of our country.
The bottom-line here is that politics and administration are two closely related social science disciplines, so much so that it is difficult to draw a line of demarcation to say where politics starts and ends and where administration starts and ends.
This position not withstanding, can be said without fear of contraction that politics and politicians are mainly concerned with the “a theory of public administration which means in our time a theory of politics too”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What was Woodrow Wilson’s view in 1887 on the field of Public Administration and Political Science?
3.2 Public Administration and History The general belief is that history is a mere record of past events.
It focuses on the lives of kings and princes, queens and princesses.
But this belief is not correct.
History supplies very valuable materials for the study of public administration.
History, in fact, studies the social progress of man.
The history of Nigeria is fundamentally the history of the Nigerian people, and it is their religion and social institutions which supply a continuity that is found nowhere else.
Hence, the study of the administrative system of any country would not be complete without a proper glimpse of its historical background.
The importance of history to the study of public administration can be well judged from the meticulous practice of keeping records in the archives of the governments.
In recent time, the students of public administration have started taking to research in the historical past of public administration.
The two important works by L.D.
White, On early History of American administration, and An Introduction to the Administrative History of Medieval England, by S.B.
Chrines, etc.
are some of the examples of the historical studies in the administration of various countries.
Although it is a sad commentary on history but it is a fact that so long, it has been mainly concerned with the record of battles, warfare or the stories of dynasties.
The historian in the past did not pay much attention to the social, political and economic developments of the states.
Of late, this approach has changed and the historians have started taking cognizance of almost all the aspects of social life.
26 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Therefore, it augurs well for the study of history for it will not only broaden the outlook of historians but also help other social sciences in their respective fields of research.
While a historian outlook on the part of administrative scientists would broaden their perspective, an administrative outlook on the part of a historian would make the study of history more fruitful.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Is history a mere record of past events?
Explain this in relation to Public Administration and History.
3.3 Public Administration and Economics Public administration has much in common with economics.
It was not always so.
During the 18th century, and the early years of the 19th century, the scope of public administration was confined only to the maintenance of law and order and the administration of justice.
But the industrial revolution and the numerous problems that followed on account of it, compelled the state to interfere in the economic and industrial fields.
Laws were framed to regulate hours of work, condition of service, etc of the workers.
Later on, the government decided to enter the economic and business fields in the interest of social justice.
At present, except for a few capitalist countries, the tendency is more and more growing towards state ownership and nationalization.
However, it is being increasingly realized that those entering government services must have a background of economics.
The problems of financial administration e.g.
budgeting, execution of the budget, accounts and audit, banking and insurance, currency and coinage, trade and commerce, revenue producing departments like the post and telegraphs, railways and newly set up government undertakings such as life insurance corporation, Nigerian Air ways, etc, all these have a special bearing on public administration.
The topics of public finance, banking and currency and financial administration are of common interest to both the administrator and the economist.
Economic administration has recently been included in the syllabi of public administration.
Administration has borrowed a great deal of techniques as well as terminology from business administration.
The field of private business is considerably contributing in improving a lot of the masses.
The field of business is the field of economics.
This explains the interaction of economics with public administration at the national level.
27 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION However, modern governments have to deal with many other problems of economic nature, for example, strikes, lock-outs, activities of trade unions, housing, etc.
The federal government of Nigeria is committed to establishing a socialistic pattern of society in Nigeria.
All these problems can be solved only when administrators have a sound knowledge of economics.
A comparative study of economic systems of different counties can be very much helpful to the administrators in their work.
It is worthwhile to conclude by reminding ourselves that, we, in Nigeria, have taken to planning as means to establish socialistic pattern of society.
It implies that whatever we plan must be implemented most efficiently.
It is therefore, the task of administrators to plan and implement.
If our administrators and administration fail, our planning fails.
Most of the failure of our planning in the past has been on account of the administration not coming up to the burden of planning.
3.4 Public Administration and Sociology Sociology is the study of human behaviour in a group.
It studies various types of groups and how they influence human instincts and activity.
All human beings who live in society have to interact with one another.
Sociology is the mother of all social sciences and it deals with society in its fundamental forms and their off-shoots.
It studies different kinds of groups existing in a society.
Public administration deals with the administrative aspects of the society, and thus, both are closely related.
Administration is a co-operative endeavour in which large number of people get together to achieve certain objectives.
Besides being organised in a huge hierarchical structure, they also enter into social intercourse and can thus be called as constituting a “social group”.
The larger the organisation, the greater the growth of smaller social groups.
These groups and sub-groups develop their own loyalties, their own sympathies and antipathies, their own ethnics and outlooks which change the very formal arrangements of the organisation, thus deeply influencing the work of administration.
Sociology provides to administration very useful information about these groups, how they function and how they influence social life.
Some of the recent studies of sociology in the field of status, class, power, occupation, family, caste, etc are of special interest to public administration.
Max Weber’s essay on Bureaucracy in his book, The study of public administration, is a valuable contribution in this regard.
He looks upon bureaucracy as a social structure meant to carry community action into a rationally ordered social action.
His study has proved immense value in 28 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION studying power- relationships in an organisation.
Among the writings of contemporary sociologists which have significant relevance for public administration studies are, Robert k. Merton’s Social Theory and Social Structure, Peter Blaius, Bureaucracy in Modern Society, Philip Selznicks, T.V.A., and the Grassroots, Brian Crosier, The Bureaucratic phenomenon, and Monroe Berger’s Bureaucracy and Society in Modern Egypt.
Modern administrators have to face a lot of trade-union activities.
The concepts of power, authority, etc, relate to the field of sociology as well as to public administration.
Public administration has to be studied in the environmental context.
Herbert Simon developed what may be called Ecology of Administration.
Sociology has given public administration a new perspective which may broaden the horizons of public administration a great deal.
3.5 Public Administration and Psychology During the 18th and 19th centuries, public administration refused to be influenced by psychology because it regarded itself as a perfect science, capable of discovering immutable laws of organisation and management.
Later researches, however, proved that psychology has much contribution to make to the study of public administration.
Human behaviour is not as perfectly rational as public administration thought it to be.
It is on account of this fact that the importance of social and industrial Psychology is being increasingly realized in the various fields including that of government services.
An administrator has got to be a psychologist as well otherwise he will prove a flop.
He has to deal with people and not with bricks and mortar and as such, he must have an understanding of psychological behavior of the persons he deals with.
The importance of informal contacts between the heads and the subordinates on the one hand and between the administrator and the public on the other, has been realized only recently.
It is little informal contacts which produce a great influence upon the efficiency of administration than the formal routine and official commands.
Therefore, psychology has developed the staff training techniques as well as public relation and publicity systems of the government.
It has also made a major contribution to the development of administrative techniques.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 How could you prove that psychology has much contribution to make, to the study of Public Administration?
29 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.6 Public Administration and Law The term Law, is a body of principles the purpose of which is the adjustment and ordering of human relations in the society.
The relationship between Law and public administration is quite clear from the fact that implementation of social policies is impossible without the help of laws.
The administrator with the aid of laws tries to bring about desired changes in the society.
For example, if Nigeria is to adopt a socialistic pattern of society, suitable laws have to be made.
On the other hand, if three laws propose to bring changes in the basic structure of society, the help of administrators will be essential.
It is they who are to enforce them.
Unless the laws are enforced properly, they remain mere paper-work.
Public administration, unlike private administration, has to function within the framework of law of the country.
Nothing which is illegal or contrary to law can be accepted in government administration.
It implies that a public servant should so conduct himself as to be always on the right side of law, both negatively and positively.
He should not break the law but apply it, both in letter and spirit.
In case he exceeds his powers, he is subject to the overall jurisdiction of law courts.
The administrators not only implement the law but also assist in the making of law.
The ministers do not have the expert knowledge and consequently have to depend upon the advice of their secretaries for giving a legal shape in their policies.
The bills are drafted by civil servants who for this purpose require technical knowledge of jurisprudence and law-making.
Delegated legislation is law making by the administration.
Public Administration has been described by Woodrow Wilson as a “Systematic and detailed execution of law” The relation between administration and law is so close that the former has been mainly studied as a part of the latter in the continental countries.
Administrative law, delegated legislation, administrative tribunals, etc, are topic common to the study of law and public administration.
Public Administration, too, has influenced the basic concepts of law.
Now the law must give greater protection to the weaker section of our society.
This is in the interest of social and economic justice which administration aims at promoting.
Administration is also closely related to constitutional law.
As Wilson writes: “The study of administration-philosophy, as viewed, is closely connected with the study of the proper distribution of constitutional authority” to be efficient, it must discover the simplest arrangements by which responsibility can unmistakably be fixed upon officials, the best way of dividing authority without hampering it, and responsibility without obscuring it.
And this question of distribution of authority, when taken into the sphere of higher, the original functions of the government 30 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION is obviously the best principles upon which to base such distribution it will have done constitutional study an invaluable service” 3.7 Public Administration Ethics Public Administration is also related to Ethics in as much as the latter sets standards of integrity and honesty for human actions.
Ethics has to do with the moral values of the community and administration must take cognisance of these values while enforcing public policy.
Public and professional morality now constitute an integral part of the study of Public Administration.
In the words of Dr. Appleby, “moral performance begins in individual self-discipline on the part of officials involving all that is meant by the word character.” But, this is not enough.
It also requires systematic process which supports individual group judgments enriched by contributions from person’s variously equipped and concerned differentiation in responsibilities to each other and to a whole public responsibility.
The official individually and organisationally must be concerned to be beyond simple honesty to a devoted guardianship of the continuing reality of democracy.
3.8 Influence of Science and Technology It is worth mentioning the influence of Science and technology on Public Administration.
As a consequence of Science and technological progress, the character and the dimensions of the activities performed by Public administration have changed.
The modern scientific developments and industrial civilisation have created several problems, e.g., problems of health, housing, employment, etc., which were hitherto unknown to public administration.
These developments have facilitated the task of administration also.
The type-writer, printing press, telephone, calculating machines and various other kinds of inventions have made swift communication very easy and facilitate the work of administration.
The whole organisational and working relationships between the headquarters and field establishments have undergone modifications on account of greater and newer communicational devise.
In fact, it is difficult to assess the contribution made by science and technological developments to all social sciences.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Explain the influence of science and technology on Public Administration.
31 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION From the foregoing discussions, it is evident that public administration is closely related to other social sciences.
While no one can contest the fact that public administration is a distinct and independent academic discipline, it must be studied in the relevant context of politics, economics history, sociology, psychology, law, science and technology.
Student of public administration need not worry about the skepticism expressed earlier in some quarters that graduates of the course may turn out to be jack of all trade and master of none after they are given tit-bits drawn from a number of social science disciplines.
5.0 SUMMARY While there is no doubt that public administration is a distinct academic discipline which may be looked upon as an autonomous social science discipline, it is however closely related to a number of social science disciplines.
Commenting on the close relationships between the social sciences, McIver and Page observed that “it is always the focus of interest that distinguishes one social science from another.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Politics is about laying down policies whereas administration is concerned to execute these policies economically and efficiently: Expatiate 2.
Explain Administrative Law.
3.
How does public administration relate to political science.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushaned (2005).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and company Ltd. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration an Introduction.
Ibadan.
AMFITOP BOOKS.
Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Books Ltd Uyi, Edigin Lambert and Aiguosatile, Otoghile (1994).
A Theoretical Approach to Public Administration.
Benin City: University of Benin Printing Press.
Nicholas, Henry (ed).
(2004).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. 32 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 NEW DIMENSIONS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 New Public Administration 3.2 Development of Administration 3.3 Comparative Public Administration 3.4 International Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There has always been a controversy about the nature, contexts and ends of public administration.
Prof. Woodrow Wilson in 1889 drew a sharp distinction between politics and administration and opined that the later must steer clear of the former.
It was said that politics was concerned with policy-making while administration was concerned with policy implementation.
The politics-administrative dichotomy had writers such as Woodrow Wilson, Willoughby, White, Luther Gullick, Henry Fayol and Urwick to discover principles of Public Administration.
These principles laid emphasis on economy and efficiency as the sole goal of administrative activity and regarded administration a mechanical organisation.
Taylor’s scientific management movement in the last quarter of the 19th century emphasized the fact that administration was nothing but management and it should be possible to discover the best principles of managing public affairs.
The politics-administrative dichotomy need was criticized being both impracticable and undesirable.
It was impracticable because the administrator also takes part in the policy formulation.
The above controversy regarding the nature and contents of Public administration continued to persist till the late thirties of the present century when the terms of the new changes began to creep in.
Now, the rigid and dogmatic separation between politics and administration was given up and it was recognized that administrative process is permeated with politics.
33 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discover what has influenced the study of Public Administration • identify why the term why New Public was used to describe this trend in the field of public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 New Public Administration In 1960s and early 1970s were periods of turbulence, instability and confusion in the west, particular in the United States.
Like other social sciences such as psychology, sociology and political science, public administration was shaken by this revolutionary period.
The earlier dogmas of public administration, economy and efficiency were found inadequate and incomplete objectives of administrative activity.
It began to be said that efficiency is not the whole of public administration.
Man is the centre-stage of all administrative activity who cannot be subjected to the mechanical test of efficiency.
The impact of administration on human character is more important than its efficiency and economy.
The term new public administration was used to described this new trend in the field of public administration.
Two books, titled, towards a new public administration.
The Minnowbrook perspective, edited by Frank Marini and published in 1971 and public administration in a time of turbulence, edited by Dright Waldo and published simultaneously, gave currency to the concept of New Public Administration.
These two books edited the ideas of an academic get together of younger-age-group on public administration called the “Minnowbrook Conference” held in 1968.
This conference expressed dissatisfaction with the state of the discipline of public administration and sought to give it a new image by discarding traditional concepts and making it alive to the problems presented by the turbulent times.
Evaluation: The critics of the doctrine of New Public Administration hold that the New Public Administration possessed only a kind of difference by definition.
For example, Campbell argued that it differs from the old public administration only in its response to a different set of societal problems from those of other periods.
Robert T. Golembiewski holds that new public administration must be counted as a partial success at best and perhaps only a cruel reminder of the gap in the field between aspiration and performance.
The critics also feared that the advocates of new public administration are trying to arrogate to themselves what falls within the domain of political 34 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION institutions, further; the concept of social equity is vague.
What it means, what it requires in public programmes and opinions vary greatly.
The New public administration has not yet developed a theory of its own.
It was the product of the social ferment of the 1960s and early 1970s in the America.
The Minnowbrook Conference was a youth conference which felt that old public administration had failed to solve the current social problems.
According to James C. Charles Worth, “Public administration theory has not caught up with emerging problems.
The huge military industrial complex, riots, labour unions and strikes, public school conflicts, still slum the impingement of sciences and developing countries”.
However, the New Public Administration continues to endure as witnessed.
The books published in 1980 by H. George Frederickson, Negro and Negro, are of the view that the new public administration has certainly broken fresh ground and seriously jolted the traditional concepts.
It has imparted new substance and a large perspective to the discipline of administration.
Since the new public administration emerged, question of values and ethics have remained the major items in public administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the concept of “New Public Administration.
3.2 Development Administration The sphere of development administration has acquired an immense importance in the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin American since the 1960s.
Often these countries are labeled as developing countries because they are relatively young and are engaged in the developmental tasks of nation-building and socio economic progress.
Although, these countries have different customs, traditions, cultures, political systems, languages, and vary greatly in social values, religious beliefs and degrees of economic development, they have the following fundamental features in common.
i.
First, they are faced with similar developmental problems, be it social, economic, political or administrative.
ii.
Second, they are embarking on the road of modernisation with much stress on raising their national income per capital and improving the well being of their people.
iii.
Third, they have realised the importance of development administration as a means of carrying out socio-economic, political change with a view to achieving the goals of nation building and socio economic progress.
35 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Meaning of Development Administration Development administration is of recent origin.
Edward Weidner defined it as “The process of guiding an organisation toward the achievement of progressive political, economic and social objectives that are authoritatively determined in one manner or the other”.
Merle Fairsoul regarded development administration as “a carrier of innovating values, it embraces the way of the new functions assumed by developing countries embarking on the path of modernisation and industrialisation.
Development administration involves the establishment of machinery for planning economic growth and mobilising and allocating resources to expand national income”.
To Montgomery, development administration connotes “carrying planned change in the economy or capital infrastructure and to a lesser extent in the social services especially, health and education”.
In the above definitions, development administration is used in two inter-related senses.
i.
It refers to the administration of development programmes, to the methods used by large scale organisation, notably government to implement policies and plans designed to meet these developmental objectives, ii.
By implication, rather than directly, it involves the strengthening of administrative capabilities.
This two aspects of development administration i.e.
administration of development and development of administration are intertwined in most definitions of the term.
Riggs Observes “Administration cannot normally be improved very much without changes in the environmental constraints (the infrastructure) that hampers its effectiveness and the environment itself cannot be changed unless the administration of development programmes is strengthened”.
Donald stones analysed the concept of development administration in terms of plans, policies, programmes and projects towards the achievement of developmental goals.
Development administration, therefore is concerned primarily with the tasks and process of formulating and implementing the four Ps (Plans, Policies, programmes and projects), in respect to whatever mixture of goals and objectives may be politically determined.
36 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Development Bureaucracy As said earlier, development administration is concerned not only with the administration of development but also with the development of administration.
The development of administration means development of administrative machinery and processes suited to the task of national development.
Only through an effective administrative system can the goals of socio-economic development and nation-building be achieved.
The government being the principal planner, financier, promoter and director of national development depends on bureaucracy for its functioning.
Therefore, the role of bureaucracy as an agent of socio- economic change becomes important in the development process.
Despite the fact that bureaucracy in developing countries is ill-prepared and ill-motivated for the tasks lying before it, the fact remains that in most of these countries it is the major instrument of social change.
Eisenstadt observes that bureaucracies in developing countries “helped to maintain the framework of a unified polity as well as the capacity to absorb varied demands and to relate them effectively.
Not only were they important instruments for unification and centralisation, but they enabled the rulers to implement continuous policy.
In addition, they also served as important instruments for mobilisation of resources, taxes, manpower and political support.
There is no basic conflict between bureaucracy and development.
No doubt, at present it suffers from certain structural weaknesses and behavioural attitudes, nevertheless, given right orientation in the new content, bureaucracy can be structurally and behaviorally geared to the task of development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the importance of Development Administration as a means of carrying out socio-economic- political change.
3.3 Comparative Public Administration The World War II is often regarded as the dividing line between the old and new literature on the subject of public administration.
As stated earlier, a new discipline under the name of New Public Administration came into being.
Similarly, development administration also was the product of World War II.
In the field of comparative public administration, emphasis shifted from general managerial approach to contextual and situational approach.
Public administration, it was argued, is essentially culture-bound and develops its own peculiar characteristics in different cultural areas or environments.
A look at the structure and function of the public administration in different countries revealled that though there is manifest similarity in formal organisations, 37 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION yet their informal and behavioural patterns possess considerably diversities, each being shaped by its societal culture.
Meaning The comparative administration group of the American society for public administration which was set up in 1963 under the chairmanship of Fred Riggs to study the administrative problems of developing countries, viewed in the systematic context of their social, cultural, political and economic environments, defined comparative public administration as “The theory of public administration applied to diverse cultures and national setting and the body of factual data, by which it can be examined and tested”.
Fred Riggs, holds that the term “comparative” should be used only for empirical, homothetic studies.
He outlines three trends in the comparative study of public administration.
i.
From normative towards more approach, ii.
Shifts from ideographic (Individualistic) toward Nomothetic (universal), iii.
Shift from a predominantly non-ecological to an ecological basis for the study of public administration.
Focus The comparative public administration emphasises that: i. Organisations must be viewed as embedded in specific cultures and political settings ii.
The principles of public administration are seriously inadequate.
iii.
Both the study and practice of administration are pervasively value-loaded and iv.
Any proper discipline must have complementary, pure and applied aspects.
Therefore, the study of comparative public administration is not merely an intellectual exercise of some young scholars.
Its conclusions have important bearing on the whole range of public administration.
The major contribution is that it has helped eliminate the narrowness of provincialism and regionalism.
The principles of public administration are analysed in cross-cultural and cross national context and to be universal, they should be tested in cross-cultural settings.
38 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.4 International Administration Generally speaking, public administration is the administration of the affairs of a state.
In recent years, the sovereign states of the world have been drawn closer together through the improvement and speeding up of communications and transport.
The modern states are not only physically closer but even otherwise they depend on each other for their mutual national development.
It is now generally conceded that the nation states have become inadequate to the realities of the situation in the world today.
The further progress of mankind now depends on developing fruitful international cooperation.
It is in the field of public administration more than in any other that international cooperation has been most closely realised.
There is no international government yet in the sense of supra-national authority whose writ should be binding on all states.
The nation states, even the smaller ones, are very zealous to guard their sovereignty and are not willingly to submit themselves to the mandatory control of any supranational organisation.
Yet multination international cooperation has been extended into many fields of human activity.
Up to the Second World War as many as 222 international unions had been founded which according to Gladden, was the pioneering stage in the development of modern international administration.
The League of Nations was the first world organisation to enforce international law and improve the living conditions of the weaker sections like labour.
Although the league failed to prevent the Second World War, it had, however, come to operate as a store house facts and a clearing house of ideas about truly international affairs.
However, with the replacement of League of Nations in 1945, a new phase in the development of international government began.
The United Nations originally consisting of 26 members represents almost universal membership.
The U.N. staff functions in a neutral way without any influence from any government or from any other authority external to the United Nations organisation.
They represent only the organisation.
In addition to U.N. and its specialised agencies, there have come into being a large number of regional organisations serving the common interests or member states.
Some of these important organisations are North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), European Economic Community (EU), African Union (AU), Common Wealth of Nations, World Bank, South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC), etc.
39 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is international Administration?
It may be mentioned that the United Nations and other regional Organisations have their own limitations as organs of international administration since they are not supra-regional or supra-national governments establishment.
They have depended upon the goodwill and co-operation of the member-states in successfully discharging of their functions.
The international bureaucracy can function effectively only in an atmosphere of freely granted consent and confidence.
4.0 CONCLUSION The key-note of New Public Administration is an intense sensitivity to and concern for the social problems of the day.
Its parameters are relevance, post-positivism, morals, ethics, and values, innovation, concern for clients, social equity etc.
In this background, new forms of organisation are carved out to suit the fast-changing environment.
5.0 SUMMARY The New Public Administration advocates a client centered approach.
It wants administrators to provide the people a major choice in how and when and what is to be provided.
In the words of Negro and Negro, “Client-focused administration is recommended along with de- bureaulisation, democratic decision-making, and decentralisation of administrative process in the interest of more effective and human delivery of public services.” On the other hand, there appears to be no neat distinction between development administration and non- development administration.
The difference seems to be of emphasis on the ecological setting in which an administration functions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Name some of the universal principles of public administration.
2.
Explain some of the organs of international administration.
3.
What is the meaning of development Administration?
40 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING EKHATOR, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printer and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Harry (ed.)
(2004).
Public Administration and Affairs.
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Tonwe D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP Books.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (ed.)
(2005).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 41 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 GENERAL ASPECTS OF ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Bases of Public Administration 3.2 Administrative Implications of Federalism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Administration, as we all know is about rational organisation and the management of men, women and material.
The arrangement of personnel for facilitating the accomplishment of some agreed purpose through the allocation of functions and responsibilities is organisation.
It is the relating of efforts and capacities of individuals and groups engaged upon a common task in such a way as to secure the desired objective with the least friction and the most satisfaction to those for whom the task is done and those engaged in the enterprise.
The necessary point in that structure is an arrangement of the working relations of individuals, not merely an impersonal process of putting blocks together to make a building.
A person has to be found to be fit in the framework of sound organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • the bases of Public Administration • the Administrative Implications of Federalism.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basis of Public Administration Public Administration is organised on two basis - Functional basis, and Geographical basis.
From the functional point of view, administrative organisation is based upon your main principles, i.e.
principle of specialisation, principle of integration, principle of hierarchy and principle of permanency.
From the geographical point of view, the 42 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION organisation may be based upon centralised system or decentralised system.
a. Functional Basis i.
Principle of Specialisation: To ensure efficiency and economy in work, the administration is divided into numerous administrative agencies called departments, although sometimes there are a large number of commissions, corporations and boards outside the department structure.
The question that then arises is, on what basis are the departments organised?
In general, it may be said that the departments are based on some broad substantive purpose, for example, the advancement of education, the development of industries, the conduct of foreign relations or the management of transport.
Each department forms a particular type of function such as department of Home Affairs, the department of Foreign affairs, Railway Board, etc The departments are further subdivided on a narrowly defined purpose or objective such as criminal investigation department or Board of secondary education.
Specialisation continues to work into the lower levels of organisation.
Thus a board of secondary education may contain a division devoted to textbooks, another division devoted to syllabus and still another devoted to organisation.
etc.
ii.
Principle of Integration: While administration is divided into departments according to the principle of specialisation, these departments cannot function independently.
The activities of the various departments need to be integrated into a composite whole.
The problem of integration deals with the inter-relations of various administrative units on the same level of government.
It is the problem of the relations of different services within the same department or of the different departments within the same government.
The importance of integration hardly needs any emphasis.
There can be no doubt that from every point of view, integration is desirable to achieve the purpose of administration, i.e.
the general good of the people.
iii.
Principle of Hierarchy: The third principle common to the administrative set-up of all the modern democracies is the principle of hierarchy.
All administrative organisations follow the pattern of the superior-subordinate relationships through a number of levels of responsibility reaching from the top to the bottom of the structure.
This form of organisation is called by Mooney and Reiley the “scalar process” under which there is a pyramid-cal type of organisation.
It consists of arranging the 43 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION administrative units in such a way that there is a supreme leadership leading at the top and a broad base at the bottom.
Every position in the organisation finds its appropriate place in the hierarchy.
The superior gives orders to the subordinates, while he too, receives and obeys orders from superiors.
The subordinate accepts the decisions of the superior as a guide to his own behaviour.
Through link after link, the chief executive is united with each individual employee.
iv.
Principle of Permanency: Administration is machinery for the execution of public will as determined by the political authority.
Now while the political authority, i.e.
the legislature and the chief executive may change with the change of public opinion, administrators continue to remain on their post.
Nigeria had turned out colonialism but she had not turned out the British legacy of administrative permanency.
The officials are appointed on permanent basis.
Thus public administrations in modern democracies resemble a cone whose base is divided into a number of departments, each manned by permanent members of the civil service.
All the sections of the cone converge on the vortex which is presided over by a political authority – chief executive.
b. Geographical Basis Administrative authority may be concentrated or dispersed.
Due to the vast size of the modern states, it is generally dispersed.
The country is divided into numerous areas, each area developing its own administration.
Thus division of administrative authority is called localisation of administration.
In every modern state, administrative life is centred in three foci of action which may, as De Tocqueville said, be compared to the different nervous centres which convey motion to the human body.
These three foci fall on a vertical line.
At the highest extreme is the central administration, in the middle is the state, provincial or country administration and at the lowest rung is the village or town administration.
Meaning of Centralisation First of all, let us be clear about the meaning of centralisation.
A centralised administration is one in which there are close relations between officials responsible to different levels of government as federal -state or state- local.
When much administrative power is vested in the hands of the officials of the central government with a consequent diminution of the authority and discretion of officials in lower 44 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION government agency, the system is centralised.
In other words, it may be said that the process of transfer of administrative authority from a lower to a higher level of government is centralisation.
Meaning of Decentralisation In a decentralised system, the government at lower levels enjoys certain amount of autonomy as given by the constitution or statute.
There are many centres of government, local and central, each with a recognised right of independent existence and functions.
In this system, the control of the central governments over the local government is restricted.
Limits of Centralisation De Tocqueville has written, “A centralised administration is and tends to enervate the nation in which it operates by incessantly diminishing and crystallising at a given moment or at a given point all the responsible resources of the people, impairing the renewal of these resources.
It may ensure a victory in the hour of strife but it gradually relaxes the sinews of strength, it may help admirably the transient greatness of a man but it cannot ensure durable prosperity of a nation”.
The question whether administration shall be central or local turns upon the extent of the institution in question.
The centre must deal with the problems of a national character, and must not take a new function unless it is clearly recognised as one properly to be withdrawn from local or state control.
Efficiency is certainly not a product of decentralisation.
Centralisation after all is a process rather than a status and it is a process which inevitably grows out of the social environment of the age in response to the necessity for dealing with specific and concrete situation.
It is to be remembered that responsibility and authority are for ever inseparable and without one we cannot have the other.
The central government should exercise reasonable supervision which should be general, intelligent and sympathetic.
It should not remove authority from those whom it must hold responsible for the direct conduct of its services.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the bases of Public Administration?
3.2 Administrative Implication of Federalism Federation is a decentralised form of administration.
The fundamental principle of federation is the division of power between the federal and the constituent governments.
Broadly speaking, the units of federation 45 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION are autonomous in the field of administration allocated them, but recently there has arisen a practice of exercising control by the central Government over the administration of the states.
The constitution of Nigeria makes numerous provisions whereby the central Government can exercise considerable control over the administrative machinery of the states.
It may be remarked that the tendency in recent years has been towards centralisation even in England and America the central control over local governments has recently increased.
This is the impact of technological developments and the welfare state concept on administration.
However, in spite of the increasing tendency towards centralisation, the difference between a decentralised system and a centralised system of administration still persists.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Is Nigeria a Federal State or University State?
Explain this in the light of administrative implication of Federalism.
4.0 CONCLUSION In terms of integration, it must have to be realised that too much of integration may destroy the initiative of the officials in charge of the Public offices while the lack of it may lead to confusion if not destruction of responsibility.
5.0 SUMMARY Every country has its own peculiar administrative structure which suits its geography, history, national character and form of government.
Nevertheless, several aspects of administrative organisation which are common to the administrative set up of modern democracies may be considered.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is a Scalar process?
2.
Explain your understanding of Localisation of Administration.
7.0 REFERNCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (ed.)
(2004).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Jersey: Prentice – Hall, Inc. Vishnno, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (ed.)
(2005).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 46 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Various Approaches 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have known from the previous discussions that public administration is a social science and that as a social science discipline, it is closely related to other social sciences.
Like other social sciences, it has various approaches to the study of the discipline.
However, the emergence of public administration as a separate and independent discipline of study can be traced back to the year 1887, when a young political scientist, Woodrow Wilson published an article entitled The Study of Administration, in which he advocated the need for an independent study of administrative aspects of government.
The earlier scholars regarded public administration as a part of study of political science but with the advancement in science and technology as well as the increasing complexities which arose due to greater interference of government in administrative activities, public administration became gradually conceived as a separate independent field and thus an important discipline of separate study and research.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss: • why there are so many approaches to the study of public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Various Approaches The study of public administration has been approached from various angles.
A brief analysis of the different approaches is as follows: 47 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION i.
Mechanical Approach: This is the earliest approach to the study of public administration.
Its main advocates were L.D.
White, W.F.
Willoughby, Taylor and Warner.
These thinkers concentrated their attention on the question of achieving efficiency in public administration.
Taylor believed that the problems of efficiency were alike in private industry and public administration.
He held the view that one could discover the best way of principles of managing everything.
His method was to break down workers, experiment with different work methods and procedures, and finally adopt those which proved most efficient.
He was concerned with mechanical efficiency and viewed administration as a technical problem.
The basic idea underlying the mechanical approach is that administration is a mechanical organisation and that we can find out certain principles which will make the organisation function efficiently.
According to his approach, efficiency is axiom number one in the value scale of administration.
The mechanical approach may therefore be also called “efficiency oriented approach or scientific management approach” with a little difference of emphasis.
ii.
Philosophical Approach: It is said to be the oldest approach, Plato’s republic, Hobbes Leviathan, Locke’s Treatise on Civil government are examples of the approach.
This approach takes within its purview all aspects of administrative activities.
Further it enunciates the principles or ideas underlying those activities.
Evidently, its range is very comprehensive.
iii.
Structural Approach: This approach studies public administration in terms of its structure.
It emphasises the study of POSDCORB techniques of administration.
It studies administrative organisations, personnel management and financial administration.
It may also be called institutional approach.
L.D.
White concerned himself with the problems of administrative organisation, personnel and administrative accountability.
W.F.
Willoughby gave due importance to the study of financial administration.
iv.
Juridical/Legal Approach: It is one of the oldest systematically formulated approaches.
Its origin can be traced from the European tradition of rooting public administration in law.
Frank J. Goodnow was the main advocate of juridical approach.
It studies public administration from the view point of law.
It lays emphasis on the constitutional structure of public administration.
Its preoccupation has been with power, sovereign and subsidiary.
It has been concerned with offices, with the stated duties, 48 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION limitations, prerogatives and disabilities of officers and with the legal obligations and rights of citizens.
Its characteristic materials have been the language of constitutions, of codes of law, of published regulations and of the decisions of judicial bodies, courts of accounts and high reviewing bodies like councils of state.
Thus, its emphasis has been on the presumed action of officers in carrying out the laws and also on the correctives that are available.
v. Behavioural Approach: The behavioural approach also called the socio-psychological approach is basically concerned with the scientific study of human behaviour in diverse social settings.
The approach grew out of the criticism against the traditional approaches which laid emphasis on descriptive analysis rather than substantive one.
In public administration, behaviouralism dates back to 1930’s with the human relations movement and was later popularised by Chester Inving Barnard, Herbert Alexander Simon and others.
Simon argued that ‘Administrative behaviour’ is part of behavioural science movement and the only difference lies in the subject-matter of various disciplines.
He said, ‘before a science can develop principles, it must posses concepts’ this was however, after critically examining the principles of public administration.
In his book, administrative behaviour, Simon rejects the traditional approach and holds that public administration should be concerned with the study of human behaviour in organisation.
vi.
Case Method Approach: This approach attained popularity in the thirties of the 20th century.
A case narrates of what actually has taken place in administration.
It however keeps intact the context and all relevant dimensions.
Such an approach seeks to reconstruct the administrative realities and acquaints the students with the administrative process.
This approach has been adopted by the Nigerian scholars while conducting researches in yet on unexplored fields.
However, the approach is not immune from flaws.
vii.
Historical Approach: It seeks to recreate a chapter of history as it attempts to study the public administration of the past within a particular time span and interpret the organisation and information on chronological order.
A society having rich past caters to this approach as the uniqueness of its administrative systems is thus identified.
In fact quite a sizable number of administrative institutions can be comprehended in the light of their past by adopting this approach.
For instance, it is rather 49 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION difficult to understand the creation of Nigeria into one unit without going into her origin and her phases of development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the various approaches to the study of Public Administration?
Comment why Public Administration has been approached from various angles.
4.0 CONCLUSION The subject matter of public administration is so complex and yet largely unexplored that it needs to be approached from all possible viewpoints to unravel its complexity.
All the approaches already discussed above have immense potentialities for the development of the study of public administration.
None of these approaches by itself is adequate.
Each one of them should be seen as necessary complement of the other.
5.0 SUMMARY An approach should not be considered a substitute for scholarship.
An academic sound study is the product of utility of all approaches to the extent feasible.
Fred W. Riggs who has recently made an important contribution to the study of administration in developing countries, believes in empherical analysis and an ecological approach to the study of administrative behaviour.
He stressed the importance of a comparative study of administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define institutional approach of public administration.
2.
What is efficiency or scientific management approach?
3. Who was Frank J. Goodnow?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printer and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (ed.)
(2004).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration, an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP BOOKS.
Vishnno, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (ed.)
(2005).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 50 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 5 ENVIRONMENT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Relationship of Environment with Public Administration 3.2 The Importance of the Study of Environment 3.3 Politico – Constitution Environment of Public Administration 3.4 Economic Environment on Public Administration 3.5 Cultural Environment on Public Administration 3.6 Social Environment in the Working of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public Administration deals with human beings, therefore, it is influenced by the environment in which it is required to function.
It is a well known fact that no administrator can ignore his/her circumstances.
In fact, administration and environments mutually affect each other so much so that it can be said that the study of environment for proper study of a public administration system is unavoidable.
Therefore, there are different types of environments covered, and each one has its impact on administration.
For example, economic conditions always have deep impact on economic structure and organisation of the society.
Similarly administrative system contributes in economic development, etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discover the following points: • that the study of public administration is incomplete without the study of its interaction with external environments • importance of the study of Environment • how political and constitutional environment of a country are inter- linked with its public administration system • the impact of economic environment on public administration • the role of language, education, values and communication system on administration etc.
51 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Relationship of Environment with Public Administration It has rightly been said that public administration and all types of environments are closely linked with each other and thus are interlinked.
Interlinking of Public Administration and Environment Public administration deals with human beings and as such it is a human activity.
Obviously such an activity is bound to be decidedly affected by the environments in which it is required to function.
All human problems with which public administration is concerned are created and solved sooner or later by the environments.
Even awakening capacity to think and react in favour of or against the administrative system is the outcome of environments.
Needless to say that administrative systems, organisations and processes do not develop in a vacuum but grow, develop and decay under certain social systems, cultural traditions and political and economic set up.
That is the reason why these radically differ from society to society.
These organisations and systems would have been same all over the world had there been no impact of environments on public administration.
Not only this, but as the study of comparative public administration is proceeding from simplicity to maturity that seriousness about impact of environments on it is also increasing.
Therefore, today it is almost accepted by all that for real and meaningful study of any administrative problem, it is essential that the environment under which it was created should be simultaneously studied.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Administrative system, organisations and processes do not develop in a vacuum; Explain this in relation to Environment and Public Administration.
3.2 Importance of the Study of Environment i Study of environment or the study of problems, processes and organisations of public administration is not only essential but also unavoidable.
The idea of need of study of environments on public administration was derived from biology.
It was thought that as external environments influence the growth and decay of plants and their study is essential, similarly the study of external environments is essential for the study of development of social, administrative, political, institutions and systems, etc.
It is 52 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION follows that to have meaningful and critical analysis of any system and organisation, it is essential that its environments should be scientifically analysed.
In this wise public administration system is no exception to this general rule.
ii.
Importance of the study of environments can be realised from the fact that those administrative institutions which work successfully in a country, cannot be planted in any other country with the presumption that these would be successful there as well.
For their successful working, favourable circumstance will have to be created and environments in which institutions are required to function will have to be critically studied.
iii.
In big countries with different races and communities, the same administrative institutions do not successfully work in different parts of the country.
This happens because environments in different parts of the same country are not similar.
iv.
For comparative study of public administration systems, it is essential to find out which type of environment is most suitable for the type of successful work of an administrative institution, so that before introducing any institution in the country as a whole or in any part of the country, these environments should first be created.
Ferrel Heady, in his Public Administration: A comparative perspective rightly said, “the point is that bureaucracies as well as most political and administrative institutions can be better understood if the surrounding conditions, influences and forces that shape and modify them are identified and ranked to the extent possible in order of relative importance”.
3.3 Politico-Constitutional Environment of Public Administration Public Administration of a country is influenced by political and constitutional set up of the country.
Even when similar types of administrative systems are adopted by two countries that function quite differently because of varying political and constitutional systems.
It may be all success in one country but may be only partial success or complete failure in another country.
Public administration is always influenced by constitutional and political environments of the country.
Keeping these environments Ferrel Heady has classified countries and divided these in the following ten categories.
In each category he has placed several countries, keeping in view their constitutional and political environment on the one hand and 53 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION administrative system on the other.
Thus each one has its own features.
He has placed first four countries in the category of developed and others in developing countries.
The categories are: i. France and Japan ii.
Britain and America iii.
Japan iv.
Soviet Union v. Traditional Autocratic System vi.
Bureaucratic Elites System: Civil and Military vii.
Polyarchal Comparative Systems viii.
Dominant Party, Semi Comparative systems ix.
Dominant Party Mobilisation Systems x.
Communist Totalitarian System.
It should be noted that both politico-constitutional environment influence administrative system and vice-versa.
In effect, every constitution is framed keeping political environments into consideration hence it is glaring that when major constitutional and political changes take place, the administrative system also changes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain extensively why the Public Administration of a country is influenced by political and constitutional set up?
3.4 Economic Environment on Public Administration In every country economic activity is the main activity around which every other state activity and the system revolve and public administration is no exception to that.
The essential point to note is that the whole administrative system of a country develops after taking economic limitations of the country in view.
Accordingly, the economic system of the country decides administrative organisations and procedures on the one hand and honesty and the character of the administrators on the other.
Thus, the point can be elucidated when one finds that some type of administrative set up produces altogether different types of economic systems.
To this end, it is pertinent to note that not only when the economic resources in two countries are the same can one set of administrators manage to give better production, whereas the other fails to do so.
Thus administration and economic environment go hand in hand.
In fact, it is very difficult to understand administrative system of a country and its problems without properly studying its economic environments.
54 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Therefore, in every society the economic activity is the main activity among others which influences the public administrator.
In the light of this, some types of administrative systems produce different results under two different economic systems.
Essentially, without economic resources no public administrative system can be efficiently run.
The implication of this is that adequate economic resources are a pre- requisite for running good administrative system.In sum, administration controls economics life and vice versa as well as ensuring that the economic health of the country is maintained and that all economic agreements, etc.
are not violated in any way.
3.5 Cultural Environment on Public Administration Like political, constitutional and economic environments, public administration system of a country is also influenced by cultural environments.
However, since the culture of affluent Western Societies is very much different from that of a developing society, the impact obviously will be different.
It is also needless to say that the culture of a society is based on values that will demand maximum labour to achieve and held in high esteem.
In line with this analysis, it is clear that the public administration system cannot remain uninfluenced by these values any longer.
It is important therefore to know that cultural values of a society very much influence and decide the nature of natural relationships of employees with each other formalities to be observed between male and female employees on the one hand and employers and employees relations on the other.
Also, it is important to note that it is a culture of society which broadly lays down superior subordinate relationship in an organisation.
Now let us consider some of the impact culture factors influence public administration includes: i.
Language ii.
Communication System iii.
Religion iv.
Education v. Cultural Values i.
Language has deep effect on public administration in multi lingual societies in relation to the many misunderstandings which arise when an administrator do not speak and follow the language of the people.
Very importantly therefore, the running of an administration becomes easy when administered and the administrators speak the same language.
In sum, the problem of language serves as a bottleneck so much so that many programmes cannot be executed and prepared as well.
55 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION ii.
Communication system also influences administration.
A good and efficient communication system makes conveying of orders easy and makes it possible to collect performance reports on the one hand and also to have close contact between line and staff agencies on the other.
iii.
Administration becomes easier in single religious society than in multi religion dominated society like Nigeria.
The reason is because religion binds the people in bonds of unity which in turn makes the task of administrators easy.
iv.
Education helps in producing a good number of trained administrators but the task of administering illiterates is easy as compared with the literates, who had always wished that their viewpoint should always be accepted.
v. When the values of the administrators and the administered are same it becomes easy to enforce laws because these are not always accepted simply as there is fear of punishment.
In effect, it could be said that the traditions/cultural environments has a deep impact on administrative set up of the society.
However, since conservative societies love traditions, these do not gladly accept new administrative techniques.
3.6 Social Environment in the working of Public Administration Public Administration not only influences but is equally influenced by social structure of the society, its customs and traditions, cultural traditions, by family and social back ground of those who join it etc because human element in public administration is part of social system of the society.
Social Institutions and Organisations influence both character and behaviour of public servants both directly as well as indirectly.
Each one has some perception about public administration much before he/she joins as a public servant.
Therefore, public administration and social organisations has a close relationship with each other because each public relation activity deals with some social activity.
Administration therefore seeks the help of these organisations to clarify public doubts while social organisations keep a watch on the activities of public administration and thus make its working protected.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain how Public Administration and social organisations have close relationships with each other.
56 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION It is pertinent to conclude this unit by opining that we have so far discussed the relationship of environment with public administration, the importance of the study of Environment, the politico-constitutional environment of public administration, economic environment on public administration, cultural environment on public administration, and social environment in the working of public administration.
Summarily therefore, no public administration can either ignore or undermine the fact that administration and environment mutually affect each other, as public administration does not exist in a vacuum.
5.0 SUMMARY The entire unit brought to bear the increasing realisation that no administrative system can work successfully without an analytical study of environment in which it is expected or work.
In effect, the need of study of environment for successful working of a public administration system can be said to be fully realised and appreciated these days.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State how political and constitutional environments of a country are inter-linked with its public administration system.
2.
Discuss the impact of economic environment on public administration.
3.
State the importance of the study of environment for the study of public administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2003).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Mukhi, H.R.
(1998).
Comparative Public Administration.
New Delhi: SBD Publishers.
Nicholas, Henry (2006).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall of India Ltd. Williamson, M. (1950).
Supervision: Principles and Methods.
New York: Women’s Press.
57 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 3 Unit 1 Principles of Public Administration Unit 2 Public Administration and Bureaucracy Unit 3 The Problem and Failure of Bureaucracy in Africa Unit 4 Chief Executive Unit 5 Legislature as a Board of Director UNIT 1 PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Principles of Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public administration is not only an art but also a science – a body of systematized knowledge; therefore, it is pertinent to sum up in principles, some basic facts of administration having general application.
These principles may be expected to serve the practical purpose of providing an essentially framework connection to facilitate the study of the subject.
In effect, in as much as it cannot be stated that these principles equate scientific laws in any respect or serve as a means of prediction but the readings or labels or drawers of filing Cabinets in which material for a comprehensive study of the subject may be sorted or arranged.
It is believed that these statements have succeeded in showing the broad dimensions of a subject and at the same time mapped out its main features.
And it will be desirable to give these statements the name principles because they provide dues to the causes of any phenomena or elements.
Therefore, without any fear, it may be claimed that the principles of public administration exists.
A brief description of these principles is given below: 58 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • enumerate the principles of administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles of Administration i.
Principle of Political Direction Public administration is an agency of government.
It is subordinate to the political executive which is the supreme organisation.
The administrative machinery obeys the general direction as issued by the political authority.
It is directed by the political laws and statutes.
The objective of administrative action are defined and authorized by the political authority in a state possessing power to compel members of the society over which it presides to act in certain ways.
However, since the ends or its purposes are not of its own devising, public administration serves the will of others which is formed and expressed by political, not by administrative, machinery.
The administrative body only receives the orders from the above and has no initiative of its own.
The only initiative, which an administrative body possesses, is with regard to those activities or spheres which have not been touched by the superior authority and are left to the administrative bodies in their discretion.
Thus, the first principle of political direction is of great significance as it keeps the administration away from politics and tells the civil servants what their position is in the government structure.
In effect, the entire efficiency of public administration depends on the master thus it can be said that if the political executive is wrong there is no reason that the permanent executive should not be wrong and misguided.
ii.
Public Administration This is carried by persons who have certain powers or authority.
Authority is the power or right of a person commanding other people to do things and in general of getting work done by them.
Essentially, the authority that comes to an administrator results from the position of superiority occupied by some people over others.
The authority which a superior exercises is of three sorts – legal or statutory, second, the nature of the position he/she holds while the third, his/her own personality.
59 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION iii.
Principle of Public Responsibility This is the principle of public responsibility which as shown above is responsible for all acts to the political executive who in turn is responsible to the general public through the legislature.
Thus, public administration, if not directly, at least indirectly is responsible to the people for its acts through the political boss.
In effect, public administration must be sure of the grounds on which it acts since it can be asked at anytime to give accounts of its stewardship.
It must be able to explain its actions when asked to do so.
Adequate records of the grounds and reasons for its actions as well as of the actions themselves must be maintained that is why all official transactions are conducted by documentation, correspondence and written minutes of a meeting preserved in files.
Since public administration is ultimately responsible to the general public, this responsibility as a whole will tend to require uniformity in administrative action.
Following the above, since civil servants cannot give special considerations to individuals or a particular group, their treatment should have uniformity throughout and to all the people generally even though, it will always be difficult in public administration to justify giving special consideration and treatment to individuals if it is not extended generally to all individuals in like circumstances.
From the above mentioned two principles, it will be wrong to infer that administrative responsibility is a mere responsibility of carrying out orders, as a squad of newly recruited soldiers obeying a drill sergeant on the parade ground.
Public administration is much more than being a mere faithful servant.
In fact, administrative action is an inevitable necessity and absolutely indispensable without which social action becomes impossible.
In the modern times, social instrument cannot be operated without the aid of public administration because it is the inevitable part of a social link which is something very essential in the nature of society.
So great are the complexities of all the requirements of social action that political institution alone is unable to plan their execution in all its details hence much has to be left to the administrative action if political objectives are to be attained.
In other words, it is a necessary part of the government of a country that the success or failure of the government will almost depend upon the efficiency of public administration.
Thus, if the political boss formulates grand plans but it is not implemented in right manner, all the labour of the political bosses will be in vain.
This is one of the reasons of public dissatisfaction in Nigeria.
60 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION iv.
Principle of Efficiency It is increasingly realized that efficiency is rather the sole standard of judging success or failure of an institution and public administration is not an exception to this rule.
Efficient public administration is most essential for the development of the growing complex of social, political and economic set up.
A public administrator should work with the clear idea of bringing more and more efficiency.
This can be brought about through various means hence it is essential that target fixed for achievement should be rational and reasonably achievable with available resources.
In effect, neither religion nor sex but ability of the person should be the sole criteria for making all appointments.
Rather staffing should be on scientific line and as far as possible there should be division of labour on very sound footings.
More so, there should not be frequent administrative and policy changes rather it should be made when absolutely necessary.
At the same time there should not be too much rigidity hence the employees should be given reasonable and proper promotion opportunities and initiatives should be encouraged and properly rewarded.
There should also be refresher courses and other training facilities available to the employees so that the public administrator is fully well-informed about latest administrative techniques and methods.
v. Principle of Organisation This principle draws attention to the need for careful organisation or structuring of the administrative machinery.
To a large extent a large measure of this principle depends upon the volume of the contribution public administration can make to social well-being.
In effect, though the organisation must be economical, yet it should not be lacking the basic ingredients of a perfect organisation.
Co-ordination, correlation and integration, are necessary words covering a multitude of administrative virtues given that every department of public administration must be correlated with each other.
In order words, there must not be watertight separation between the various departments but given that the government is a unit and must be run as a unit so that important and independent activities should be integrated at one place.
Based on the fact that coordination of the work of all the parts of administration is absolutely necessary to make the administrative system work it is necessary that public administration be characterised by the division of labour it employs.
In order words, the division of labour also makes the fixing of responsibility easy.
This is because the application of the principle of division of labour results in the hierarchical or scalar 61 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION grading of the staff employed.
This is also because the means adopted to recruit and select labour needed in various grades and in the division of the administrative task between a considerable number of public departments, each specialising in a particular function or group of related function.
In sum, if the government has to perform numerous activities, it is necessary for everyone concerned with administration to know which department is responsible for which activity.
In this instance, it is not only the officers of the department but the people also who should know which duty is performed by which department.
This principle also introduces the useful analysis of organisation by “Line and staff”.
At this point, it must be noted that line agencies are those which are concerned with the primary objects for which the government exists.
The staff agency is an advisory agency to a high ranking official but does not have operating responsibilities.
Finally, administrative machinery should be organised properly because it is on the proper organisation of administration that depend the efficiency of the government.
vi.
Principle of Public Relations Public administration is a means and not an end in itself.
It exists for the welfare of individuals and since it affects their welfare, it is essential that it must understand the needs and desires of the people.
The principle of public relations enjoys effective interaction between administration and the public affected by administration.
It points to the need for integration of democratic experience with the administrative agencies designed for its expression.
Accordingly, only when public relations have been rightly established that a democratic system of public administration can be said to be effective.
In effect, public relations is valuable not only to the extent to which they enable one to understand the public needs and requirements but also to the extent to which they are able to assist in understanding the aims and methods of departments thereby facilitating the integration of public experience with administrative action.
Any serious divergence between the theory of government and the practical daily life of the people runs grave dangers because whenever any administrative activity injures the people, a revolt may take place.
Therefore, it is essential that public relations must be kept all right.
vii.
Principle of Evolution and Progress A peep into history reveals the mass and momentum of public administration as well as the rate at which it has increased and is increasing everyday.
At the end of the eighteenth century and during the first quarter of the nineteenth century little or nothing had been done to cope with a number of pressing social problems.
Today the government 62 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION has opened her departments like the department of social security, community projects and planning, etc.
which has ensured an increase in administrative force.
More and more activities have been assigned to public administration and there is no sign that the tendency is likely to be reversed.
Education, social security, electricity supply and many other activities have been largely removed from the sphere of exclusive, voluntary, private or uncontrolled exploitation.
Today the relationship between states and individual is not that of opposition but essentially one of self-help and co-operative effort through a better and more intelligently planned division of labour.
Therefore, the principle of evolution and progress in public administration is all that the above indicate as well as the fact that public administration is becoming more and more scientific and evolving itself from old methods to new ones.
viii.
Principle of Research The principle of Research includes the systematic study and recording of new methods.
Practically in every field of knowledge the work of research is carried on and there is no reason why it should not be carried out in the field of public administration.
Administrative foresight and planning should therefore be recognised as a function of public administration and provision be made to pursue it departmentally as well as generally.
In fact, in Nigeria, the need for specialisation and research has been stressed by several civil service reforms reports.
To actualise this need, the government has established the Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON) in Badagry.
Lagos engaged in ordinary and advanced training and research in the field of public administration so as to give public administration both professional practical bases.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the principles of administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION All these principles cannot be taken as final word in administrative activities.
The basic limitation of these principles is that emphasis is on the internal structure of the organisation whereas different theories developed by prominent administrative and social scholars have proved that administration are effected and also affect in their turn, various other ecological factors such as social, political, economic, cultural and so on.
Thus, whatever the principles, if at all are to be developed, have to take a broader perspective.
63 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 5.0 SUMMARY To sum up, no rigid set of principles can be said to be of universal acceptability.
Principles, if necessary have to be flexible, and may have to be reviewed from time to time in the context of changing times and places.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Analyse how the principles approach may serve as a means of prediction of how public administration should perform.
Explain the following principles (a) Principle of political direction (b) Principle of public relations, and (c) Principle of Efficiency 2.
What is authority?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiment of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP Books.
Vishnoo, Bhagaran and Vidya, Bhushan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 64 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND BUREAUCRACY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Historical Development of Bureaucracy 3.2 Needs for Bridging the Gap between People and Bureaucracy 3.3 Bureaucracy and Political Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The term bureaucracy is often heard and used in connection with the conduct of public affairs and the activities of public officials in particular.
The word bureaucracy as it appears, have acquired an opprobrious meaning, an odious connotation because the sum of impressions that spring to mind at the mention of the word bureaucracy is associated with inefficiency, lack of initiative; unintelligent, rigidity in the approach to human problems and undue fussiness on the part of officials and downright stubbornness in the way public officials go about their business.
The administration of a country is run not only by ministers who are rather amateur in the art of administration but by the civil servants.
The point to note is that the minister depends upon the expert advice of the bureaucracy (i.e civil servants).
Moreover, the period of office of a minister is not fixed since the minister is like a bird of passage while the civil servant goes on forever.
The politician is as changeable as the climate.
The government is not the minister’s alone but also that of the civil servant or bureaucracy.
The real burden of government, which is about running the administration falls on the shoulders of the bureaucracy i.e the army of civil servants, which is responsible for the administration of a country.
MEANING This word Bureaucracy has been derived from the root ‘Bureau’ which stands for the post or office under a government.
In popular parlance bureaucrats are called civil servants.
Essentially, a civil servant is “a 65 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION professional body of officials, permanent, paid and skilled’.
Let us also consider other definitions by the following: Jennings writes that “it is a function of a civil servant to administer and of the ministers and the cabinet to control administration.
In other words, the minister does nothing except to take decisions on matters of importance”.
Laski conceives bureaucracy as “a system of government, the control of which is so completed in the hands of officials that their power jeopardises the liberties of the ordinary citizens”.
Professor Ogg’s own conception of bureaucracy is that without them the government cannot move hence his succinct position that “such manifold talks fall rather to the body of officials and employees known as the permanent civil servants.
It is this great body of men and women that translates law into action from one of the country to the other and brings the national government into its daily contact with the rank and file in the country – less in the public eye than the minister, this army of functionaries is not a bit less necessary to the realization of purposes for which government exists” Following from the above conceptions, it is glaring therefore, that the role of bureaucracy has assumed greater importance in the modern age, because with the development of science and technology, several new problems and spheres have come up where experience, skill and expertise are strongly and necessarily needed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • the historical development of bureaucracy • the need for bridging the gap between people and bureaucracy • the difference in bureaucracy and political development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Historical Development of Bureaucracy The system of bureaucracy is as old as ancient civilization.
It existed in the ancient period in Rome, China, India and several other countries.
Their duties were fixed in the statecraft of those periods.
Some account of the development is available throughout the pages of history.
However, their duties were limited to spheres of taxation, collection of taxes, maintaining records, gathering data for the information of the 66 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION king, conveying the orders of the kings to the public, maintaining accounts, controlling the treasury and managing the affairs of the palace.
But with the systematic development of state craft during the middle ages and the development of the activities of the modern states, the function of civil servants were highly enlarged.
Today on the one hand the state keeps the army for defence, on the other hand, it is required to employ civil servants in very large number (as if they are army of civil servants).
The term bureaucracy was first coined by Vincent De Gournay in 1712, a French economist, in the eighteenth century.
He had observed that: “We have an illness in France which bids fair to play havoc with us, this illness is called bureaumania”.
The dictionary of the French Academy accepted the word in its 1798 supplement and defined it as “Power influence of the heads and staffs of government bureaus”.
It was in 1895 that bureaucracy was discussed as a subject of importance in its own right by Mosca in his Elementi di science Politica.
Mosca regarded bureaucracy as being of fundamental importance to the government of great empires and classified political systems into feudal and bureaucratic.
His book was translated into English as the Ruling Class.
Laski’s Views: Laski attributes the rise of bureaucracy to several factors.
First, it rose as a by product of aristocracy.
In his history, disinclination on the part of the aristocracy for active government has in some cases led to the transfer into the hands of permanent officials.
Secondly, the origin of bureaucracy may be traced to the desire to be set off against the aristocracy for power.
Third, the advent of democracy helped it in two ways: (a) In the nineteenth century the advent of democratic government over threw in the Western world the chance of maintaining a system whereby officials could constitute a permanent and hereditary caste.
(b) The new conditions which accompanied democracy made it essential to have a body of experts in charge of a particular service.
Fourth, the scale of the modern state and the vastness of the service it seeks to render make expert administration inevitable.
Max Weber’s View: It was Max Weber in 1864 who first founded the sociological study of bureaucracy which has become most familiar with 67 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION social scientists.
What Weber was concerned most was to discover the canons of social behaviour of democracy.
In effect, the focus was not to depict and suggest goodness or badness but to suggest a standard model.
To this end, his concept does not represent average attributes of all the existing bureaucracies or other social structure.
It is rather a pure type in itself derived from the most characteristic bureaucratic aspects of all the loans organisations.
Max Weber has defined bureaucracy in terms of its structural characteristics.
The above mentioned attributes portray a kind of organisation which is impersonal, where authority is exercised by administrators only by virtue of the office they hold, and what is more, in accordance with the clearly defined rules ands regulations.
In other words, bureaucracy emerges as a unique impersonal, neutral passive, and instrumental with behavioural characteristics that bother on objectivity, precision and consistency.
3.2 Need for Bridging the Gap between People and Bureaucracy The bureaucracy should, no doubt, be efficient in its job.
But efficiency alone is not the criteria of a good government.
It is the need of the hour that bureaucracy should be helpful in promoting social justice and economic progress.
There is need, therefore, that the gap between the Bureaucracy and the people be bridged hence administrators should not be recruited from the upper strata of the society alone.
There is need for good rapport between the civil servants and the people hence the need for mutual understanding of each other’s feelings or points of view.
Committed Bureaucracy A controversy has been raging in Nigeria on the question as to what is the role of civil servants in building the new society of ours.
Whether the civil servants in Nigeria have honestly endeavoured to successfully implement the policies and programmes of government, and how much faith does the bureaucracy repose in the ideal of social justice?
Have the civil servants committed a lot of the policies of the government?
If commitment means “politicisation of the services: it would be well to remember that it may demoralise administration.
It would be good that the civil servants remain aloof from the political parties.
The civil servants should serve the people in a selfless and impartial manner.
But there is another aspect of commitment, ie, having the bureaucracy to fulfill the ideas enshrined in the constitution and accomplish the aspirations of the people.
It is essential however, that the bureaucracy 68 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION should have faith in social and economic justice.
It should implement the policies of the government honestly and with a sense of urgency.
The commitment of the bureaucracy in this sense will be praise-worthy.
3.3 Bureaucracy and Political Development The phenomenon of development involves a gradual separation of institutionally distinct spheres, the differentiation of separate structures for the wide variety of functions that must be performed in any society.
The greater the differentiation in a society, the more politically developed it is assumed to be.
In this sense, political development is varied.
For instance, highly developed systems, such as the West, contain a large number of explicitly administrative structures; each specialised for specific purposes – agriculture, transport, defence, planning, communications, health etc while in traditional or simple societies such differentiation takes place to an extremely limited extent.
For proper and democratic functioning, there should be balancing of political and administrative or bureaucratic structures while only vigorous political institutions can be kept under check in a modern bureaucracy.
However, if the political institutions are weak, bureaucracy gains an upper hand.
In order words, weak political institutions create a power vacuum, which is filled by bureaucracy.
Fred W. Riggs mentions two features of political development in the developing societies: 1.
First is a complex pattern of heterogeneous overlapping.
In this process of modernisation, these countries adopted from the western model distinct social and political structures and assigned them differentiated task.
But in the process the older institutional base of a society lingered on.
Thus creating a dualistic situation.
2.
Second is the concept of lag.
All functional sectors of a developing society do not change at the same speed.
Thus a lag is produced, one sector making faster progress, the other lagging behind.
Therefore, the requirements of the civil services are that, it shall be impartially selected, administratively competent and politically neutral and imbedded with the spirit of service to community or authority.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, it is important to note that while bureaucracy has inherent elements that make its processes often cumbersome or distasteful to its public chiefs, yet it is indispensable and indeed an instrument for the achievement of efficiency in all large organisations.
It is concerned with 69 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION the most efficient means of planning and control, and the fact that these processes are often misused and abused by inefficient, corrupt, and stubborn officials, is not a case for the total condemnation of bureaucracy.
5.0 SUMMARY Ordinarily, although bureaucracy is not a virtue in administration, yet it is an element of administration that has become an inseparable feature.
Bureaucracy implies a certain degree of flexibility and impersonality so much so that it constitutes a problem to administration, but again to the extent that these problems are inseparable from administration, bureaucracy incidentally is a process and an element of administration.
There is nothing to be afraid of in bureaucracy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the characteristics of Bureaucracy?
2.
Why is expert administration inevitable?
3.
Discuss the contributions of the following scholars: (a) Max Weber (b) Laski and (c) Vincent de Gournay.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Books LTD. Madhu, Varshney; Jag, Mohan Balokhara and Naveen, Kumar Chittoria.
(2002).
The Study of the Phenomena of Governance.
New Delhi: H.G Publication.
Gabriel, Almond A. and Binghan, Powell; Jr. Kaare Scrom and Russell, Dalton J.
(2001).
Comparative Politics Today: A World View.
New Delhi: Replika Press LTD. 70 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 THE PROBLEM AND FAILURE OF BUREAUCRACY IN AFRICA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Lack of Development Administration 3.2 Violations of Administrative Responsibility in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION After the end of colonial rule, the emerging free states – called the Third World Countries of Africa, Asia, latin America, etc., started the process of socio-economic development which led to phenomenal expansion of bureaucracy and the rise of a new class, a bureaucratic bourgeoisie (capitalists) in many of these countries.
This class soon acquired social and political paramountcy on account of the various political and social factors.
This new class was western oriented and trained in western methods of administration.
With the aid of western countries in the form of training abroad and financial assistance for development projects, these new classes of administrators were able to establish bureaucratic authoritarianism and hierarchical formalism which substituted for mass mobilisation and popular participation - the two essential ingredients of development administration.
In fact, the speed of change in different functional sectors of developing countries, especially Africa, was not uniform.
Development in public administration technically, takes place more rapidly than in political institutions like the political executive, legislative, electoral processes etc.
This, therefore, makes bureaucracy more dominant in the developing societies and it is exercised disproportionate influence resulting in several serious consequences, such as inefficiency and lack of initiatives, gross violation of administrative responsibility, etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss: • the reasons for the lack of Development Administration • violations of Administrative responsibility in Nigeria.
71 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Lack of Development Administration The development of administration means development of administrative machinery and processes suited to the task of national development.
Only through an effective administrative system could the goals of socio-economic development and nation-building are achieved.
The government being the principal planner, financier, promoter and director of national development depends on bureaucracy for its functioning.
However, the role of bureaucracy as an agent of socio-economic change had been questioned by so many thinkers, such as Robert K. Merton, Alvin Gouldner, Robert V. Presthus, Warren Bennis, etc.
Warren Bennis questioned the role of bureaucracy in the development administration by saying that bureaucracy is likely to go out of use in the wake of new social system.
Mohit Bhattachary, an Indian thinker, stated that “The Weberian model, according to the critics, is subject to dysfunctional consequences of failing to take into account the individual or behavioural aspects of the people who worked within the organisational system.
It may be pointed out that in many developing countries, especially Africa, the economic and political situations are unstable.
Joseph la Palombara wrote, “The time is evidently past when public officials are expected to sit on the developmental side lines, limiting their roles to fixing of general rules and to providing certain basic services and incentives for those private entrepreneurs who are the major players in the complicated and exciting game of fashioning profound changes in economic and social system the bureaucracies except for minor and other changes, have confined their roles to the fixing up of legal framework.
They have remained more or less bound by hierarchy, functioning in accordance with predetermined laws, rules and procedures”.
Therefore, most studies of public administration in African countries have stressed the view point that the bond of officials who have been brought up and trained in the colonial administrative culture, wedded to weberian characteristics of hierarchy, status and rigidity in the adherence of rules, and concerned mainly with the enforcement of law and order and collection of revenues, hence are quite unfit to perform the duties expected in the changed situation of an administration geared towards the task of development.
72 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 The role of bureaucracy as an agent of socio-economic change had been questioned by so many thinkers, explain.
3.2 Violations of Administrative Responsibility in Nigeria The management of public affairs in Nigeria is grossly afflicted by various abuses of administrative powers and malpractices which are described as violation of administrative responsibility.
Some of these are: i.
Bribery and Corruption ii.
Dishonesty iii.
Unethical Behaviour iv.
Acting without legal Authority v. Unfair treatment of Workers vi.
Gross Inefficiency vii.
Violation of procedural Due process viii.
Denial of Rights ix.
Failure to Exercise Administrative initiative i.
Bribery and Corruption Bribery and corruption could be regarded as the worst acts against administrative responsibility in Nigeria.
Many officials receive monetary or material gratification in the course of their official duties.
For instance, some officials receive bribes before appointments into the public service are made, monetary inducements are made before licenses of various kinds are issued, and contracts are awarded after the awarding officers have been fully rewarded in money and materials, and so on.
Apart from “kickbacks” and inflation of contract prices, there is yet another fraudulent practice of paying for contracts that were not executed at all.
There are serious cases of examination malpractices by teachers as a result of monetary inducements.
Indeed, bribery and corruption afflicts the whole public sector management.
ii.
Dishonesty Dishonesty is quite associated with corruption, as dishonest official indulges in corrupt practices such as fraud, forgery, embezzlement of public funds, cheating, stealing or misappropriation of public property which are wide–spread in the Nigerian public service.
Some scrupulous revenue officials of the State and Federal Governments collect taxes, duties, fee, etc, with fake receipts and such revenue is not paid into the 73 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION public treasury but pocketed by individual officials.
There are numerous cases of falsification of documents to satisfy selfish ends.
Dishonesty is quite a serious canker–worm which wrecks the public services in Nigeria and which results in inefficiency and low productivity.
As a developing nation and one which has undergone a long period of military administration, the Federal Republic of Nigeria has a wide spread of abuse of office in its public administration which adversely affects the efficiency of the administration.
iii.
Unethical Behaviour Unethical behaviour negates administrative responsibility.
Unethical behaviour is an administrative act which even though not against the letter of the law, is morally wrong as it is intent is in exploiting the loop–holes in the law.
It is an act that lacks in administrative integrity.
When an official places order for an inferior goods and services instead of the most superior ones, jobs orders for repairs of office equipment, machineries and vehicles are issued not to the best mechanics that put in tenders but to friends and relation who are known to be inferior in standard, are numerous cases of such unethical behaviour in Nigeria.
iv.
Acting without Legal Authority Acting without legal authority is rampart among public officials in Nigeria.
Such administrative acts which were frequent and wide –spread during military rule and led to the expansion of bureaucratic powers.
In the process of administration, top official create and change existing laws.
For instance, an officer can be forcefully retired without following strictly all the due processes required by law.
v. Unfair Treatment of Worker Unfair treatment of workers is also seen frequently in the public service.
The management of various public organisations indulge in arbitrariness treatment of innocent workers, high–handedness, victimisation and oppression of workers.
Public officers often take decisions which violate principles of social justice and fair play.
Examples of these negative administrative behaviours include non payment of workers salary and allowances for many months, denial of promotion without objective reason, dismissal from office in the guise of “security risk” that does not even exist in the first place, denial of official benefit, etc.
This unfair treatment of workers in organisation creates a poor image of the organisation and lowers morale and organisational efficiency.
74 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION vi.
Violation of Procedural Due Process Violation of procedural due process is a common feature of development administration are more often than not, found in Nigeria.
Many public organisations violate the principle of procedural due process in relation with outside parties.
According to Nigro and Nigro (1973) “In general terms, procedural due process means that all public officials at all levels of government must be fair in their dealings.
vii.
Gross Inefficiency Most public organisations in Nigeria manifest low productivity as a result of administrative inefficiency.
Administrative inefficiency is a product of low moral and inadequate motivation which in turn results in the manifestation of adaptive behaviours by public servants.
One observes among public servant lack of devotion to duty and absence of commitment to the objectives of the public organisation.
viii.
Denial of Rights A common feature of development administration which is typified by the Nigerian case is denial of fundamental human rights.
This is caused by the increased powers of the Executive, Military administration, Capitalist attitudes, value, administrative indiscipline and immaturity.
Numerous cases of denial of human rights are recorded in all states of the Federation.
People are arrested and detained without due process, employees are retired without immediate payment of personal benefits, etc.
Denial of human rights is dehumanising and is a manifestation of sheer administrative irresponsibility ix.
Failure to Exercise Administrative Initiative Public officials are given under the law certain limits of administrative discretion.
In spites of this, some public officials do not take positive decisions by exercising the legitimate discretion.
Sometimes the official fails to take the action even though the law empowers him/her to do so and indeed the situation calls for it in order to satisfy the interest of the public.
Therefore, the failure of officials to have initiative could be highly risky.
Whatever the case may be, administrative initiative is an essential requirement for organisational efficiency and high productivity.
A public officer has a responsibility to contribute a maximum not a minimum of service to the organisation which he/she serves.
75 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Discuss some of the violations found in Administrative responsibility in Nigeria.
3.3 The Importance of Bureaucracy Despite the fact that bureaucracy in African in general, and Nigeria in particular is ill – prepared and ill – motivated for the tasks lying before it, the fact remains that in most of these countries it is the major instrument of social change.
In effect, Eisenstadt observed that bureaucracies in developing countries “help to maintain the framework of a unified policy as well as the capacity to absorb varied demands and to relate them effectively.
Not only were they important instruments for unification and centralisation, but they enable the rulers to implement continuous policy.
In addition, they also served as important instruments for mobilisation of resources, taxes, manpower and political support”.
There is no basic conflict between bureaucracy and development.
No doubt, at present it suffers from certain structural weaknesses and behavioural attitudes, however, given right orientations in the new content, bureaucracy can be structurally and behaviourally geared to the task of development.
The following changes among others may be helpful to fit bureaucracy in into developmental tasks: i There should be de-emphasis of hierarchy to get rid of the conventional organisational pyramid ii There is need to redesign organisations to enable cooperative decision making and promote collaborative problem–solving iii Authority should be decentralised and field units should be strengthened and given more authority for decision-making iv There should be flow of communication unhindered by status levels in organisation v Merit alone should be the criterion for recruitment of personnel.
Adequate arrangements for training should exist.
vii Bureaucracy must secure people’s participation and cooperation in development work viii Behavoural changes are needed to make the bureaucracy change - oriented, result – oriented and people – oriented.
ix Professional mobility should be encouraged.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List some of the changes that may be helpful to fit bureaucracy into developmental tasks.
76 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION It has to be borne in mind therefore, that bureaucracy is still relevant today.
This is because if kept within reasonable limits, bureaucracy and bureaucratic practices are functionally necessary for the operation of a large administrative apparatus.
Care must be taken to distinguish the ingredients of bureaucracy from poor performance in public administration which has nothing to do with bureaucracy.
Too often, many people tend to lump all together under the name of bureaucracy any unwholesome attitude or activities noticeable in government.
On the other hand, there are some factors which continue to influence the public administration in most of the developing countries, such as, cultural constraints, formal colonial status, entrenched elites, low prestige of specialists, brain drain and government in almoner i.e.
government distributing money and help to the poor.
5.0 SUMMARY It is important to note that while bureaucracy has inherent elements that make its processes often cumbersome or distasteful to its public clients, it is also indispensable and indeed an instrument for the achievement of efficiency in all large organisations.
It is concerned with the most efficient means of planning and control, and the fact that these processes are often misused and abused by inefficient, corrupt, and stubborn officials is not a case for the total condemnation of bureaucracy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the reasons for the failure of Bureaucracy in Nigeria.
2.
Bureaucracy is still relevant today: Explain 3.
What do you understand by Inefficiency and lack of Initiative?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Books Ltd. Dike, Chijioke (1985).
The Nigerian Civil Service.
Owerri: Alfa Publishing Company.
Eghe, Victor Ekhator.
(2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (2006).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Dehli: Prentice – Hall of India Private Ltd. Ogunna, A.E.C.
(1999).
Public Administration in Nigeria, Theory and Practice.
Owerri: Great Versatile Publishers Ltd. 77 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 CHIEF EXECUTIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Chief Executive 3.2 Features of chief Executive 3.3 Administrative Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION The chief executive occupies a central position in public administration.
By chief executive we mean the persons or body of person at the head of the administrative system of a country.
The administrative structure of a country is like a pyramid broad at base and ending in a simple point at the apex.
The chief executive is the apex of the administrative pyramid.
However, the chief Executive is known by different names in different countries.
In a parliamentary form of government, in the nominal sense, the chief executive is the president but in the real sense, the cabinet is the chief executive.
In a presidential form of government, the president is the chief executive.
In a monarchy, the Queen/King is the chief executive.
It must be pointed out here that we have the chief executive not only at the top of the National Government, but at every level of Government for instance, in a Federal country like Nigeria, Governors are chief Executives of various states.
Also at the Local Government level, we have chairmen who are chief executives within their jurisdiction.
They are equally known as chairman/managing directors/presidents in private companies and semi-Government organisations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the types of chief Executive • identify the features of the chief executive • describe the administrative functions of the chief executive.
78 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Chief Executive There are various types of Chief Executives.
The forms and power of the chief executive of a country is patterned on the basis of the types of the constitution that a country has adopted.
Some of the important types of chief Executive are discussed below.
(A) Parliamentary Type of Executive In parliamentary form of government like Great Britain (UK) and India all the executive powers are vested in the Queen/King or the president respectively.
In Parliamentary form, executive powers lie with the Prime Minister.
In actual practice, they can exercise their powers only on the advice of the ministers.
Thus, the cabinet or the prime Minister becomes the real chief executive.
In these countries, the Queen/King or the President is found with ceremonial and advisory powers, and as such their role in the administration of the country amounts to titular or nominal role.
The implication of this is that they cannot act on their own.
It is the leader of the cabinet ie.
the Prime Minister who virtually exercises the powers of the Chief Executive.
At the state level, the position of Governors is synonymous to that of the president at the centre, as the chief Minister wields power.
Therefore, in a parliamentary form, the chief executive is the Prime Minister who is the creator, preserver and destroyer of the cabinet.
He hires and fires since the cabinet is at his mercy.
He has the power also to call for the dissolution of the Parliament.
Hence, in this form of Government, the head of the state is just a rubber stamp, a toothless bull- dog, to say the least.
(B) Presidential Type of Executive: The position of chief executive entirely differs over here.
There are no more real or nominal types of chief executive, as they are found in Parliamentary form of government, only one person, i.e.
the president of the country is vested with all executive powers.
The United States of America and Nigeria present the best example of this type of executive.
The second article of the America constitution, vests the executive power in the president only.
The president has his own army of junior executives who work as his cabinet secretaries-ministers.
These officers designated as secretaries/ministers are personally and directly responsible to the president for the performance of their duties, but he retains sole executive authority.
These officers do not take part in the meetings of senate or congress.
Thus, in the presidential system, there is only a singular executive who works independently without any type of 79 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION binding on him.
But, this does not mean that the chief executive is uncontrollable.
The congress exercises considerable pressure on the president through legislation, voting of supplies and confirmation of appointment, approval of treaties and investigation and enquiries.
Moreover, presidential type of chief executive can be impeached, if he is found guilty of any charges.
Bellow is a diagram of comparism of parliamentary and presidential types of chief executive Parliamentary type Presidential type 1.
It is a plural body, i.e.
cabinet It is a single individual, i.e.
headed by Prime Minister president Alone 2.
The are colleagues, i.e.
members Here, the opposite members are of cabinet are on equal footing quite subordinate 3.
Cabinet members are the Members are not elected but representative of the citizens selected by the president 4.
Members of the cabinet are also It is not necessary here.
The members of parliament President is not a member of the congress or house of representatives.
Comparing both the types of executives, the parliamentary type is better suited for administrative efficiency because it establishes a responsible and effective chief executive.
For efficiency of administration the chief executive must supply administrative direction, driving power and coordination between executive-legislative operational relationships.
Even in USA, thoughtful cities have advocated for the modification of the presidential system along parliamentary lines to ensure its smooth functioning.
The Swiss executive embodies features both of these types.
The seven councilors constituting the executive are selected for a fixed period hence they are accountable to the legislature even though they cannot be ousted by it.
They do not have the right to vote but can sit in the legislature and participate in discussion.
They cannot dissolve the legislature as is the case in parliamentary executive.
Such a type of executive possesses the advantages of both the systems in as much as it avoids their defects.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State and explain the types of Executive that exist?
80 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Features of Chief Executive The system of administration in which the chief executive functions as the general manager of administration has the following main features.
i. Scalar System This system establishes a pyramidical system which consists of arranging the administrative groups or units steps upon steps in a scale from which the term ‘scalar’ has been derived.
In it the supreme leadership is represented by an individual or individuals at the top of the pyramid, but in order to exercise this leadership, it becomes necessary to delegate authority and responsibility to the sub- leaders of various subordinate steps of the scale.
The essence of this system is the unity of command.
The line of authority runs through the chief executive to the legislature and not directly.
The authority of the legislature, no doubt, shall still be supreme but this is to be exercised through the chief executive.
It means that all administrative officers including the departmental heads shall be responsible for their actions to the chief executive who shall be held responsible if anything goes wrong.
ii.
Chief Executive, the Master of Civil Service It means that all members of civil service are under the direct control of the executive who has the right of selection, promotion and removal from office.
But with regard to the lower employees, the discretion of the executive is limited by the authority of the public service commission, with regard to the head of departments; the executive enjoys full discretion in matters of their appointment and removal.
iii.
Control Over Institutional Activities The executive exercises full control over institutional activities of the administrative services, i.e.
it prescribes and controls the methods in which the several operating services perform their duties.
The legislature does not interfere in these matters.
iv.
Control Over Administrative Reports All administrative reports are submitted to the legislature through the executive.
The heads of departments do not appear before the legislature.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the features of Chief Executive.
81 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Administrative Functions Having stated briefly the features of general managerial system, it is therefore, pertinent to state clearly the functions of the executive.
The chief executive has to perform a number of functions.
Luther Gullick coined the word POSDCORB for the administrative functions of the chief executive.
In his words, the POSDCORB stands for: Planning Organising Staffing Directing Coordinating Reporting and Budgeting Marshall Dimock summarizes these functions in one sentence, “He is a trouble shooter, a superior and promoter of the future programme.
L.D.
White had put these functions under the following main categories: i.
Deciding Administrative Policy The legislature lays down the policy to be followed by the government in general terms.
For the implementation of the general policy the executive has to decide a large number of questions pertaining to administrative policy.
E.M. Gladden has defined administrative policy as “the form in which the ministerial administrator or board carries the will of the government into effect” As the general administrator, the chief executive has to issue a number of instructions and orders, written or oral, to enable the administrative officers to perform their duties in a proper manner.
However, the ability and personality of the chief executive has a close bearing on administrative efficiency.
ii.
To Authorise Details of Organisation Legislature usually provides for establishment of main units of organisation, like departments, commissions, corporations.
Details are left to be filled in by the executive at his discretion.
The chief executive leaves the shaping of divisions, branches and sections in the hands of their chiefs subject to his/her approval.
The settings up of various ad hoc 82 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION committees to meet particular situations are determined by the executive.
It is highly important, therefore, that institutional activities should be performed in a uniform manner.
In order that uniformity may be secured and efficient methods employed, it is therefore, necessary that the power to prescribe and subsequently to enforce the manner, in which these duties are performed, shall be vested in some agencies exercising general jurisdiction over all services.
iii.
To Coordinate the Organisation The modern administration is a mosaic of departments, commissions, divisions, sections each performing only a specialised part of the function.
In order to create unity in this huge mass of diversified activities, a very high degree of coordination and integration is needed.
This has to be done at lower as well as higher levels.
To achieve the purpose of administration, i.e., the general good of the people, as well as integration is desirable from every point of view.
Hence, chief executive’s role in this field is of pivotal importance.
iv To Appoint and Remove the Personnel The chief executive as said earlier is responsible as general manager for the manner in which he heads several departments and perform their duties.
Since the responsibility ultimately is that of chief executive, it is logical that he/she should have the power to select and remove the officers.
In modem times thousands of people are required to fill in the various administrative posts.
A substantial majority of these is appointed on the basis of merit while most of the personnel are selected by the Civil Service Commissions.
The commissions are merely recommendatory and not appointing authorities.
The executive which is the appointing authority may refuse to accept the recommendation.
Appointments of a high category such as of ambassadors are made by the chief executive, for instance, in the United States, the president made high appointments subject to the approval of the senate.
After appointment all the questions of training, pay increment, promotion are determined by the executive iv.
To Control the Management of Finance With regard to the public finance, especially in the parliamentary system of government, the chief executive enjoys wide authority.
As the general manager, he/she has the duty to make a full report regarding past operations and present condition and to make a statement as to the provision, which in his/her opinion, should be made for meeting the 83 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION revenue and expenditure needs of the government in the future.
The recommendation goes in the form called budget.
The legislature after considering the various items, passes it in an appropriate act.
After the passage of this act, the executive has the duty to supervise the expenditure and collection of money.
In parliamentary form of government the chief executive or his representative presents the budget in the legislature and sees to its passage.
Rejection of the budget means no confidence in the government.
In the actual practice the president of U. S.A. or Nigeria, is the chairman of the Bureau of budget which frames the budget and then hands it over to the congress or the National Assembly for its passage.
Finally, the president possesses effective veto power over the budget.
v. To Supervise, Conform and Investigate the Administrative Operations The function of the executive is not only to carry on the public business itself, but also to see that it is being carried on properly.
As such, he/she has to supervise the work, give necessary instructions, caution when the work is not being done properly, and encourage when it is running smoothly.
It can make inquires to investigate any administrative matter and set up investigation committee for the purpose.
Therefore, the above functions of chief executive made it clear that he/she is the administrator-in-chief or the General Manager of public administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain Administrative functions of the Executive.
4.0 CONCLUSION To conclude this discussion on the features and functions of the chief executive, we may say that the chief Executive should be capable enough to direct, guide, control and coordinate the activities of his/her administration.
He/she should have the ability to persuade people to cooperate and strive willingly for common objectives.
He/she must have the interest of the public in his/her heart.
He/she must be a leader of men and women.
He/she must do his own thinking and he must be his own public relations man.
In short, the qualities of the chief executive should include, among others, vitality and endurance, decisiveness, persuasiveness, responsibility, intellectual capacity, good health, sense of mission, interest in other people, integrity, judgment, loyalty, foresight, clarity of vision, strength of character, balance of personality, sense of purpose and initiative.
84 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 5.0 SUMMARY The chief Executive is always the chief executive.
He/she heads the administration.
Hence he/she is responsible for its proper functioning.
Much depends upon the personality and caliber of the chief executive.
Therefore, to succeed, he/she has to get assistance from a band of well chosen colleagues for running the administration efficiently and smoothly.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Chief Executive is the master of all civil service: Explain 2.
Differentiate between the nominal, and the real chief executive.
3.
Differentiate between parliamentary and presidential types of Government.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Books Ltd. Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2000).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printer and Publishers Co. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP BOOKS.
Vishnboo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 85 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 5 LEGISLATURE AS A BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Various Functions of Legislature 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Of all the several branches into which the problem of administration is divided, and that have to do with general administration, the legislature is the most important one.
In modern times the legislature as the representative body of the people has become the source of all authority regarding administration.
It means that the prime responsibility and authority of making fundamental decisions in respect to location and exercise of the general function of direction, supervision and control of administration rest with the Legislature.
The function of direction, supervision and control is the function of the legislature.
But these functions differ from the function of executives.
The word execution means the actual carrying out of the orders.
It simply consists in putting into execution what has been ordered.
The distinction between direction, supervisor and control on the one hand and execution on the other, is of vital importance because as said above for the former is the function of the legislature while the latter, is the function of the executive.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the various functions of the legislature.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Various Functions of Legislature The Legislature sitting as a board of directors perform numerous functions and they are as follow: 86 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Determination of the Activities to be Undertaken As regards the first function, there can be little doubt that the determination of what the government shall do is a responsibility that rests upon the Legislature.
The policy to be adopted by the government both in the internal and external field is set out by the Legislature.
But it does not mean that it should lay down all the details of a party, the specific acts which shall be performed in carrying out the policy.
The Legislature is a body of politicians representing particular territories and interests.
They are interested primarily in their territories.
The executive represents and is interested in the entire territory and government of the state.
His judgment is bound to be better as regards details than that of the legislature because the former being in close touch with administration is in a better position to understand its need.
Moreover, the legislature will not be unnecessarily burdened with the task of specifying the details.
If the legislature goes into details it denies the initiative to the executive and in so doing may kill the efficiency of administration.
(i) Determination of Organisation Organisation is the medium through which individuals work as a group and as effectively as each would work alone.
It consists of the relationships of individuals to individuals and of group to groups, which are so related as to bring about an orderly division of labour.
Generally speaking, organisation is divided into departments, bureaus, divisions and sections.
In addition to these units, there are certain units called field stations.
This field stations are created in the services where the work of the service is done not only at the head quarters of the government but also in field station all over the country e.g.
post offices, railway stations, law courts, etc.
Now, the issue is the point at which it is advisable that the legislature should stop determining not only the departments that shall be created for the performance of administrative duties, but also the internal organisation of these departments.
In practice, no uniformity exists among states on this issue.
In the United States of America, the number and character of the administrative departments that shall be created to handle administrative affairs are more or less definitely determined by the constitution.
In France, departments are set up by the Executive decree.
In Nigeria, the power of creating new departments rests with the president.
In India the power of establishing new departments rests with the president acting through the prime minister.
In so far as the units of the lower order, i.e.
divisions, sections, and field offices are concerned, the discretion in Nigeria is left in the hands of the ministers acting through their heads of department.
87 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (ii) Determination of Personnel Personnel are the body of persons who actually run the administration.
It may be of two types – directing personnel, that is, those who are responsible for direction of service and are commonly called officers, and employees proper, that is, those occupying subordinate positions and having as their general duties, the carrying out of orders given to them.
It is generally accepted with regard to the former class that the legislature should itself determine their ‘number, character, compensation, powers and duties’.
In USA and Nigeria respectively, the senate approves most of the top appointments made by the president.
This is on account of the presidential form of government and checks and balances system prevalent in Nigeria and USA respectively.
As regards the second class of employees the legislature may determine their conditions of service either by a general stature or by an act of appropriation.
Willoughby is of the opinion that it is not wise to control personnel other than directing personnel, by the first method.
Any attempt to prescribe imitations upon subordinate personnel in this manner gives rise to a rigidity that is sure in many cases to work injury.
(iii) Determination of Rules of procedure Rules of procedure may be of two types: (1) Those which affect the interests or right outside of service and (2) Those which have to do with purely administrative operations within the service.
The example of the former are the rules setting forth the procedure to be followed in assessing and collecting income-tax or land revenue, in the grant of copyright, trade marks, etc.
These are matters affecting personal and property right of the people in a most direct manner.
The examples of the latter are the rules for the disbursement of pay to the members of the service.
Now as regards the former, it is necessary that the legislature should pass a statute to give them legal sanction.
The question as to whether these rules should be embodied in the Acts of the legislature or promulgated by cabinet or the head of the department involves a consideration of the question of the delegation of legislative powers which lies outside the scope of our discussion.
The advantage of having these rules embodied in the statute lies in the greater certainty of their legal force.
The advantage of having them embodied in the executive orders lies in the fact that they are drafted by the persons directly familiar with the conditions and problems of the department.
88 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (iv) Determination of Grant of Funds In all democratic countries, the legislature determines the amount of money which is to be made available for expenditure to the executive.
All the public services are to be paid from public funds for their work.
If no money is made available, the entire administration would come to a halt.
Therefore, it is the duty of the legislature to find out the needs of all the departments and make provision of money accordingly.
(iv) Legislative Supervision Since the legislature is the source of all administrative authority and makes money available for carrying out the administration, it is desirable that all grants are properly exercised.
In other words, it may be said that the legislature should provide the means by which it shall be able to exercise due supervision and control over its agents.
To see that these agents perform their duties properly is an imperative duty of the legislature.
Therefore, the executive power, or rather function is that of representing the government as a whole and of seeing that all of its laws are properly complied with by its several parts.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the above description, it is clear that the legislature instead of directly running the administration or determining too in detailed a manner the activities, agencies, organisation, plant and personnel should give directions and furnish the officers charged with the executive with detailed data regarding the acts of all administrative officers.
5.0 SUMMARY The executive power, or rather function, is that of representing the government as a whole and of seeing that all of its laws are properly complied with by its several parts.
It also addressed the administrative function which is that of actually administering the law as declared by the legislature, and interpreted by the judicial branch of the government.
In effect, the distinction usually made by declaring the executive function which is essentially political in character, that is, one involving exercise of judgment in its use, and the administrative function concerned with the putting into effect of policies and carrying out of orders as determined or given by other organs is highlighted.
89 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the functions of the legislature?
2.
How can the legislature facilitate the smooth running of a bureaucracy?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum, Books Ltd. Sharma, M.P.
(1972).
Public Administration: Theory and Practice.
Allahabad: Kitab Mahal Publishers.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (2006).
Public Administration New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 90 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 4 Unit 1 Executive Control over Administration Unit 2 Parliamentary Control Administration Unit 3 Judicial Control over Administration Unit 4 Community Control over Administration Unit 5 Internal Controls UNIT 1 EXECUTIVE CONTROL OVER ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Political Direction 3.2 Budgetary System 3.3 Recruitment System 3.4 Executive Legislation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every official is responsible to and under the control of his/her administrative superiors who are known as ministers.
A minister is responsible for all that goes on within his department.
If a mistake is made a civil servant in a department and the minister in charge of the department are held responsible even if he/she knows nothing about it or he/she was not consulted by the officials concerned before taking the action.
In a parliamentary type of government, the minister has to resign for the mistakes committed by the officials in their departments in this regard, the ministers or executives exercise control over administration through the following methods: i.
Political direction ii.
Budgetary system iii.
Recruitment system iv.
Executive legislation Before we discuss various means of control over administration, let us briefly describe what administrative responsibility is.
Administrative 91 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION officials are not permitted by law to act arbitrarily.
They are liable for their own official actions.
Therefore we can aptly define “Administrative responsibility” as the liability of the officials to give a satisfactory account of the exercise of the powers or discretion vested in them to some one who it is due, failing which some kind of punishment may follow.
According of white, “Administrative responsibility consist of the sum total of the constitutional, statutory administrative and judicial rules and precedents and the established practices by means of which public officials may be held accountable for their official actions”.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • political direction • budgetary system • recruitment system • executive legislation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Political Direction The minister has the power of direction, control and supervision.
S/He has full authority to manage and direct his/her department.
S/he lays down the policy and sees to its implementation.
S/he issues directive to the departmental officials.
No important decision can be taken without bringing the matter to his/her notice.
S/He may concentrate the entire authority in his/her hands and reduce the secretary to a cipher.
S/he may call for any and every file and issue the direction that no action on particular kind of matters will be taken except by him/her.
S/he may go round the department in order to supervise its working.
S/he may transfer the officials from one branch to another and make changes in the allocation of work.
The minister may also issue orders to eradicate red-tapism and increase efficiency.
In other words, the departmental officials are directly and wholly responsible to him/her.
However, it may be noted that in actual practice civil services are not always dictated by the ministers, but they even lead and dictate.
Being experts, the civil servants exercise substantial influence on the minister in the policy formulation and its implementation.
Secondly, it may also be noted that the extent of control of a minister over his department rests on his political position.
If the minister enjoys the full confidence of the president or prime minister and has a strong 92 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION base in the party (in case of a parliamentary system), s/he can deal effectively with bureaucracy.
But if he/she is politically non-assertive his/her control over administration may be weak.
A strong–willed president may reduce a minister to a mere nonentity.
Thus, a minister’s control over administration depends not only on the legal or constitution system of the country, but also upon his political and societal strength.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 How does a minister hold sway over administration?
3.2 Budgetary System The budgetary system which determines the total financial and personnel resources which no department may exceed give the executive an effective means of control over administration.
The civil servant has to work within the budgetary allocation.
He cannot spend a single naira without the proper sanction from higher authorities.
The money is to be spent according to the financial rules.
Proper accounts are to be maintained which are subject to audit.
Under an effective budgetary system the administration is under the constant control of the executive.
Therefore, in a democracy, the most effective device for legislative to control public administration is to act in skeleton form and empower the executive to fill in the details.
The rules formed by the executive have the fore of law.
The scope of administrative law making is very wide in the modern social welfare states.
These administrative rules determine the authority of the different official in the department.
The executive control on all administration is constant and continuous.
According to Prof. Negro, ‘Executive controls are most important for their positive development and enforcement of standards and safeguards in the actual operation of substantive departments.’ This gives a positive and continuous guidance to the administration.
It keeps the administration always alert.
Executive controls are not negative or coercive but positive and corrective.
Prof. Negro says, ’’The closest most influenced form of control is in my judgment, that of executive agencies of the auxiliary type.
I must risk the heretical statement that a good budget staff and a good personnel officer will do more to preserve the liberties of the people than a good count, because they will be in operation long before a potential wrong is done.’’ Significance of Executive Control The legislative control over administration is general and periodic in nature.
The executive control is corrective and stimulating in nature.
Negro has rightly opined that Executive controls are most important for 93 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION their discussion on budget.
This is really a critical time for the government.
Member of the legislative body have these opportunities to criticize civil servants working in difference departments.
First, at the presentation of the budget, general discussion on the whole budget takes place.
Secondly, at the time of voting on grants, the members can criticize specific points on each head of demand.
Thirdly, discussion on the finance Bill gives an ample opportunity to the members to criticize the entire administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is budgetary system?
3.3 Recruitment System Another important means of executive control over administration is recruitment system.
Generally, recruitment in the civil service is placed in the hands of public service commission which is an independent body.
The general rules of recruitment are laid down by the government.
The qualifications, experience, age, etc, required for different posts are determined by the executive.
It has also the power to exclude certain posts from the purview of the public service commission.
To the higher posts of the civil service, the executive has a free hand.
The minister selects their own secretary and head of departments.
Thus through their appointees the exercise full control over the administration of the department.
3.4 Executive Legislation The executive exercises power of legislation which is termed “delegated legislation.
The legislature passes positive development and enticement of standards and safeguard in the actual operation of substance of department.
This control is positive and not negative in character because it takes the form of guidance and encouragement.
Undoubtedly, the executive is effective, stimulating and correcting.
But this does not mean that the position of the minister is that of super-load.
It is expected that the minister maintains a crucial relationship with the permanent staff of his ministry, so that the work of the ministry can be done in efficient and economical manner.
The minister is always amateur because he occupies his position not by virtue of his ability but because of his popularity.
He has therefore to depend on his permanent secretary who is an expert in the job of administration.
Government as we know, is made up of special and non special minds, the civil service forming the first and the minister forming the second element.
The success of any government depends upon the harmonious 94 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION relations between the two.
The minister should not have too much interference in the detailed functioning of his ministry.
He should lay down only broad outlines of policy and see to it that it is executed faithfully by his permanent staff in the ministry.
The relationship between the minister and that of the civil servants should be seen as that of colleagues working together in a team to co- operative partners in progress while advancing public interest and the efficiency of the ministry.
The minister should not be an isolated autocrats, issuing orders and directives without hearing or considering arguments for alternative course.
The partnership should be alive and virile, rival ideas and opinions should be fairly considered and the relationship of all should be one of mutual respect and understanding, of course, that the ministers decision is final and must be loyally and helpfully carried out, and that he deserves efficient and energetic service.
Thus it becomes apparent that the executive control over administration can be fully effective only when there is team- work, cooperation and mutual trust and respect between the political boss and the civil servant.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is Executive Legislation?
4.0 CONCLUSION The civil servants play vital roles in the modern social welfare states.
The public servant today is not a mere docile executor of the public policy but is very largely its initiator or formulator.
In fact, he is the main-spring of administration.
He supplies the expert knowledge to the administration and being an expert he controls the administration .He enjoys wide discretionary power and exercises great influence in the body policy.
It is but necessary that means be devised to secure effective control over public servant lest he may become irresponsible and despot.
Administration is a means of public welfare.
The people have a live interest in seeing that public administration is both responsible and efficient.
The public officials should be made responsible appropriate authorities.
They must be liable to give a satisfactory account of the exercise of their power.
There are certain control through which administrative responsibility is enforced.
5.0 SUMMARY By executive control of administration, we mean the control exercised by the chief Executive over public Administration.
In the parliamentary form of government, the chief Executive is only the nominal head and the real powers are exercised by the cabinet.
The cabinet or the council of minister are collectively in charge of the whole administration and is 95 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION responsible to the legislature for all the departmental activities.
But each minister is also individually in-charge of one or more department.
According to the doctrine of minister responsibility, it is the minister who is responsible to the legislature for acts of omission and commission of the officials in his department and if anything goes wrong in his department, he may even be asked to resign his office.
It is therefore, the minister who exercises control over public officials 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is Administrative Responsibility all about?
Define Executive control, and explain its significance.
Administration is a means of public welfare: Comment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (ed.)
(2006).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Negro, F.A.
(1951).
Public Administration; Reading and Documents.
New York: Rinehart and Co. Inc. Tonwe, P. A.
(1998).
Public Administration: An Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP BOOKS.
Vishnvo, Bhagivan and Vidya, Bhutan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 96 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 PARLIAMENTARY CONTROL OVER ADMINISTRAION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Law-Making Process 3.2 Question-Hour 3.3 Audit and Report 3.4 Debates and Discussion 3.5 Appointment of Committees 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In all systems, parliamentary or presidential, control of the administration by the legislature is important.
Legislature is most effective and real instrument of controlling public Administration.
It is feared that if control over public administration is relaxed, administration will try to act arbitrarily and would become very corrupt.
As such, legislative control is very important to prevent irresponsibility and to avoid the evils of public Administration.
Io modern democratic states, people exercise control over administration through their elected representatives (members of the legislature) the legislature looks after the work of the government on their behalf.
The legislature is the source of all administrative authority.
It is the legislature which lays down the public policy – the work programme.
It decides the nature and scope of administration, and the numbers of personnel require manning the administrative machinery.
In a parliamentary system, such as India and Great Britain, it is primary important because all states activities emanate from the legislature.
The cardinal principle of parliamentary system is the responsibility of the executives to the legislature.
The executive therefore, cannot afford to be irresponsible.
He has to be responsible for each an every act of his civil servant.
The responsibility of administration is thus indirect because it is enforced through the executive.
The official cannot be called to the floor of the House to explain his act.
It is the minister who shoulders the responsibility for the administrative acts of the department.
If he is unable to satisfy parliament, he has to quit office.
Sometime, the entire ministry may have to quit the office because 97 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION ministerial responsibility in a parliamentary system is collective.
Thus, we find that the legislatures control on administration is indirect, i.e.
through the executive.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain law making process • discuss question-hour • explain the roles of audit and report • identify the importance of debate and discussion • explain the role of the appointment committees.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Law Making Process The legislature makes the law which determines the organisation, functions and procedures of public administration.
A new department may be created to give effect to a particular law enacted by the parliament.
However, the legislature control through the law making process is very general.
It is difficult, if not impossible, for the legislature to attempt to lay down in details the administrative procedures to be followed.
Generally, the task of laying down the detailed rules is left to the executive who is known as Delegated legislation.
But the executive makes the rules within the ambit of its authority, delegated by the legislature.
It cannot transgress the limits of its authority.
Sometimes, the legislature may require these rules to be placed before it for approval.
In every democracy, there is a committee on delegated legislation to examine these rules and report back to the house about their authenticity.
Just as the legislature may create new powers and functions, similarly it may make changes in them.
It may also give the executive the power to make essential adjustments.
Thus, in a general way the organisation of public administration is determined by the legislature.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 The legislature makes the law which determines the organisation, functions and procedures of public administration: Explain.
3.2 Question Hour Questions constitute a very powerful device of parliamentary control over administration.
In parliamentary democracies, there is a question 98 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION hour which is the opening hour of the parliament meetings.
During the question hour, any member of the house can ask questions to seek information in respect of any matter.
The members are expected to give a notice of their questions to the ministers.
The ministers concerned prepare their responses with the aid of the civil servants in the departments.
The minister is expected to respond to the question but he/she can also decline to answer a question on the ground that disclosing information regarding that particular matter is not in the public interest.
If the answer to the question is not comprehensive and satisfactory, supplementary questions can also be asked to which the minister is supposed to give proper reply.
Sometimes, the question hour is followed by half-an hour discussion if a member feels dissatisfied with the answer given to his/her question.
During this short discussion, the house may extract more information on matters of public policy from the government or may put more pressure upon his or her policy in accordance with the wishes of the opposition parties.
The question is very important because it exercises a very healthy check on administration.
W.B.
Munro says, “It is an effective check upon those bureaucratic tendencies which are bound to appear in every government.
It keeps the experts responsive to a body of laymen.
As a palladium of his rights and liberties, it is worthy to be ranked with trial by jury and the writ of habeas Corpus”.
Although the motive of these questions may be political, i.e.
to sink the minister at whom they are directed or the government to which he belongs, yet they play an important part in the mechanism of control over public administration.
The question hour has been described as a search light turned on the activities of administration.
Due to parliamentary questions, administration is carried against a background of awareness of responsibility to parliament and the public.
This keeps the administration open.
A minister has to be constantly asking him/herself, not merely whether his/her the proceedings and proceedings of those for whom he/she is responsible are legally or technically defensible, but what kind of answer he/she can give if questioned about them in the house, and how that answer will be received.
This device of questions, according to Lowell, helps greatly ‘not only to keep the administration up to the mark, but to prevent growth of bureaucratic arrogance”.
In short, questions represent a very powerful method of parliamentary control over administration.
The question hour in the parliament keeps the civil servant on his/her toes.
It compels him/her to be alert and circumspect in his/her actions and often prevents acts of petty injustice commonly associated with bureaucracy.
High Gaitskell once said, “Anybody that has ever worked in a civil service department would agree with me that if there is one major thing which 99 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION leads civil servants to be excessively cautious, timid and careful and to keep records which outside the civil service would be regarded as unnecessary, it is the fear of the parliamentary question”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the importance of question hour.
3.3 Audit and Report When money is sanctioned by the parliament for expenditure, it is also its responsibility to ensure that the money is spent judiciously.
This control over public expenditure is done by the legislature, through the Auditor-General.
He/she audits the expenditure incurred in and outside the country by the government and submits his/her report to the legislature.
The Auditor-General while auditing the expenditure ensures that the money spent was given due sanction by the competent authority and that it is spent for the purpose for which sanction was granted.
It also ascertains that the expenditure is incurred with due regards to the principles of financial propriety.
The report submitted by the Auditor- General is scrutinized by the public Accounts committee of the legislature and therefore, the legislature discusses its findings.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain the duties of Auditor–General of Nigeria.
3.4 Debates and Discussion Debates and discussion are a very important occasion for the parliament to examine and scrutinize the activities and efficiency of various governmental agencies.
The inaugural address of the president, the budget speech, introduction of a bill for amendment of an Act or enactment of new law, introduction of motion or resolution provide an occasion for debates and discussion.
When the president opens the session of the parliament, the speech delivered by him/her is discussed in the parliament before a vote of thanks is passed.
In the course of discussion, the members of the parliament/National Assembly criticize the administration for its lapses and failures.
The Budget speech of the finance minister provides another opportunity to the parliament to review and criticize the function of administration.
Budget debates, it may be said, are very important from the viewpoint of parliamentary control over administration.
These debates are known as the great annual national inquisitions.
At the time of considering demands for grants of the various departments, the parliament examines 100 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION and scrutinizes the working of the whole departments.
Whenever a bill is introduced for enactment of a new law or amendment of an old Act, the parliament again gets an opportunity to review the function of administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Debates and discussion are known as the great annual national inquisitions: Discuss.
3.5 Appointment of Committees The parliament as a whole is some times not in a position to go into details of the working of various administrative departments, due to lack of knowledge about their activities.
Thus, it makes use of committees who can go into the depth of their working of different departments and keep a constant watch on their functioning.
Some of the important committees are: Public Accounts Committee Estimates Committee Committee on Public Undertakings Committee on Assurances, Committee subordinates legislature, etc.
Basically, the first three committees deal with financial control of public administration.
As mentioned earlier, the public accounts committee scrutinises the report of the auditor- general concerning the propriety of expenditure incurred by administrative departments and then reports its finds to the legislature.
The estimate committee examines the estimates (proposals of expenditure in the budget) sent by different ministries before they are considered for debates and discussions by the parliament.
Its main role is to suggest economics in expenditure.
The public undertaking committee as the name implies scrutinizes the reports and accounts of the public sector undertaking.
It also examines the public sector undertakings as being managed in accordance with sound business principles.
In fact, it evaluates the overall performance of such undertakings.
The committee on assurance is responsible for ensuring that the assurance given by the minister from time to time is implemented within time frames.
Sometimes, this ministers during question hour or debates give and assurance or make some promises regarding certain issues on the floor of the House.
Formally, it was left to the individual members to keep an eye on whether the promises were fulfilled or not.
The government had no obligation to make the reports to anybody weather or 101 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION not the assurance have been carried out.
Ministers were, therefore tempted to make false promises to please certain members.
But now the rules of procedure of the house of the legislature provides for the setting up of the committee on assurance which consists of some members of the house and functions under the control of the senate president or speaker as the case would be.
The committee or subordinate legislation exercises the necessary checks over the authority delegated to the executive from time to time.
In many democratic states, delegated legislation is a common practice; the parliament simply lays down broad principles and leaves the procedural details to be framed by the executive.
This committee keeps a control over power of delegated legislation.
However, whatever has been said above of legislative control over administration holds true of parliamentary system.
Under the presidential system of government of Nigeria and U.S.A. most of the means of legislative control described above are not available.
Thus the legislature in a presidential system can neither put question to the ministers nor can it pass a no-confidence or censure motion against the government.
The executive does not sit in the Congress/National Assembly.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Mention some of the important committees, and explain why committees are essential in the working of different departments.
4.0 CONCLUSION The legislature enjoys a privileged position vis-à-vis administration.
By free and unfiltered discussions on the floor of the house he/she can exercise health influence upon the administration.
But continuous and constant pin-prinking makes the minister and bureaucrats in his/her department timid and reluctant to shoulder responsibility.
This practice eventually proves harmful to proper functioning of parliamentary democracy which is based on harmonious combination of the amateur politician and expert administrator.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit summarily addressed the issues of power arguing that when power is granted to administrators, it requires adequate control without crippling authority and that the greater the power, the more the need for control.
The need for effective control of the exercise of power stems from the fear of its abuse or misuse, for if you give a man/woman power to do right, you also give him/her the power to do wrong.
And, to ensure 102 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION this safeguard against misuse of power certain measures of effective control over administration have to be evolved.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Would you say administration thrives on delegated legislation?
2.
The Question Hour has been described as a search-light turned on the activities of administration: Comment 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (2006).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration.
An Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP Books.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya Bhashan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 103 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 JUDICIAL CONTROL OVER ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Cases of Judicial Intervention 3.2 Judicial Remedies for Suing the Government 3.3 Extra Ordinary Constitutional Remedies 3.4 Limitations of Judicial Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Judicial control over administration means the powers of the courts to examine the legality of the officials’ acts and the safeguard of the rights of the citizens.
It also implies the right of an aggrieved citizen to bring a civil or criminal suit in a court of law against a public servant for the wrong done to him/her in the course of discharge of his/her public duty.
L. D. White explaining the importance of judicial control writes: ‘the system of formal external control over officials and their acts falls primarily into two main divisions – that exercised by the legislative bodies and that imposed by the courts.
The purpose of legislative supervision is principally to control the policy and the expenditure of the executive branch, the end sought by judicial control of administrative acts is to ensure their legality and thus protect citizens against unlawful trespass on their constitutional or other rights.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the following: • judicial intervention • judicial remedies for suing the government • the extra ordinary constitutional remedies • limitations of judicial control.
104 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cases of Judicial Intervention In most modern democratic states, the accepted practice is that the judiciary can interfere with the administrative and quasi-judicial orders, whenever they suffer from luck of jurisdiction, grave error of law and facts, abuse of authority, material irregularities of procedure when it causes prejudice to the rights of the persons or the order is differed on account of bias.
One thing that should be borne in mind is that the courts cannot interfere in the administrative actions on their own, unless when invited to do so by any person who feels that his/her rights have been infringed or likely to be infringed as a result of some action of the public servants.
However, the courts cannot interfere in each and every administrative act.
This is because of the fact that too much of judicial interference may make the public officers to be too conscious and timid and very little of it may make them negligent of the rights of the citizens.
The need of the hour is to strike a balance between the two extremes.
Therefore, no hard and fast principles can be laid down for judicial intervention, but the courts intervene in administrative cases on the following grounds: Lack of Jurisdiction Every officer has to act within the limits of the authority given to him/her and also within a specified geographical area.
If he/she acts beyond his/her authority or outside the geographical limits of his/her powers, his/her acts will be declared by the courts as ultra vires or null and void hence ineffective.
When an official uses his/her authority arbitrarily to harm some citizens, it is an abuse of power, which is technically known as malfeasance.
At this juncture, the court has the power to come to the rescue of the affected persons.
ii.
Error of Law A public servant may misinterpret the law and may impose upon the citizens duties and obligations which are not required by law.
Any citizen, who has suffered on account of this, has the right to approach the court for damages.
iii.
Error of Fact Finding There may be cases in which the official has erred in discovering facts.
He/she may wrongly interpret facts or ignore them and thus may act on 105 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION wrong presumptions.
This may affect a citizen adversely and so there may be ground for bringing a case in a court of law.
iv.
Abuse of Authority If a public official uses his/her authority vindictively to harm some person, the court can intervene and punish him/her if s/he is found guilty of using his/her authority to take a personal revenge.
v. Error of Authority Above all, public officials have to act according to certain procedure as laid down by the laws and if they do not follow the prescribed procedure, the courts have a right to question the legality of their action, on appeal from the party affected.
This act on the other hand, is known as procedural error.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is judicial intervention?
Explain some of the grounds for judicial intervention.
3.2 Judicial Remedies for suing the Government Judicial remedies are available against the government officials in the cases mentioned above.
Judicial control can be in the form of suing the state or the government itself or the public official concerned for his/her wrongful acts.
The position regarding the suability of the government and public officials differs in countries following the system of rule of law or the administrative law.
The rule of law system prevails in USA, England and her Dominions and other common wealth countries including Nigeria.
The administrative system is practiced in France and other countries of continental Europe.
The system of rule of law implies that everybody, high or low, official or private citizen is subject to the same ordinary law of the land and that the official cannot take shelter behind the state sovereignty in defending him/herself.
To repeat what Dicey said: “with us (English) every official, from the Prime Minister down to a constable or collector of taxes is under the same responsibility for every act done without legal justification as any other citizen”.
It means that the state cannot be held liable for the wrong acts of its officials even if they have done an injury to a citizen while working in their official capacity and that the officials themselves are personally liable for their wrongful acts.
The state thus enjoys immunity from liability in torts, i.e.
it cannot be sued for 106 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION damages and a suit can only be brought for damages only against the official responsible for doing a wrong or causing an injury.
Thus remedy is hardly of any use because the damages decreed by the court cannot usually be recovered due to the impecunious condition of the official.
There is strong need for a reform concerning this system so as to make the remedy effective.
In England, the system was improved by the passage of the crown proceeding Act of 1947, which makes the crown, i.e.
the state, liable for torts committed by its servants.
But in the USA, the state is still immune from tortuous liability of its officials.
In Nigeria, the constitution recognised the suability of the state, which by implication provides that the state is stable for contracts i.e.
trading activities and is not usable for tortuous act of its officials.
In practice however, the state is ordinarily held responsible for the tortuous acts of its servants.
On the other hand, in the countries where the system of Administrative law prevails, the liability for wrongful acts by its officials is fully established.
There, the officials are tried not in ordinary law courts but in administrative courts which award damages from public funds to the aggrieved individuals.
The state may later deal with the officials who have defaulted as it deems fit but so far as the citizen is concerned he/she sues and obtains damages from the state.
In the countries with the rule of law system, the public officials are no doubt personally liable and sue able in respect of acts done by them in their official capacity.
In effect, they are amenable to the ordinary law and in the ordinary courts of the land even when there are distinctive procedures to be followed in bringing a case against them.
First there are certain officials like the Heads of State who enjoy legal immunity like the British monarch who is completely immune from legal liability in respect of any of her acts done in public or personal capacity.
The American president is also immune from any legal proceedings during the term of his office.
He can only be impeached by the congress and it is only after his removal from office that he can be tried in ordinary courts for crimes committed by him as president.
In Nigeria, personal immunity from legal liability is granted to the president of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the state Governors, for any act done in exercise of their powers and duties as laid down in the constitution.
During their term of office they are immune from any criminal proceedings even in respect of their personal acts.
The ministers have however, no such immunity as they are, liable for crimes and torts and amenable to the ordinary courts.
The judicial officers also enjoy immunity from liability to be sued for any act done by them in the discharge of their official duties.
Whenever the rule of law is not observed or it is violated, citizens have the following extraordinary remedies also against the excesses of public officials.
107 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the concepts of rule of law and Administrative law respectively.
3.3 Extraordinary Constitutional Remedies In addition to the constitutional remedies of suing the government or its officials, the constitution of Nigeria has provided a number of writs which may be issued whenever the rule of law is not observed or is violated; citizens have the following extraordinary remedies also against the excesses of public officials.
Habeas Corpus The write of Habeas Corpus is a prerogative writ of highest constitutional importance.
It is an order issued by the court for the release of a person who has been unlawfully detained.
It issues a command that the person who is in custody should be produced before the court, so that the legality of his/her detention maybe examined.
The purpose of Habeas Corpus is not to punish wrong doers but merely to secure the release of the person illegally detained.
The prayer for the writ can also be made by some one else on behalf of the detainee.
Prohibition The writ of prohibition is issued by the superior court and the High court to the inferior court to prohibit a body from proceeding any further with the case in question.
The writ is slightly different from the writ of certiorari.
The writ of prohibition is issued while the process is gong on, while certiorari can only be issued after the decision has been taken.
Both orders are available for excesses of jurisdiction and very often the two order overlap.
(iii) Certiorari The writ of certiorari is issued by a senior court to lower courts or tribunals for quashing the decisions of those courts, if those decisions were found to be without jurisdiction.
The writ can only be issued when the tribunal or court has disposed of the matter.
(iv) Mandamus A writ of Mandamus is directed to the inferior, courts, tribunals, cooperation or officer, requiring the performance of a specified duty fixed by law.
It compels the junior authority to exercise powers in accordance with the mandate of law.
The writ cannot be claimed as a 108 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION matter of right.
It is only when the senior court is satisfied that the writ of Mandamus is issued Quo-Warrantor Quo – Warrantor means what is your authority?
The writ is issued to protect a citizen from being deprived of a public office to which he/she may have a right.
This writ will not lie in respect of an office of private nature.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What happens when the rule of law is not observed or is violated?
3.4 Limitations of Judicial Control The judicial remedies mentioned above under the rule of law system provide an effective control against official excesses or abuse of power and in protecting the liberties and rights of the citizens.
But judicial control has certain limitations.
In the first place, all administrative actions are not subject to judicial control.
There are many kinds of administrative actions which cannot be reviewed by the law courts.
This is precisely because if every act or decisions of government is reviewed by the court, administration will be paralyzed and the administrative machinery might be brought to a halt.
Following from the above, it is quite imperative that there should be some limitations of judicial control over administration; some of the limitations of judicial control over public Administration are: No court can intervene on its own accord.
It intervenes only when approached by an individual or group of individuals with a plea that their rights have been infringed by the order of the government or its officials.
The judiciary intervenes only after the event is over or when the law has been set in motion.
This is because mere suspicion or fear cannot be the basis for judicial intervention.
Judiciary cannot go beyond the constitution.
Judges decide strictly according to the provisions of the constitution.
Personal whims or natural justice cannot override constitutional provision.
If the provisions of the constitution stand changed with retrospective effect, decisions of the courts will also be effected.
109 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Judicial process is costly and poor persons cannot afford it.
In fact, poor people cannot approach the courts thereby making it appear as if judicial protection is meant for the rich people.
Judicial process is so cumbersome and dilatory that ordinary people hesitate to approach the court.
It goes without saying that justice delayed is justice denied.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Review some of the limitations on judicial control.
4.0 CONCLUSION In all civilized countries, the actions of the government are made subject to the scrutiny of the court of justice.
In case of Nigeria, Lord Atkin observed that the executive can only act in pursuance of powers given to him by law.
Also, in line with British jurisprudence, the position is that no member of the executive can interfere with the liberty and property of a British subject, except on the ground that he/she can substantiate the legality of his/her actions before court of law.
The unit also addressed that it is the tradition of a British justice that judges should not shy away from deciding such issues in the face of the executive.
Most importantly, the unit argued that in a democracy, the judiciary has a crucial role to play given that it is the guardian of conscience of the people as well as the law of the land.
5.0 SUMMARY In sum, the unit argued that at one extreme the vigor of judicial control may paralyse effective administration while at the other the result may be an offensive bureaucratic tyranny so much so that creating a balance judicial administration relationship may be a major problem.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Ultra Vires?
Why does a court declare acts as Ultra Vires.
2.
What is procedural Error?
3.
Explain how Rule of Law can facilitate a balance in judicial administration.
110 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES\FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (2000).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice- Hall, Inc. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration, an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP Books.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhashan.
(2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 111 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 COMMUNITY CONTROL OVER ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Election 3.2 Recall 3.3 Pressure Groups 3.4 Advisory Committees 3.5 Vigorous Public Opinion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION People generally do not bother about the governmental machinery as they are busy in their daily pursuits with little time to think of the governmental machinery, yet the fact remains that it is they who set the whole mechanism of democratic government in motion.
They elect the head of the state and the members of legislature directly or indirectly.
In some countries they even elect the officials.
Public administration is meant to serve the people who inevitably will suffer at the hands of irresponsible administration.
Therefore, a democratic administration must be responsible to the people.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should explain the following: • election • recall • pressure groups • advisory committees • vigorous public opinion.
112 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Election The head of the state is usually elected by the people directly or indirectly.
The president of Nigeria and USA are elected directly by the people.
But the prime minister in a parliamentary system is the leader of the party returned in majority by the people.
The ministers are the members of the legislative and are elected by the people.
The top administrative officials are responsible to the elected representatives of the people.
In other words, these officials become indirectly responsible to the people and come under their control.
In some countries, like Nigeria, USA and Switzerland, there is the system of electing the administrative officials as well.
This system ensures direct popular control over administration but it introduces political consideration into administration and encourages favoritism and patronage.
It may also lead to inefficiency and corruption.
Moreover, the people are generally ignorant and hence incapable of assessing the qualification and personal achievements of administrators.
It is also impossible in some countries to elect all the officials.
Hence, from the point of view of administrative efficiency, integrity and impartiality, election of officials by the people is undesirable and can hardly be advocated.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why is it necessary that those who hold important public officers should be elected directly by the people?
3.2 Recall The system of recall is the logical corollary of the election of officials.
Under the system, the electorate can call for the dismissal of an official before the expiry of his/her term.
The system of recall makes the official continuously subject to popular whims and understanding and thus neglectful of the correct practices of his/her profession.
However, the system of recall is very rarely resorted to if Prof. Charles Worth opinion is to be relied on.
His position is that “the recall though not reduce the influence of bosses, corporations, or other special interests, it is just as useful and as available to bad elements as to good.
More so, it has been determined that it has no warning effect upon an official who is about to make a mistake or to prepare a crime”.
113 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is recall?
Does it hold sway in our society?
3.3 Pressure Group Pressure group is an American terminology for a section of the public organised and active in pursuit of some special interests which its members join to promote.
Usually a pressure group is a vested group.
It is a group of industrialist and traders with organised commercial interests.
These pressure groups bring pressure to bear upon both the legislature through lobbying and upon the administration through liaison officers.
It is difficult to exactly assess the extent of influence exerted by pressure groups upon administration, as no factual study has so far been made.
However, in USA, they are quite active.
The opinion is that “the process of government has become a group process in which organised minorities have become so closely identified with the formal governmental structure itself as to constitute a real center of political power”.
According to F.P.
Herring, “the future of many civil servants, particular the ablest and most enterprising is not in the federal service but in the private employment of the groups in which their official duties bring them into contact”.
Accordingly, Herbert B.
Bans refers to main legitimate contacts of private interests with the administration as follows: i.
To put across its own point of view to the polity formulating authorities, the legislature and the administrative agencies ii.
To keep themselves apprised of the development of government lest it violates new regulations, provisions, requirements, taxes.
iii.
To keep themselves vigilant against a bureaucratic tendency for more regulations resulting in more control and leading to government operation and ownership iv.
To attempt to use the government as an ally in its competition with another industry.
v. To keep abreast of the changes in the government and comply with even multiplying requirement that the government tends to make of the government.
vi.
Make a whipping boy of a business organisation or business in general.
The activities of the pressure groups are some times usefully to the administration.
They may convey to the administration the reaction of the vested interests to administrative decisions in time and may thus enable it to adjust its policy and activities so that there may be no 114 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION opposition from those particular interests.
This illegitimate means to secure an official favour leads to corruption and favouritism and subsequently destroys the efficiency of administration.
The above methods of public control over administration are very general.
It is doubtful whether direct controls upon the public administration from outside the executive are desirable.
The officials cannot take directive from the people nor can he/she act in accordance with their desires though he/she may be ultimately responsible to them.
Thus given that no official can serve two masters it becomes apparent that he/she owes responsibility only to the executive authority.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 The activities of the Pressure Group are sometimes useful to the administration: Discuss.
3.4 Advisory Committees A direct link between members of administration and the public has since recent years appeared in the advisory field.
The advisory committees, councils or boards are appointed at different levels of administration from the top to the lower levels.
These councils or committees consist of important citizens and of representatives of special interests.
Though the function of these bodies is merely advisory, but they render a highly positive service to the public hence there is no room for doubt.
In effect, what needs to be known is that the proper use of advisory bodies is the right answer of representative democracy to the challenge of corporate states as they are an invaluable instrument for breaking administrative measures on the back of the public.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What are the functions of advisory committees?
3.5 Vigorous Public Opinion The most effective means of community control over administration is a vigorous and informed public opinion.
Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty.
If people are politically sluggish and indifferent to what goes on in administration, they will soon lose their interest, and administration will become despotic.
In effect, the community has to become conscious of its rights and obligations before it can exercise any influence over administration.
To this end, there should be enlightened public opinion so that decentralisation of administration may provide the local 115 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION community with a better opportunity of intimate understanding and influencing the conduct of public business by the official.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 What is eternal vigilance?
4.0 CONCLUSION It can be safely concluded that every popular government is ultimately responsible to the people since in fact it is a creation of public opinion.
In effect, it could be said that public administration is unlikely to transcend its creator in depth of vision and insight except on marginal matters.
5.0 SUMMARY It may be emphasised that an institutional structure, however elaborate and well contrived, cannot by itself be effective to tone up the administration unless the administration itself is permitted by high ideas and carried forward with a sense of dynamic purpose.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is a Pressure group?
Explain some of its objectives?
2.
What are the formal methods of community control over administration?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphics Printers and Publishers Co. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP Books.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhashan.
(2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 116 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 5 INTERNAL CONTROLS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personal Management 3.2 Efficiency Survey 3.3 Professional Standards 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Internal controls are those controls which operate from within the administrative machinery.
They are fitted into the administrative machine and work automatically as the machinery moves.
The Internal controls range from top to bottom.
They exist in every section, branch and department.
The administrative machine, as we know, is designed hierarchical, in which one controls the work of the other.
There is always a fear of reprimand, of loss of superior favour, of the loss of increment, and of demotion and dismissal.
While the public administration punishes the aging and inefficient officers, it provides incentives to the loyal and efficient officers.
Since the administrative machine has today become a complex structure, it is necessary to supplement its external controls by internal controls in order to make the machine work effectively.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss: • personal management • efficiency survey • professional standards.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personal Management Personal management is one of the internal controls over administration.
The administrative machine is hierarchical in structure.
The hierarchical structure of administration provides for clear lines of responsibility.
117 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Referring to its importance, the Hoover Commission wrote, “Responsibility and Accountability are impossible without authority - the power to control.
The exercise of authority is impossible without a clear line of command from the top to the bottom and a return line of responsibility and accountability from the bottom to the top”.
Under the hierarchical system of organisation everyone is bound up in a single chain of command which makes an officer at a lower level responsible to the officer at the higher level.
Another device of control through personal management is the standardisation of established norms.
The number of personnel required in each department, their grades and salaries, their recruitment and promotion, their retirement and dismissal, their training and transfer and other conditions of service are laid down by a central agency, known as the Home Department.
Other Departments are required to adhere to the established norms laid down by the Home Ministry.
The Central agency on the other hand lays down the general conditions and principles of personnel management, while the responsibility for detailed management may be left to the separate department.
There can be no doubt that a good public personnel management is an effective means of internal control over administration.
Much will, however, depend upon the sense of justice.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the importance of authority or the power to control.
3.2 Efficiency Survey Efficiency Survey of the work of administrative unit is another effective method of internal control.
Inspection has always been of great importance in the control of Public business.
It is particularly valuable in a widespread organisation.
The offices from the headquarters go on inspection to ensure that reasonable levels of efficiency are being achieved by the field establishments.
There may be a body of expert inspectors too with the duty of making periodical visits to out stations and the authority to carry out a detailed examination of current procedures and results.
It is essential that officials posted for inspection, should have a wide knowledge and experience of the authorized work and regulations.
They should also be skilled, in conducting investigations with the least friction with the local officials.
In effect, for inspection to be efficient tactfulness must be applied; otherwise it may do more harm than good.
To therefore achieve this, a continuous and systematic system of efficiency surveys is called for.
It is hoped that the organisation and method (O&M) system will find out solutions to the problems presented by efficient auditing.
118 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Why it is that efficiency survey cannot be compromised in internal control of administration?
3.3 Professional Standards It is vital that public officials should cultivate high standards of conduct.
Every profession has its professional code or ethics to which the members follow.
The government service is also professional in nature and naturally, therefore, public servants should also adhere to the entire professional code of ethics.
They should be non-corruptible loyal, humble, non-partisan, honest, efficient and public servants of integrity.
The British civil servant is known for its administrative ethics.
In Nigeria there is a voluminous code of conduct for civil servants but they are mostly breached.
Hence, what is needed is a self-cultivated code of conduct.
There are far more moral lapses on the part of our civil servants.
Corruption in civil service is widely prevalent in this country.
According to Prof. Dimock, “the professional standards, ethics, philosophy, attitude and ideology of the public services are the surest means of securing a satisfying rapport.
Group consciousness and responsibility, although, may lead to exclusiveness paradoxically is the very force which can correct the inherent defects of bureaucracy.
Thus professional ethics provide rules of the game which do more to control public officials than any external or internal control can do.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is professional code of ethics?
4.0 CONCLUSION For the achievement of high professional standards, the responsibility cannot be placed entirely upon the shoulders of the official.
The official works in the society and a society in which bribery, corruption, nepotism, favoritism and lawlessness are the order of the day, cannot have a chaste civil service.
The society must, therefore reform itself.
The leaders of the society must come forward and take upon themselves the task of caring for the society of its ills.
5.0 SUMMARY James McCanny has summarised control over administration with the following statements “Next and probably most significant of all, the permanent officials of government are responsible to themselves.
They 119 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION must answer to their own consciences, to their own sense of dignity and pride, to the opinions of their fellowmen and to their hopes of esteem for the record they leave behind them, above all to their devotion, the their own honest effort to define the total welfare and to serve it” 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Authority.
2.
For the achievement of high professional standards, the responsibility cannot be placed entirely upon the shoulders of the officials: Explain.
7.0 REFERENCES\FURTHER READING Dkhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiment of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP BOOKS.
Vishnoo, Bagwan and Vidya, Bhashan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 120 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 5 Unit 1 Management –A Conceptual Analysis Unit 2 Leadership Unit 3 Policy Formation Unit 4 Decision-Making Unit 5 Administration and Nigerian Experience UNIT 1 MANAGEMENT - A CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Management 3.2 The Nature of Management 3.3 The Tasks of Management 3.4 Value of Management 3.5 Tests of good Management 3.6 Types of Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Public Administration, management has acquired a distinct conceptual significance.
Management is a cooperative endeavour for achieving a particular objective.
It implies, therefore, that every organisation, public or private, governmental or business which aims at achieving a particular objective must have a well established management.
In the modern welfare state, the government undertakes several activities for achieving the greatest good of the greatest number, and as such, its managerial field is constantly on the increase.
The success or failure of administration depends largely on how well the government is in a position to manage programmes of public welfare.
In the words of Dr. Appleby, “The heart of administration is the management of programmes designed to serve the general welfare.” Dr. Appleby’s contention is correct particularly in a developing democracy like Nigeria, where planned economy has been geared up to attain our cherished goal of becoming amongst the world best economies by the year 2020.
121 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end this unit, you should be able to explain the: • meaning of management • nature of management • task of management • value of management • test of good management • type of management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Management The term Management is applied in different ways and to a number of important ideas vital to the study of business administration.
Management is a difficult concept to define.
It is a concept so exceedingly complex that writers often define the term on a working basis, according to their own needs and purposes.
However, in public administration the term has acquired a distinct conceptual importance.
It is considered complementary to organisation – the anatomy of administration.
In this sense, it represents the physiology of administration.
If organisation represents the static or structural aspects of administration, the management represents its dynamic aspects.
The two words, are therefore, used in combination – organisation and Management.
In fact both are complementary to each other.
Neither of the two exits in isolation.
If organisation is the apparatus of administration, management signifies the running of it.
If organisation signifies the overall structure, management is the process for achieving the goal of the structure.
Seckler Hudson has correctly portrayed the distinction between these words, “In this volume organisation will be regarded as the division and unification of effort towards some goal or policy.
Management will be regarded as the collective utilisation of human resources and material in an effort to reach the known goal”.
Millett defines management as “The process of directing and facilitating the work of people organised in formal groups to achieve a desired goal”.
In essence management is the means of ensuring performance of any undertaking.
It aims at utilising limited resources to accomplish maximum output with speed and efficiency.
Millet is of the opinion that “Public Administration is an instrument for the exercise of political power”.
In the words of Terry, “Management is the accomplishment of predetermined objective through the efforts of other people”.
A manager 122 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION should therefore, possess the qualities of putting things together and getting the work done rather than having the capacity to do it him/herself.
If he/she has it, it is good but it is not a substitute for his/her techniques of getting the work done especially as management is a process of achieving a desired goal.
It is not the doing of things but getting them done.
In the above concept of management, the following characteristics may be noted: i.
Management is a process of organised activities.
ii.
The organised activities are directed towards an objective or set of objective.
iii.
The goal-oriented organised activities establish relationships among the available resources which include materials, money and people in the organisation.
iv.
Management involves working through other to accomplish the desired objectives.
v. Management involves decisions to get things done by others.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain what management means.
3.2 The Nature of Management In a large-scale organisation hierarchical pattern is adopted.
At the top management is run by an elite termed as managers or directors.
Hence, it is called top-management while the middle management and rank and file constitute the next rung of the hierarchical ladder.
Some of the main features of management reflecting its nature are: i.
University of Management Process This means that the functions of management are common to all types of administration, public or private, large scale or small scale.
Management is that type of skill which can be changed from one field of administration to another.
It is on this belief that there is a growing trend towards the transfer of personal from public to private field, from one country to another, one department to another.
The long-held concept of POSDCORB is equally applicable to all the administrative system, and vice-versa.
123 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION ii.
Management is a Collective Activity/Team-Work Management is not the task of one person.
It is a collective endeavour of so many persons.
It is a group of persons who exercise jointly the authority and the responsibility for group activity.
It exists in the whole of organisation.
In the words of Fayal 1949, management is neither an exclusive privilege nor a particular responsibility of the head of senior members of the business; it is an activity spread, like all other activities, between head and members of the corporate body.
It is thus, present at different hierarchical levels of authorities with different and responsibilities.
iii.
Management as a Profession Management has been described as a profession.
A profession has been defined as “a call in which one professes to have acquired specialised knowledge which is used in instructing, guiding or advising others.
At present, the managerial class fulfills these conditions.
However, full professionalism is impossible.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the main features of management?
3.3 The Tasks of Management It is very difficult to exactly state the tasks of management.
Gullick summed up the task of management in his snappy anagram or acronym thus, POSDCORB – planning, organising, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
According to Terry, the four fundamental function of management are: planning, organising, actuating and controlling.
To Fayal, this process involves planning, organising co-coordinating and controlling.
Seckler Hudson on the other hand has a more comprehensive view which includes in this process policy formation, locating and utilizing authority, planning, organisation, budgeting, staging, operating, reporting, leading, directing and controlling.
Millett divides the function of management into two forms.
In the first comes functions which are the peculiar problems of the organisation of which the management has to direct.
He called this function, “the substantive tasks of Management”.
For example, the substantive tasks of the Finance department are to prepare budget and present it before the legislature.
The second functions, according to Millett, are technical in 124 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION nature and are common to all administration, for instance, planning, operating, staffing and directing.
Millett classifies the technical functions into the following three heads: (i) Work direction, which includes the problem of leadership, supervision, planning and public relations.
(ii) Work operation, in which he puts organisation, human relations, budget, fiscal control, essentials of personnel policy, etc.
(iii) Internal service, which includes problems of capital, plant, supply and disposals.
The best way to sum up the task of management is to confine our attention on leadership, policy formation, decision-making, planning, supervision, communication, delegation, co-ordination and public Relation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain the tasks of management according to Gullick, Terry, Fayal, Seckler Hudson, and Millet.
3.4 The Values of Management To a few people, the principal concern of management is effectiveness, or efficiency, in the operation of an enterprise.
Lather Gullick has spoken of efficiency as “the single ultimate value in administration”.
Herbert Simon has been much concerned to demonstrate that rational behaviour in administration is primarily a calculative means reasonably expected to realise a given end.
Waldo has pointed out that economy and efficiency have been the twin beacons which have guided administrative reformers and writers in America.
But what is this term except that in scientific analysis, efficiency is measured in terms of output in proportion to input.
But what is input in management?
In brief, we can say that input in management is the quantity of men, money and material applied in the working of an organisation.
If these factors are out together in the right proportions, efficiency of an organisation is ensured.
Management, therefore, aims at fixing the right proportions of these factors with a view to better production.
But can we regard efficiency in its most wooden form as the basic value of management?
Should we agree with Simon that knowledge of administration, like all knowledge, is a moral?
Waldo has been critical of this view putting his objective succinctly through arguing, “We hold that efficiency cannot itself be a value” but pointed out that efficiency is 125 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION concerned with relationships and that it must therefore be defined in terms of some purpose or end.
Dahl has argued that the “Student of Public administration cannot avoid a concern with ends”.
He claimed that no science of administration could be possible until the place of normative values was made clear.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What is input in management?
3.5 Tests of Good Management According to Gullick, the true goals of management are to make the conduct of affairs technically sound, politically responsible, publicly acceptable, progressively approved, and socially constructive.
Millett postulates the following test of management: i.
Satisfactory service: This means fair and equitable service, i.e.
equal treatment to citizens of the administration.
ii.
Timely Service: This indicates that for service to be effective, it must be well timed.
iii.
Ample Service: It indicates the right quantity at the right time and at the right place.
iv.
Continued Service: That is, service unobstructed by rain, snow, sunshine or nocturnal darkness.
v. Progressive Service: it means a service which improves in quality and performance.
vi.
Responsible Performance: That is the management provides direction for administrative effort by working with and through those institutional devices which exists to express the will of a democratic society.
vii.
Participative Management: Participative Management is the current phrase used in management circles.
It means participation of the employees in decision-making.
It is a part of democratic leadership in organisation and human factor in administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Explain the true goals of management according to Gulick.
126 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.6 Types of Management The organisation of a large-scale body falls into three well defined zones: 1.
Top management 2.
Middle management, and 3.
The rank and file.
In fact, no hard and fast line of demarcation can be drawn between them.
However, their levels of work and responsibility are well marked atleast in Great Britain and in Nigeria.
In Great Britain for instance, administrative service constitutes the top management, the executive service comprises the middle management and the clerical service forms the rank and file.
In Nigeria too, the demarcation is not so well defined yet it may be said that the Nigerian Administrative and class/service constitute the top and the class II and other field officers comprises the middle management.
i.
Top Management Top management comprises of political and administrative personal.
In Nigeria, for example, political top management is represented by ministers, ministers of state and deputy ministers.
Administrative top management is composed of secretaries, joint secretaries and deputy secretaries.
ii.
Functions of Top Management Top management is mainly concerned with direction and control.
Direction means providing for the right kind of action.
Control means looking towards the attainment of accountability for and execution of a policy.
These two simple words are, in fact, meaningful; Direction includes planning, co-coordinating, and programming.
Control involves organisation, supervision, documentation, and reporting.
Certain functions entrusted to top management involve both direction and control.
The Following are Some of the Important Functions of the Top Management (i) It performs managerial functions of direction and control.
(ii) It prepares notes, reports and information required for the press, the public and the legislature.
127 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (iii) It furnishes the minister with all sorts of information required or likely to be required by him/her.
(iv) It provides the legislative information asked by it through interpellations, short notice questions and its committees (v) It is to gather information which ministers require to supply to the legislature, the pressure groups, his/her party men/women and the constituency.
Such information appears in the form of press communiqués, reports and circulars.
(vi) It has to supply information regarding legal matters pending in the law courts.
Questions of legal authority, cases before the courts, perplexities of inter-agency co-ordination and problems of public opinion all complicate the task” (vii) It serves as a coordinating body for inter or intra-departmental agencies.
(viii) It serves as a link between the cabinet and the civil services.
(ix) It coordinates the activities of the various departments, commissions, boards and divisions.
(x) It has to assimilate the activities and energies of various technical agencies into general administrative business of the state.
(xi) It shares with the political head the functions of thinking and planning.
(xii) It pays attention to such requirements of effective public management as cannot be attended to by political leadership, viz, preservation and continuity of administration and the recognition of administrative principles.
Qualities of Top Management The top management which is required to perform such important functions is expected to be an embodiment of the following: i.
Open mindedness, with the ability to see all sides of a question ii.
Vision iii.
Imagination and drive iv.
A capacious intellect v. A wide experience of men and affairs A.
Government Work as a Teamwork Government work is as a matter of fact, a team work.
Though formulation of policy is theoretically the function of a political head yet in actual practice top administration plays a vital role.
Policy execution also involves team work.
The rank and file collects the data, the middle management arranges it systematically and the top administrative management on the basis of systematized material formulates the policy.
The final word of consent or dissent is left to the political head.
128 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION However, though things may happen the other way round the basis of the policy of the board emanate from an enthusiastic minister.
However, such a policy is apt to remain vague and a mere utopian dream unless it is accorded a practical shape by the administrative top management.
In fact, modern administration is a highly technical and fairly vexing affair.
It is in many cases far beyond the comprehension of a lay politician.
Hence the importance of top as well as middle managers is gradually growing.
B.
Middle Management and Structure Middle Management, with a few exceptions covers bureau chiefs division and section heads and other intermediate grades and the departmental auxiliary agencies.
Thus budget and accounting officers, purchasing officers, personnel officers, procedures experts, public relation officers, liaison officers, the managers of public institutions and their subordinate staff, etc, comprise middle management.
In Nigeria there is not even one service performing middle managerial functions.
Each ministry is manned by it’s own service recruited on different principles and under different conditions.
Despite such diversity, there is one common factor to be traced in all such services, for example, they are recruited by the civil service commissions under specific rules and set standards.
Branch officers commonly known as under secretaries, section officers, heads of attached and subordinate offices of field establishments, head of departmental auxiliary agencies constitute middle management in Nigeria.
Functions of Middle Management Dr. White well described the main functions of middle management in this word.
“The normal task of middle management is to supervise, direct, and control the performance of business within the scope of law, policy and regulations already established”.
These are matters vital to good administration.
However, the functions of middle management can be broken down as: i.
Advice: The main function of the middle management is to render advice to the political head as the middle managers have the substantial knowledge of their organisation.
The mass of information transmitted to the head of department is the production of the middle management.
As such, the middle management gives advice on policy and management.
Middle managers have the primary duty to assist their principals to work out programmes and to advice them on various problems that may arise in the course of practical application.
129 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION ii.
Programme Planning: Another function of middle management is programming.
Though middle management is not responsible for the information of administrative policy – the task of top management, yet it is directly concerned with the programmes and departmental planning.
In the process, it modifies the details to make the policy formulated workable.
Hence, F.M Marx remarks, “The middle manager is always a policy maker”.
To this end, he conceives the middle manager as someone who “Not only takes part in policy formulation by translating strategy into tactics, but also tracks out top determination into line activities.
He frames the operating policies under his/her own responsibility.
He/she is also a policy maker indirectly, implicitly or explicitly”.
iii.
Policy Making: Besides giving advice to top level executives, and programme planning, the middle manager also plays an important role in policy making, he/she modifies the details, if not the principles of the policy, to make it practical and workable.
iv.
Control and Direction of Operations: Another main concern of the middle management is the control and direction of operation to get the job.
Control and direction of operations extend all the way from the beginning, i.e., planning stage to the completion point.
In the control and direction of operations the middle managers remain very alert and have to use different tactics.
v. Supervision: Skillful supervision runs through the entire organisation.
Each superior supervisor supervises his/her immediate subordinates.
The middle managers have to be skillful supervisors.
The lower levels supervise the rank and file while the higher supervise the lower levels and assist them in their supervising duties.
Here the art of supervision finds its natural home.
The burdens of specific supervision increase from level to level downwards.
C. Rank and File Management: Included among the rank and file management is the clerical service which forms the operative part of an organisation.
This service is classified into different groups and classes such as lower division clerk, upper division clerk, assistant, deputy superintendent, superintendent.
etc.
They initiate a file, make a summary of the case, i.e.
rules, and put up the file to the middle management for necessary action.
130 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 What are the types of management that constitute the Nigerian administrative hierarchy?
4.0 CONCLUSION Management is applied in different ways and to a number of important ideas vital to the study of business administration.
Management is a difficult concept to define.
It is a concept so exceedingly complex that writers often define the term on a working basis, according to their own needs and purposes.
Also discussed in this unit is the meaning of Management as well as the distinction between the meaning and relationship of public administration.
The nature and functions of management have been looked into as well, etc.
therefore, given the above; it is obvious that middle management is very important.
Therefore, more attention should be given to it especially now that the political command of the country depends upon it.
5.0 SUMMARY Paul H. Appleby had summed up the whole analysis in these words, “The heart of administration is the management of programmes designed to serve the general welfare”.
His contention is correct particularly for a developing democracy like Nigeria where planned economy has been geared up to attain our cherished vision of becoming economically vibrant by the year 2020.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Management, and Make a distinction between Management and Organisation.
2.
Define ‘Efficiency.
3.
Write on the nature of Management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Gabriel, Almond A.; Bingham, Powell G. Jr.; Kaare Storm and Russell; Dalton J.
(2001).
Comparative Politics Today: A World View, New Delhi: Replika Press (P) Ltd. Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi.
S. Chand and Company Ltd. 131 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 LEADERSHIP CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Leadership 3.2 Leadership and Other Concepts 3.3 Functions of Leadership 3.4 Qualities of Leadership 3.5 Leadership Styles 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION With the functions of the government constantly increasing for the realisation of a welfare state, the need for administrative leadership has acquired a special urgency.
Our Government is setting up large and complex organisations for the management of public sector undertakings – a field so far left to the private sector, which requires managerial talent of a high caliber and effective leadership.
With the development of local government/institutions, we have thrown open the channels through which leadership can grow in the local areas.
In the social field, more hospitals, more schools, more institutions for social welfare and social security throw a challenge to administration.
This challenge can be accepted if we are able to increase administrative talent and cultivate the qualities of administrative leadership in our personnel.
In the words of Seckler-Hudson, “The overwhelming significance of the problems of leadership has mounted with the revolutionary growth of such factors of size, complexity, specialisation, organisation, entities, technical developments and social demands”.
Thus the first and foremost task of management is to provide leadership, to guide and direct the work of the group as a whole toward desired objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of leadership • differentiate between leadership, power and authority 132 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION • list the functions of leadership enumerate the qualities of a good leader • mention the four leadership styles.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Leadership It is really very difficult to attempt a definition of leadership or in other words, it is difficult to define what makes certain persons leaders.
Bernard has rightly put it thus, “I have never observed any leader who was able to state adequately or intelligently why he/she was able to be a leader, nor any statement of followers that acceptably expressed why they followed.” Leadership if often regarded as the important modifier of organisation behaviour.
It is said, “get the right man/woman in the leadership job all your problems will be solved”.
In the words of Millett, “Leadership, if often thought of as being primarily person in character, as being founded upon individual pre-eminence or accomplishment in a particular field of endeavour.
Superior strength, superior cunning, superior intelligence, superior knowledge, superior determination – any or all of these may be means of the attainment of leadership”.
No one can deny that these personal qualities do pay dividends but leadership is not all personal pre-eminence.
It is something more, and that “something more” is the essence of leadership.
It is the capacity to set new goals, to hold forth new and loftier expectations for the group, to embody moral and spiritual aspiration and to show the group its nobler potentialities that make a man or woman a leader.
Leadership has, therefore, double meaning.
The dictionary meaning of the verb to lead shows that the term is used in two different senses.
(a) ‘to excel, to advance, to be prominent” and (b) to guide others, to be head of an organisation, to hold command”.
In the former sense, leadership is identified with individual pre-eminence and in the latter sense; it is identified with managerial talent or leadership.
Allen has, therefore, rightly distinguished personal leadership from management leadership when he says: “A person is born with the talent for personal leadership, he must learn management leadership.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 According to Millet, leadership is often thought of being primarily person in character: Explain.
133 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Leadership and Other Concepts Leadership vs Power The concept of power and leadership has common relationship.
In fact, certain people are leaders because they exercise power.
It is impossible for leaders not to have power.
But this does not mean that leadership and power is the same thing.
After all, power indicates coercion, authority, command and in any organisation, these have to be activated for the accomplishment of certain tasks but leadership act represents a choice of these instruments.
A good leader always uses these instruments as the last resort.
His/her main role is to persuade, influence, motivate and inspire.
It is for this reason that we earlier defined leadership as “the activity of persuading people to cooperate in the achievement of a common objective”.
Leadership and Authority Authority and leadership are closely related.
Authority is created in every organisation.
For the organisation to run smoothly and achieve its goal; authority is vested in the leader.
Authority enables the leader to penalise those who do not work well and reward those who perform honestly and sincerely.
According to White, “The life of authority and responsibility flow along the path of hierarchy.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Make a case between these concepts: Leadership vs Power, Leadership and Authority.
3.3 Functions of Leadership There is no unanimity of opinion as to what the functions of leadership are.
This is because the detailing of functions depends on ones general concept of leadership.
The advocates of democratic leadership feel that the essential function of the leader is to work towards unity and cohesiveness in the organisation, and to see that membership in it is a pleasant, satisfying experience.
Gordon, for example, has said that “a potential leader of a group somehow must perceive what it is the group wants, he/she must contribute something that will move the group closer to that goal, and finally his/her contribution must be accepted before he/she can be said to have pattered the groups behaviour”.
The supporters of authoritarian leadership feel that higher production is the sole purpose for which the leader must work.
This is however, a very narrow approach to the function of leadership.
Even higher production 134 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION may not be possible unless the leader is in a position to influence the organisational behaviour.
According to Bernard, a leader performs only four functions, such as: (a) The determination of objectives, (b) The manipulation of means, (c) The control of the instrumentality of action, and (d) The stimulation of coordinated action.
The most exhaustive effort to attempt at the functions of leadership has been made by the studies at Ohio State University.
The Ohio state work was largely concerned about leadership in formal organisations, most particularly the U.S. Navy, and lasted for seven years from 1946 to 1953.
It established nine dimensions, three of which are unique, as mentioned below.
i.
Maintenance of Member: This involves the closeness of the leader to the group, the frequency of his/her interactions, and his/her acceptability to the group.
ii.
Objective Attainment: The leader has a basic responsibility for seeing that work patterns are stable and understandable.
It must also see that the group achieves its goal.
iii.
Group Interaction Facilitation: The leader works to facilitates effective interaction among organisation members.
Communication is particularly an important feature of this dimension.
However, the functions of leadership, is to induce or persuade all subordinates or followers to contribute willingly to organisational goals in accordance with their maximum capability.
It therefore, follows that good leaders must strive towards achieving unity and cohesiveness in the organisation and to see that members are pleased and are satisfied with the leadership.
A good leader must provide initiative and impetus in setting objectives in cooperation with his/her followers and subordinates.
He/she must provide information and create room for the discussion of the objective.
He/she maintains Specialisation: that is jobs should be broken into simpler processes for the workers to do easily.
He allows the workers to take some minor decisions relating to their jobs.
This will make the workers feel being part and parcel of the organisation.
135 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Communication: This function helps the organisation to achieve its objectives.
Participation: A good leader always ensures maximum participation of his/her workers.
In practice, participation ranges from complete delegation of responsibility to consultation on major aspects of a problem or proposal.
Working with Superior: An administrative leader deals with his/her superiors.
The superior expects a lot from him/her and it is his/her duty to live up to his/her expectation.
Working with Equals: Efforts to comprehend and work effectively with one’s colleagues are of crucial significance.
While working with one’s colleagues of equal status, one must be consistent.
Moreover, an administrative leader must bear in mind that any arbitrary decisions taken by him/her may have effect on other sectors or departments of the organisation.
A good leader will achieve higher productivity and better employee morality if he/she allows his/her people to know what his/her expectations are, and gives them a sound training, ensures that his/her instructions are well understood and is ready to incorporate their ideas into the working plans when possible.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the functions of leadership?
3.4 Qualities of Leadership It is very difficult to lay down as to what the qualities of a leader should be.
Almost every writer on the subjects has a long list of the qualities which leadership must possess.
Therefore, an effective leader should possess some basic qualities of leadership which include the following: Intelligence: A certain amount of intelligence is requires if a leader is to succeed in directing the affairs of his/her subordinates.
Judgment: Leaders must ensure that they make sound decisions at all times by considering all facts before making a judgment.
Objectivity: Leaders must put behind them personal biases, preferences and idiosyncrasies while tackling work related problems.
All facts and aspects of a problem must be properly investigated before as decision is taken.
136 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Initiative: Leaders must have a programme and must be persistent in realising the goals of the programme.
Leaders must be initiators who are highly self-motivated.
Have considerable amount of personal drive, skill and will to undertake a programme.
Dependability: Those who lead must be firm in their dealings so that people can rely on them, they must also be accessible to their subordinates whenever the need arises.
Cooperation: Good leaders must understand their subordinates and enjoy working and being with them.
They should feel that their authority is a collective and cooperative responsibility.
Honesty: Leaders should be honest at all times by demonstrating very high standards of personal and professional integrity.
Courage: A good leader must be fearless or brave while making progressive decisions even when such decisions are popular.
He/she must have the ability to accept mistakes and to try new methods of solving problems.
Confidence: Leaders must have a great deal of self confidence and trust their own judgments as this will enable them to make the best decisions possibly.
Stability: Leaders must be emotionally stabled and not fickle–minded.
This would enable their subordinates to depend upon their reactions in various and varied circumstances.
Humanness: Leaders must be kind and sympathetic.
The must possess the milk of human kind.
Good Listener: A good leader should be able to listen to others in the organization.
Team Worker: A good leader works with his/her subordinates like team worker.
He/she respects his subordinates.
Foresight: He/she should be foresighted, i.e.
should be able to see beyond the existing situations.
Clarity of Vision: A leader should be clear in what he/she wants to do and what he/she does not want.
137 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Enumerate the qualities of a good leader.
3.5 Leadership Styles What is the right leadership style for manager is a difficult question to be answered.
There are numerous variables which affect the leadership style.
Thus what may appear to be an effective leadership style for a manager may not be equally appropriate to others in different organisations.
The important variables in this context are superiors, subordinates and the situation under which a particular style is followed.
Below are the four most important leadership styles or typologies.
Authoritarian Democratic Charismatic, and Laissez faire type The authoritarian leader is described as directive and production – centred.
A democratic leader is said to be participatory and employee centred.
The authoritarian approach grew out of F.W Taylors scientific management movement while the democratic approach developed from the researches and experiments conducted by Elton George Mayo (1924- 32) at Hawthorn Western Electrical Company and supported by IOWA and Michigan studies.
The authoritarian leader is not concerned with the welfare of his/her employees rather he/she is only interested in higher productivity.
Reverse is the case of a democratic leadership which is employee-centred.
Here the leader considers employees welfare first, then productivity second.
He/she does a general surveillance of his or her employees rather than a specific and closed type.
The above types are opposite of each other.
Neither of them works perfectly.
Democratic leadership is based on human relations approach which in keeping with democratic norms, cannot be supplied wholesale.
Thus, there is a need to search for a mid-course (middle ground).
This new group is called Reality-Oriented Leadership.
The stress laid on power, is one aspect of human relations.
It is discovered that if a leader abdicates his/her interest in and responsibility for production, it has adverse effect on both productivity and morale.
Soft leadership, overemphasis upon consideration, is not conducive for high morale.
A moderate amount of emphasis on production is needed to avoid both low production and low morale.
138 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The idea of charismatic leadership was put by Marx Weber, such type of leader is a natural leader of men/women.
People follow him automatically because of his inborn qualities.
He is a friendly and a guide to his followers or subordinates, the laissez faire means, non- interference by the leadership, complete freedom of the group without direction of any leader.
This style of leader provides his followers or subordinates with little or no direction whatsoever.
The followers or subordinates are given broad general instructions by the leader but the methods and details of how the work is to be done, is left to the followers or subordinates SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 What are the four most important leadership styles?
4.0 CONCLUSION Thus, there is a need to find a middle ground.
The new ground has been termed as “Reality-Oriented leadership” the emphasis on power is one aspect, and human relations is another of this new direction.
It is found that if a leader abdicates his/her interest in and responsibility for production; it will have an adverse effect on both productivity and morale.
5.0 SUMMARY It is very important to mention that leadership is not the activity of an individual alone.
In a large scale organisation, leadership becomes a collective activity since no single individual can meet the tremendous demands of working out the whole organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define leadership and explain what makes certain people leaders 2.
Authority and leadership are closely related: Explain 3.
What is a welfare state?
4.
Name and explain at least ten (10) attributes of an effective leadership.
139 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (ed.)
(2006).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice Hall Ltd. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration an Introduction.
Ibadan: AMFITOP.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhashan.
(2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 140 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 POLICY FORMATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Policy 3.2 Policy and Other Concepts 3.3 Basis of Policy Formation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the essential functions of government is policy-formation.
In the words of Dr. Appleby, the essence of public administration is policy- making.
Policy is prior to every action.
It is a pre-requisite to all management.
It is the policy which sets the task for administration.
It provides the framework within which all actions for the accomplishment of an objective are to be activated.
Policy is in fact, planning for action.
It is getting ready for setting the sails to reach the desired destination.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss: • the meaning of policy • policy and other concepts • basis of policy formation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Policy Policy means a decision as to what shall be done and how, when and where.
In the words of Terry “A Policy is a verbal, written or implied basic guide to action that is adopted and followed by a manager”.
In the words of Dimmock, “Policies are the consciously acknowledged rules of conduct that guide administrative decisions”.
141 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION According to Koonte and O’ Donnell, “Policies are general statements or understandings which guide or channel thinking in the decision- making of subordinates”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define Policy in the words of Dimock, O. Donnell and Terry.
3.2 Policy and Other Concepts Policy is not the same thing as rule because policy is dynamic and flexible whereas rule is specific and rigid.
There is also a difference between policy and custom in so far as the former is the product of conscious effort; the latter grows automatically in the soil of a society.
Policy should also be distinguished from decision.
Though policy itself is a big decision, it provides the framework within which several other series of decisions are taken.
Policy is not the same thing as method of procedure because the latter exists to effectuate the former.
Policy deals with basic issues, basic to the working of the whole administrative machinery.
The Following Attributes of Policy May be Noted (i) Policy is formulated in the context of organisational objectives.
(ii) Policy may be in the form of an explicit declaration in writing or may be interpreted from the behaviour of top level members.
(iii) Policy is formulated through decision-making process, (iv) Policy provides guidelines to the members in the organisation for choosing a course of action.
Administration and Policy-Making Ever since Woodrow Wilson wrote his essay on The study of Administration, published in 1887, politics-administration dichotomy school of though tended to regard policy as outside the scope of administration.
In the words of Wilson, “The field of administration is a field of business.
It is removed from the hurry and strife of policies”.
Wilson was followed by Goodnow and as late as 1926, L.D White drew a distinction between administration and Policies.
It is now being increasingly realised that policy-administration dichotomy cannot work and that administration cannot be completely divorced from policy-making.
Luther Gulick was one of the first exponents of this view.
To quote Dr. Appleby “Administration are continually laid down rules for the future, and administrators are 142 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION continually determined by what the law is, what it means in terms of action, what the rights of parties are with respect both to transaction processes and transactions in prospect.
Administrators also participate in another way in the making of policy for the future, they formulate and recommend actions for legislation, and this is a part of the function of policy-making”.
Public Officials are Associated with Policy Formation in Three Important Ways (i) They have to supply facts, data, and criticism as to the workability of policy to the ministers or to the legislature if the initiative for policy-making comes from them.
The members of the legislature or the ministers are amateurs who have risen to positions because of the poplar will not because of their administrative talent and as such, they have to give due weight to the suggestions of the officials.
(ii) In many cases, the initiative for policy or legislation emanates from the administration.
This is because of the fact that it is the administration which is in constant touch with the general public and in a better position to understand the difficulties that arise in the execution of legislation.
He/she has therefore, to make suggestions and formulate proposals for removing those difficulties and in the process.
If it is necessary, he/she would ask for amendments in the existing law or even for more laws.
In such cases, policy proposals emanate from the administration, and legislature only puts its seal of approval on them.
(iii) On account of lack of time and knowledge, the legislature passes skeleton Acts and leaves its details to the administration.
It is here that administration is most supreme in policy-making.
In order to execute these acts, the administration frames rules, regulations and bye laws which are the major contribution to policy-making.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the three important ways of policy formation which Public officials are associated with?
3.3 Basis of Policy Formation Policy, from whatever source-legislature or administration, it might emanate, must be based on factual data and accurate information.
To the legislature, it is the administration which supplies the necessary 143 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION information.
Broadly speaking, there are four ways through which the administration collects the necessary information: (i) Internal Sources: Every department is a centre to through which periodic reports, returns, statement, accounts and various other material from various field establishments flow.
These reports and other materials are recorded and kept by the department for the reference whenever the need arises.
Some departments engage specialized agencies for data collection in certain special areas.
Various ministries in Nigeria have made special arrangements and set up special machinery for gathering statistical data helpful for policy formation.
The Federal office of statistics, the Planning Commission and a host of other organisations are working for the collection of information and statistics.
The data so collected are properly processed, organised and interpreted to reveal certain facts essential for policy formulation.
(ii) External Sources: To supplement the internal data which may be insufficient, the administration takes to collecting information from external sources.
It establishes contacts with private bodies, unions, associations, chambers, etc, in order to get a true picture of facts.
Internal information is likely to be biased and hence, inaccurate and unreliable.
It travels through the official channels and they agency reporting it, may not like to reveal all the fact.
In Nigeria, the government does consultation, and even tries to know the essence of public opinion through various labour unions, chambers of commerce, and other professional associations.
Before any economic plan is actually approved, the draft outline is thrown open for discussion to various bodies all over the country.
The suggestions received are duly considered and incorporated when approved.
(iii) Special Investigation: Special investigations may be conducted by the appointment of commissions and committees of enquiring to find out facts in respect of a particular matter or field.
Such investigations are very useful for policy formulation as they provide the maximum thought in a particular field.
Examples of such commissions/committees are numerous both in Nigeria and abroad.
The Royal Commissions appointed from time to time in England.
The Mbanefor commission (1959), the Morgan commission (1964), the Adebo commission (1971/1972), the Udoji commission (1974), the Onosode commission, Dotun- Phillips commission (1988) etc, are some of the special investigating agencies in Nigeria.
These commissions have specific terms of references; they examine witnesses, both official 144 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION and non-official and obtain facts and views which they convey to the government in the form of recommendations.
These recommendations serve as the basis for policy-making and effecting reforms.
(iv) Technical Policy: It is a daily policy which is concerned with the systematic analysis of the administrative policy.
According to Gladden (1953), “Technical policy is the policy worked out by the officials in operating the techniques of professional attitudes and moral”.
In this sense, every official with discretion makes policy.
In an effective administrative organisation, there will be wide dissemination of this form of policy-making.
The greater the degree of discretion that can be delegated, the better.
In this sphere, the problems of management, and particularly of staff relations, come in prominently for consideration.
By means of an effective suggestion scheme, every member of the official body could be allowed to contribute his/her experience and knowledge in molding the policy, at modest level.
Agencies in the Government of Nigeria which Participate in Policy Formation The Constitutional Agencies and Extra-Constitutional Agencies in the Government of Nigeria which participates in policy formulation are as follows: (i) The Federal and State Legislatures (ii) National and State Development Council (iii) Planning Commission and State Departments of Budget and Planning.
(iv) Advisory Bodies and consultative committees (v) Judiciary (vi) Civil Services Extra-Constitutional Agencies: (i) Political Parties (ii) Pressure Groups (iii) Professional Associations such as Nigerian bar Association, Nigerian Medical Association.
etc.
(iv) The Press.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain the bases of policy formation in Nigeria.
145 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit brought to the fore the fact that policy in itself is a big decision which provides the framework within which several other series of decisions are taken.
In effect, every modern government, anxious to improve or to develop, has to depend on Research bodies for the information and facts.
Every new policy must take cognisance of the new research and material provided by these bodies.
To this end, there must be periodical review of the usefulness of any policy because circumstances change with time and a policy once very useful may become obsolete.
5.0 SUMMARY Summarily, this unit explained that the Public policy is what public administrators implement.
It is a course of action adopted and perused by government.
Public policy analysis is the study of how government policies are made and implemented, and the application of available knowledge to those policies for the purpose of improving their formulation and implementation.
Although policy may seem to be a decision of a particular body or department, in practice, however, the process is widespread all through the organisation and the particular body announcing it is the link of a bug-chain of previous history of the matter.
It is therefore, a collective activity, a cooperative endeavour and an effort in which many people participate.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the meaning of Policy Formation?
2.
A Policy provides guidelines to the members in the organisation for choosing a course of action-throw more light on this thoughts.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Nicholas, Henry (ed.)
(2006).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall Ltd. Tonwe, D.A.
(1998).
Public Administration, an Introduction.
Ibadan:.
AMFITOP.
Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 146 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 DECISION-MAKING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Decision 3.2 Factors of Decision-Making 3.3 Problems of Decision-Making 3.4 Rationality in Decision-Making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Of all the problems in administration/management, the problem of decision-making is the most difficult.
Even in ordinary life, to do or not to do, is one of the most important riddles that an individual faces before leaping into action.
He/she runs about for advice and guidance, for consultations and suggestions and ultimately when he/she comes to taking a decision, he/she gets too late and changes his/her mind.
In business, decisions have got to be quick and on time otherwise the enterprise shall soon be out of gears.
In public administration, however, decision-making is not as easy as in business, though here too, we cannot keep things pending indefinitely.
In business we need quick and speedy decisions; in public administration we need right decisions.
Sir Ernest Gowers devoted much thought to the difference between decision in government and decision in business and pointed out substantially, “that if in a business out of ten decisions are made, say, seven were good, two indifferent and one bad, the net result at the end of the year would probably be highly satisfactory to the shareholders.
On the other hand, if a Government achieves this percentage, the majority of the good decisions will be overlooked, the indifferent ones will be severally criticised and the bad ones will never be allowed by the opposition to get out of sight”.
Besides, decision-making activity in public administration is not free from outside influences.
All types of pressures, direct and indirect, exert much to the displeasure and disapproval of the decision-maker.
Business administration, on the contrary, is much freer from pressures.
Practically, it is the master of its decision.
147 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • the meaning of decision • factors involved in decision-making • problems decision making • rationality in decision-making.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Decision The dictionary defines the term decision as ‘the act of determining in ones own mind upon an opinion or course of action” it is choosing one alternative among several alternatives given in a particular situation.
The Collins English learner’s dictionary defines the term ‘decision’ “as the act of deciding, reaching an opinion and thought”.
In contrast, a decision applies to a particular problem and has non-continuous type of usage”.
Decision is a means to an end and not an end in itself.
In the words of Terry, it is “the selection of one behaviour alternative from two or more possible alternatives”.
In fact, Terry further argued that decision is a conclusion to long deliberations.
A decision is usually made within the guides established by policy.
A policy is relatively extensive, affects many problems, and is used again and again.
Decisions have to be made and re-made in the light of the ends to be achieved.
Decisions are not permanent in so far as they have to take cognizance of the changed circumstances.
It has to be responsive to varying situations.
Thus, decision making in fact, means, choosing one course of action rather than another, finding a suitable solution to a new problem posed by a changing world.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Decision is a means to an end and not an end in itself: Explain.
3.2 Factors in Decision Making i.
Personal Differences: There are difference in the personal qualities of individuals who make some decisive and indecisive decisions.
Common experience reveals that some individuals are willing to make choices and to abide by the consequences.
Others prefer to avoid clear-cut choices, to temporise, to postpone, hoping that somehow, some way, circumstances will intervene to 148 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION make the choice unnecessary.
Perhaps, these differences among individuals are the result of social and professional environment in which they are nurtured.
Opinion is veering round to the acceptance of the premise that intellectuals make no good administrators because they lack the capacity to make decisions.
Bernard has analysed the limitations of the intellectual as threefold: a. He/she may be irresponsible (absent minded and non punctual) b. He/she may be non-decisive (ultra careful, ultra- judicial in his examination of a problem, seeing so many aspects of it and so many possible consequences of a particular action that he cannot make up his own mind), and c. He/she may be non persuasive (queer, uninterested in people).
ii.
Role of Knowledge: Decision making depends upon the availability of facts and the necessary data.
The careful accumulation of detailed facts, their analysis and interpretation, the use of broad concept of human and physical behaviour to predict future developments- all these elements in the use of knowledge enter into decision making in a varying degree.
The critical factors in the decision process, according to Simon are: a.
The availability of information and b.
The computational capacities available to deal with the information.
iii.
Institutional and Personal Factors: There are institutional limitations which circumscribe decision making.
On the one hand, decision making must consider the aspirations, and attitudes of the agency administering government work.
On the other hand, there are personal predictions among administrators which also limit decision making.
In a democratic society like ours, decisions are highly circumscribed because the administration has to carry people along with it and not to exit in some sort of ivory tower.
iv.
Who Makes Decision?
Decision in any large scale organisation is a co-operative effort.
It is a collective activity in which all levels in administration participate.
In the words of Seckler- Hudson, decision making in government is a plural activity.
One individual may pronounce the decision and may contribute to the process of reaching the decision which is a part of the political system.
However, the chief executive must have the final say, must ultimately give the final word.
This is because, in the end, it 149 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION is he/she who has to bear the responsibility of the consequences of a particular decision.
Thus, the power of final decision must rest with him/her.
v. Bases of Decision Making: There are no fixed bases, nor there can be any, for decision making.
Much depends on the nature of decision to be taken and the nature of agency for taking it.
Of course, all decisions must be taken rationally and not emotionally or impulsively.
Secker-Hudson provides a list of twelve factors which must be considered in decision making: a.
Legal limitations b. Budgeting c. Mores d. Facts e. History f. Internal morale g. Future as anticipated h. Superiors i.
Pressure group j.
Staff k. Nature of programme and l. Subordinates We can only lay down one criterion, i.e.
that every decision should be made objectively and not subjectively.
In other words, bias or predilection should not enter in decision making.
Merits of the case should be the sole basis on which a decision should rest.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Do you agree with the opinion that intellectuals make no good administrators because they lack the capacity to make decisions?
Problems of Decision Making Some of the problems which impede the process of decision making are: Routine taking too much time: It is revealed through a study of decision making in public or business enterprises that routine takes too much of time with the result that decisions are either avoided or postponed.
Prof. March through his research has proved that a person responsible for both routine work and long term planning devotes greater share of his/her time on routine activities.
This he called “Gresham’s Law of planning” 150 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION in preliminary experiment, subjects were asked to handle a relatively simple administrative job.
The job involved three kinds of activities.
a.
Routine Communication: - They are to communicate to relevant clerks information on the current inventory levels in various warehouses.
b.
Intermediate Planning: They are to make any necessary reassignments of warehouses to groups of clerks so as to maintain an approximately equal work load in each group.
c. General Planning: They are to suggest any other changes in procedure that might be appropriate.
The subjects were told that each of the three jobs were equally important and should be given equal attention.
After a training period to allow the executives to become accustomed to the task, the work load was varied systematically.
As the work load varied they observed the proportion of communications dealing with routine activities by the subjects.
The results of the experiment are important.
First, despite instructions to spend only one third of the time on routine matters, subjects spend a good deal more than that even when the work load was relatively light.
Second, consistently as the work load increased, subjects spend a small proportion of their total time on planning activities especially at peak periods.
i.
Which Problem to be solved first?
It is usually seen that in a large scale organisation, there are several problems, each looking more urgent than the other.
The administrator finds it extremely difficult to determine the priority of these problems.
Therefore, the problems of choice create a constant worry in them.
ii.
Lengthy Procedures: As a result of lengthy procedure and unnecessary formalities, decisions are sometime delayed.
The whole procedure is cumbersome and dilatory and it checks quick decision.
Even after observing all the formalities and procedures, there is no certainty that the decision arrived at is the right one.
iii.
The Problem of Bias in Decision-Making: The last problem in decision-making is bias, but the problem of bias in this regard rarely finds solutions.
This is because of the nature of bias.
Bias is generally invisible; it travels on wings which cannot be seen except when it is openly accepted as part of policy by an organisation of agency or government.
151 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION What is Bias?
In simple terms, it may be defined as “swaying influences or undue leaning to one side”.
It also means prejudice.
It may take two forms: (a) Prejudice and (b) Predilection.
Prejudice: This is an unfavourable opinion or feeling formed before taken a decision without knowledge of reason.
Predilection: is a mental preference of a favourable predisposition towards a particular issue or matter or person.
Both are irrational and may occur consciously or unconsciously.
Bias is conscious or deliberate when an individual or an agency willingly develops it as part of a policy.
It is unconscious when it develops without the willing response from the individual or agency.
In essence bias here, implies whether decisions are made according to the rules and regulations guiding administration or whether these are made on rational and irrational grounds.
If these acts conflicts with each other, then problem arises.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of an administrator to reconcile the conflicting biases.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the problems that impede decision making?
3.4 Rationality in Decision-Making Robert Heilbroner in 1977 suggested certain guidelines for making an intelligent decision.
These are: (i) Marshall the Facts: A relevant data must be collected in respect of the problem that requires decision-making.
(ii) Consult your Feelings: Before taking a decision on any matter, we must see that it satisfies our conscience.
Heilbroner remarks, “Good decisions are the best tranquillizer ever invented, bad ones always increase our mental tension”.
(iii) Timing: While making a decision, we should try to differentiate between our deep-running characters and our transient mood.
A sense of timing also requires that we know when or not to make a decision, premature decisions are always counter-productive.
(iv) Follow Through: This refers to the willingness of the Chief Executive to implement the decision once they are finally made.
152 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (v) Flexibility: There should be no rigidity regarding the finality of a decision.
Decisions should be made in such a way as to be responsive to changing circumstances and need.
In fact, they should be subject to modification.
(vi) The Final Ingredient: This refers to the risk-taking attitude.
In making genuinely big decisions we should be prepared to bear a sense of loss, as well as gain.
While taking big decisions it will be nice to discuss it with others involved in the decision-making process of the organisation.
This will help in knowing certain missing points and give opportunity for clarity of thoughts and feelings.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Explain Robert Heilbroner’s guidelines for making an intelligent decision.
4.0 CONCLUSION Effective management whether of private or public organisation means, in the ultimate analysis, making right and responsible decisions.
A good leader is the one who can decide, who can solve the problem to do or not to do, and who can willingly undertake the responsibility for making decisions.
It is usually seen that even ministers when faced with public repercussion, pass the buck to the cabinet to avoid personal responsibility for their decisions.
In fact, responsibility is a burden which most of us do not carry well, which most of us are not willing to accept.
But leadership means that decisions must be made and responsibility accepted.
Management is impossible without the capacity and the willingness to decide.
5.0 SUMMARY It may be emphasised that despite the recent advances in decision- making theory and decision-making studies, it has been impossible to ensure complete rationality in decision-making.
The decision making mechanism puts a limit on the rationality of decision.
The decision- maker just does not have full knowledge of all alternatives and their consequences.
The limits of human mind cannot make exact predictions of future events and consequences of various alternatives.
At best the most probable alternative providing a certain amount of satisfaction can be chosen.
Further, human factors such as personal value systems, perception of problems, social and economic factors and limitations in human processing are a major source of limit on rationality in decision- making.
153 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Bias?
2.
What is rationality in Decision-making?
3. Who makes Decision?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Gabriel, Almond A.; Biggham, Powell G.; Jr, Kaare Storm and Russell, Dalton J.
(2001).
Comparative Politics Today: A World View.
New Delhi: Replika Press (P) Ltd. Heilbroner, Robert L. (1977).
How to Make Intelligent Decision.
N.J: Prentice Hall Inc. Nicholas, Henry.
(2006).
Public Administration and Public Affairs.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall (P) Ltd Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan (2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 154 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 5 ADMINISTRATION AND NIGERIAN EXPERIRNCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Organisation 3.2 Concept of Social Welfare State 3.3 Requirement of Public Relationship 3.4 Military Regime in Nigeria 3.5 Problems and Criticisms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Prior to our independence, the relationship between Nigerians and the administrators was not healthy at all.
The administration was not flexible and rules were quite rigid.
Rules were not interrupted to the advantages of the citizens, and no efforts were made to establish healthy relations with the masses.
The country was a police state.
There was a glaring gap between the rulers and the ruled.
The people were disdainful of their rulers and did not respect their authority either.
However, after independence the situation suddenly changed.
Our political bosses and leaders unequivocally changed, declaring that in Nigeria, the people were sovereign and that both the politicians and the administrators would be responsible for building a healthy nation.
Hence, every state activity must be so framed so as to benefit the citizenry.
Therefore, rules were framed, laws enacted and interpreted to the advantages of the people.
In any democratic country however, those barriers between the authority and the citizenry are not prevalent.
Thus, the concept of welfare state gives rise or necessitated the concept of human approach in administration.
Therefore, a good and competent administrator may be a flop if he/she loses the human touch.
It is now the foremost duty of the civil servants to serve their sovereign land impartially and sincerely.
155 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain: • the organization of civil service in Nigeria • the concept of social welfare • the role of military in administration since independence • problems and criticisms in Nigerian administration • requirement of public relationship.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Organisation Nigeria is a federal state.
As a Federal State, the civil service of the Federation is organised into the Federal Civil Service, and the civil service of the state governments.
This means the civil service of the federation is organised into thirty seven (37) civil services, including the state civil services.
Both the civil services of the federal and state governments are structured vertically into ministries and departments.
The horizontal structuring of civil services into classes- administrative, executives, secretarial, clerical, professional, technical, auxiliary and minor technical classes were abolished by the 1988 Civil Service Reforms.
At the apex of each of the Civil Service Structure (Federal and States), is the head of service.
He/she controls, and co-ordinates the activity of the entire civil servants within ministries and departments.
The Functional Organisation of Ministries for effective performance of government function is based on their portfolio or responsibilities and the skills and specialisation of their civil servants.
In their organisation, most civil servants of similar skills, trained and occupational specialisation, were grouped together in functional units.
For example, engineers with architects are in the ministry of works, agronomists and veterinarians are in agriculture, economists and statisticians are in economic development, teachers are in education while doctors and pharmacist are in health, etc.
However, there is a tendency for each ministry or department to work as a closed system.
Each ministerial organisation of civil servants is headed by a Permanent Secretary who is generally appointed by the Chief executive of the federal government in the case of the federal civil service, and the chief executive of the state government in the case of the state civil service.
The permanent secretary is the administrative head of the ministry.
He is also the accounting officer, while the Minister/Commissioner is the political head of the ministry charged with policy matters.
The 1988 Civil Service Reform made the Minister/ Commissioner the Chief 156 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Executive of the Ministry as well as the accounting officer.
However, the Abacha Administration returned the responsibility of the accounting officer of the ministry to the Permanent Secretary.
Therefore, each ministry within the governmental organisation has a hierarchical structure with definite lines of communication and control, unity of command definite duties and responsibilities for officials with defined relationship, definite span of control.
This hierarchical structure tends to reduce the management of public affairs to mere routine process, with set down procedure, which is regulated by the general orders.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Describe the organisation of Civil Service in Nigeria.
3.2 Concept of Social Welfare State Nigerian became a social welfare state after the inauguration of the independent Constitution in 1960.
With this, the civil servants came more in contact with the public.
Untouched activities now came under the sphere of activity and purview of the civil servants.
Therefore, the need and necessity of having cordial relations between the civil servants and the public became more important.
It is thus, the duty of the civil servant to supply his/her political boss with all the information necessary for taking a right decision, for the betterment of the citizenry in its entire entirety.
3.3 Requirement of Public Relationship It is quite unfortunate that Nigerians still are of the impression that the civil service is a class in itself.
The citizenry suffers from inferiority complex.
The wheels of Government machinery do not move unless the palms of the civil servants are greased.
The public feel that the civil servants are corrupt, inelastic.
The civil servants are deemed to practice favouritism and nepotism to say the least.
The public are even doubtful of their integrity and impartiality.
They are skeptical about their efficiency and competence.
However, it is necessary that the public have faith in the integrity of the civil servants.
They should also have trust in the impartiality of their actions.
Therefore, mutual trust is very essential in order to boost the morale of the civil servants.
Misunderstanding that had been growing over the years, ought to end for mutual benefit of the good of a welfare state.
157 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How would you boast the moral of the civil servants?
3.4 Military Regime in Nigeria The nature and pattern of decision-making under the military regime was highly personalised both at state and federal levels.
The reason for this was no doubt, due to the military’s concept of their role in government.
From the inception of military regime in Nigeria (1966-75), it was basically accepted that the task of running the government was the sole responsibility of the military and that where Executive Councils had been established, their roles were merely advisory.
This understanding was given constitutional sanction by the promulgation of Decree No.1 of 1966 which vested all executive powers of the state in the military Governors.
The tacit understanding that the success or failure of the military administration vested squarely on the Military Governor provided him with justification, if not an excuse, to treat official advice and procedural rules and regulations with scant regard.
Rational decision-making is never a one-man affair.
In normal day-to- day experience and practice in any organisation, ultimate decisions can seldom be attributed to a single individual; officials at different levels contribute to the ultimate decision.
A decision-making process involves the assembly and evaluation of all available data and of the possible consequences of selecting one or the other decision for implementation.
This sort of exercise is beyond the capacity of any single individual.
At this point, it is apt to have a proper understanding of the position of the bureaucracy during military rule.
The Characteristic Features of Military Government.
These are summarized as follows: i.
Political powers were centralised.
ii.
The military governments asserted itself to solve certain specific emergency problems.
iii.
The Military Government initiated fundamental social, economic and political changes in a revolutionary manner.
iv.
Government business was handled with speed.
Thus such expression as “with immediate effect” “Without delay” “With impromptu attention”, “as a matter of urgency”, were common with military regimes.
v. Government policies and programmes were determined without adequate discussion.
In some cases, there was no discussion at all.
158 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION vi.
The regime was intolerant of opposition.
It adopted ruthless measures to suppress or liquidate stubborn opponents.
vii.
There was a tendency toward technology.
viii.
The government climate tended to be tense, etc.
One can therefore deduce that the civil servants played dominant role in the Nigerian public administration during the military regimes.
The exercise of their authority, and the extent to which they wielded governmental powers were through policy making powers, financial powers, powers of control of personnel, local political powers, and chairmanship of Boards of Public Cooperation.
However, military regimes in Nigeria had been described as an aberration, an abnormality in public administration in times when things are out of joint.
The predominant influence of the military over policy was evil as it was undemocratic.
Research findings have not revealed that Ministers/Civil commissioners were both able to control and direct the bureaucracy nor were they able to exercise control over the determination of public policies.
Therefore, it is pertinent to say, one of the essential principles of federation – the principle of co-ordination and non-subordination of one to the other as between the states and the federal government – was stifled under the military regime.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 How would you access the nature and pattern of decision-making under the military regime in Nigeria?
3.5 Problems and Criticisms The civil service has been leveled with numerous criticisms and problems which are responsible for its ineffectiveness and low productivity.
These criticisms are, poor organisation, planlessness and over-staffing, indiscipline, red-tape and secrecy, insensitivity, rigidity, and over-centralisation, conservative and lack of imagination, apathy, incompetence and lousiness, corruption and favouritism, rudeness and high-handedness, laziness, lateness, truancy and malingering.
These criticisms have resulted in poor image of the Nigerian administration.
However, in an attempt to remedy these weaknesses in the administration, various regimes in Nigeria, on various occasions, have appointed panels of inquiry to examine the problems of the civil service – structural, orientation and operational - with a view to transforming the civil service into a powerful instrument for national development.
These panels include the Adebo Commission on the Review of the Salary Structure of the Civil Service (1971), The Public Service Review 159 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Commission otherwise known as the Udoji Commission (1974), the Dotum Philips’ Study Group on the Civil Service (1965), the Babangida Civil Service Reform of 1988, and Abacha Civil Service Reforms (1997).
In spite of these panels’ recommendations and government actions on them, these weaknesses still persist in the civil service.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have studied the organisation of Nigerian administrative experience before and post-independence, concept of social welfare state, requirement of public relationship, military regime in Nigeria, and administrative problems and criticisms.
But it is pertinent to introspect in order to see what lessons we can learn from the past in preparing for the task of public administration.
Adaptation to change would therefore require new operating methods.
It would require taking a hard look at old and established practices, in order to jettison those which have outlived their usefulness, and accomplishing by the most economical methods those which are relevant to the needs of today.
5.0 SUMMARY Looking into the future of administration in Nigeria, the administration should tackle the failures and defects of our public service which can be summarised as follows: Over cautiousness in the approach to problem solving, lack of creativity, skepticism towards new ideas, insularity and lack of sensitivity towards the public and the main issues of the day.
Although, the management of change is a difficult and demanding task, it takes a positive and continuing effort by those who seek to reform an institution like the public service to secure and consolidate the changes.
It is only by so doing that our public service can be responsive and sensitive to informed public opinion.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Military regimes in Nigeria had been described as an aberration: Discuss.
2.
What is the concept of Social Welfare?
3.
Explain the concept of Public Relationship.
160 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, Augustus (2004).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Abuja: Spectrum Books Ltd. Dike, Chijioke (1985).
The Nigerian Civil Service.
Owerri: Alfa Publishing Company.
Eghe, Victor Ekhator (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna.
Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Ogunna, A.E.C.
(1999).
Public Administration in Nigeria.
Theory and Practice.
Owerri: Great Versatile Publishers Ltd. 161 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 6 Unit 1 Planning Unit 2 Coordination Unit 3 Delegation Unit 4 Communication Unit 5 Supervision UNIT 1 PLANNING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Planning 3.2 Characteristics of Planning 3.3 Kinds of Planning 3.4 Pre-requisites of Effective Planning 3.5 Advantages and Disadvantages of Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Planning is preparation for action.
It is an inherent part of individual and of co-operative or collective endeavour.
Thieves plan a theft and the politicians at the highest level plan a policy making or marrying the future of a nation, or seeking the survival or the extinction of humanity.
Every aspect of governmental action is to be planned –objectives, policies, organisation, finances, work methods, incentive system and public relations.
In fact, planning is ‘a rational process characteristic of all human behaviour”.
Pfiffner and Sherwood have aptly described the growing fancy for organisational planning in these words; ‘In the affairs of mankind some slogan, phrase or movement occasionally catches the fancy of the public and spreads with epidemic haste.
Management people are not immune from being bitten by bugs of enthusiasm, but they often feel a compulsion to try out new procedural gadgets merely because they have a certain vogue.
162 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Therefore, planning in recent time has been widely adopted as a means of accelerating economic growth in backward economics of the world.
In the world, today, we are all planners, and the modern state is required by public opinion of the country to formulate a development plan to carry out certain basic ideas.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list the advantages and disadvantages of planning • define planning • explain the characteristics of planning • explain the types of planning • mention the pre-requisites for effective planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Planning Planning is deciding in advance what is to be done.
It comprises the selection of objectives, policies, procedures and programmes from among alternatives.
In the words of David Cleland and William King, “Planning is the process of thinking through and making explicit the strategy, actions, and relationships necessary to accomplish an overall objective or purpose”.
Simon and others defined it as “the activity that concerns itself with proposals and with methods by which these proposals may be achieved’.
In the words of Millet, ‘planning is the process of determining the objectives of administrative effort and of devising the means calculated to achieve them’.
There are writers like Millet and White who distinguished between policy-decisions and planning.
They regard planning as a technique which anticipates policy decisions.
Thus in the words of Millet, ‘the word planning in and of itself, is neutral; it implies no particular set of goals and no one special type of procedure, dictational or otherwise.
Planning is simply the endeavour to apply foresight to human activity, planning anticipates desired results and prepares the steps necessary for their realization’.
Again in his planning and administration, Millet writes, ‘it must be repeated that planning presupposes no particular set of objectives or any one conception of political values.
On the other hand, there are writers like Pfiffner who feels that policy and planning are interrelated and compliment to each other.
Planning reveals what is practicable in policy and policy has to be modified 163 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION accordingly.
Planning acts as a moderator to the over-estimated target of policy.
Although planning affects policy it is only a means to the execution of policy-decision.
It is not desirable to stretch the difference too far.
Policy and planning as aims and means, have a reciprocal relationship.
While policy formation is a political task, planning is an administrative task.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define planning.
Why is planning neutral in itself, according to Millet?
3.2 Characteristics of Planning The Following Characteristics of Planning May be Identified i.
Planning is closely associated with the goals of the organisation.
These goals might be implicit or explicit, however, well-defined goals lead to efficient planning.
ii.
Planning is primarily concerned with looking into the future.
It requires forecasting of future situation in which organisation has to function.
iii.
Planning involves selection of the best alternative to achieve the objectives of the organisation.
iv.
Planning is comprehensive and includes every course of action in the organisation.
v. Planning is an interdependent process.
It coordinates the activities of various departments, sections and sub sections.
vi.
Planning is flexible as it is concerned with future conditions which are dynamic vii Planning is a continuous affair.
It needs constant review and readjustment in the light of achieved targets and future possibilities.
vii.
Planning as a process of formulation and evaluation is primarily a staff function.
viii.
Planning is neutral as there is no particular set of goals and no one special type of procedure, dictation or otherwise.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the characteristics of planning?
3.3 Kinds of Planning As the concept planning indicates, it is impossible to suggest water tight categories of planning.
Planning is a seem less web covering all the 164 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION activities of government.
Some of the types of planning suggested are self-contained.
They are mere ideal types.
a. Over-all Planning: Over-all Planning may be termed as a socio- economic planning.
It deals with planning of natural resources, objectives and activities of the society.
Such a system of planning crushes individual initiative and dwarfs enterprise.
This type can be implemented in a totalitarian state.
This system of planning was first adopted by Stalin in the then USSR, and still being adopted in communist countries such as China, Cuba etc, It a planning which seems to be an imposition from above, could be a monopoly only of dictatorial regimes.
It is neither possible nor desirable in a democratic society as it saps individual liberty, kills initiatives, introduces state capitalism, strengthens bureaucracy and brings in many evils.
b.
Limited Planning: This planning does not centralise all the socio-economic activities at one focal point.
The state opting for this type of planning selects the main objectives which the society as a whole considers fundamental and through proper planning and regulation of the activities of the individuals and groups, would direct the life and the society in such a way, till these objectives are attained.
That does not result in the total regimentation of the lives of the people or the total acquisition by the state of all means of production and distribution.
The state selects only the main objectives and the activities of the people are regulated only to a limited extent for attaining these objectives.
Moreover, the process of planning and the implementation of the programmes are undertaken democratically, thus guaranteeing to everybody maximum limitations desired by an urge to achieve some common objectives.
Such planning is conceived in a democratic society like Nigeria.
c. Administrative Planning: The administrative planning is mainly concerned with administrative programmes.
In the words of Dr. White, ‘planning as a term used in the context of public administration is not equivalent to making decision on basic policy.
Planning in the context of administration begins where general policy stops.
It is concerned with the means by which ends can be brought to fruition.’ Prof. Pfiffner is also of the view that Administrative planning is ‘a routine level of operation which value questions seldom arise’.
165 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the types of planning?
3.4 Pre-Requisites of Effective Planning Planning is a rational, dynamic and integrative process.
It is of particular significance to an under developed country where a lot has to be achieved with limited resources and within a time-framework.
Thus, in Nigeria and underdeveloped countries, planning is perhaps the best way to pull the economy to a self sustaining and self generating stage.
However, the successful implementation of a plan for economic growth and development depends largely on the conditions and circumstances prevailing in the country.
They are as follows: i.
Sound Administrative Structure: The development of a century depends upon an effective and adequate administrative infrastructure.
Planning requires devoted personnel able to provide initiative and support.
Unless there are trustworthy, upright, selfless men or women with nationalist outlook at the top of personnel machinery, planning may not be successful.
As a matter of fact, it is the top level which is responsible for success or failure of any organisational process, and planning is no exception.
Any politicisation of planning must be avoided.
ii.
Strong and Efficient Government: Effective planning presupposes the existence of a strong and stable national government.
In the words of R.S.
Trucker, planning as is universally admitted requires centralised direction equipped to act more promptly and vigorously.
It is obvious that a weak and unstable central government cannot formulate and carryout efficiently any comprehensive national programme of economic development.
iii.
Financial Stability: An under developed country should have sufficient financial stability for steady development progress.
Deficit financing and inflationary rise in price should be avoided as far as possible.
iv.
Existence of Certain Well-Defined Objectives and Fixing Concrete Targets: Another requirement for successful planning is the existence of certain well-defined objectives.
It shall make planning purposive, help in the greater concentration of national efforts towards the attainment of the objectives and given direction and meaning to the various steps taken in that direction.
166 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION v. Accurate Data: To a large degree success of planning depends on whether the formulation of the plan is based on accurate data.
Adequate statistical data are of prime importance not only in the drafting of a realistic plan, but also needed in the course of its implementation.
Periodic check-up of progress of the plan and revisions that may be called for in view of current developments would not be possible unless the data available for the planning authority are exhaustive and correct.
vi.
Maintaining Proper Balance: Successful functioning of planning requires the presence of proper balances in the economy.
There should be a balance between investment goods sector and consumption goods sector, public sector and private sector, home and external trade, internal finance and foreign exchange and also between labour intensive techniques and capital intensive techniques.
To maintain these balances, the government must undertake necessary steps e.g.
the state should recognise agriculture, introduce reforms, organise cooperative and encourage domestic industries.
vii.
Good International Relations: An underdeveloped country depends to a great extent on foreign countries for the flow of foreign capital, technical know how and assistance of various types.
Hence a developing country committed to planning must maintain friendly and harmonious relations with other countries of the world.
It should not associate itself with any particular group of nations hence the foreign trade relations must be on non- political grounds.
viii.
Participation in Planning: The people’s participation is very essential for effective planning.
According to Prof. W.A.
Lewis, “popular enthusiasm is both the lubricating oil of planning and the petrol of economic development – a dynamic force that makes all things possible”.
The people can be urged to make sacrifices by foregoing immediate satisfaction of their needs in order to build up a strong base formational development.
But such exhortations should come from those rulers and administrators who themselves have made these sacrifices.
3.5 Advantages and Disadvantages of Planning Because of the extra-ordinary achievements made by Russia, China and India, through the adoption of development planning, majority of the countries of the world have realised that development planning is the best technique to achieve rapid economic development in the shortest possible time.
It is regarded as a panacea for all economic ills.
167 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The Following Arguments have been put Forth in Favour of Development Planning: i.
It is Farsighted: A planned authority takes into consideration the overall view of the entire economy and fixes the target and objectives in such a way that promotes the welfare of both the present and future generations.
ii.
It is Helpful for Rapid Economic Development: Development planning is essential particularly in the underdeveloped countries for achieving rapid economic development.
The planning authority invests in different sectors of the economy in such a way that rapid economic development is achieved.
iii.
It is Essential for Optimum Utilization and Proper Allocation of National Resources.
The planning authority decides what is essential and what is not essential and therefore directs the national resources towards the production of essential items.
For this, natural, human and material resources are properly allocated and fully utilized so as to attain maximum social welfare and growth rate of the economy.
Thus, there is a strong case for planning in the underdeveloped countries for rational allocation and optimum utilization of national resources.
iv.
It is Essential to Achieve Balanced Regional Economic Development.
Generally in the under-developed economies, there is unbalanced and lop-sided development of different sectors and industries.
The planning authority has sufficient resources and therefore, it invests in all sectors of the economy by giving more importance to the backward regions.
By so doing, there will be no one sided development of the country.
Hence, there is a strong case of economic planning to achieve balanced growth of industries, regions and diversification of the economy.
v. It is Helpful to Achieve Equal Distribution of Wealth and Income.
In the under developed countries, there is not only regional imbalance but also personal inequality which is not desirable for economic development.
Development planning provides equitable distribution of wealth and income in the society and thus reduces the disparity between the rich and the poor.
The planning authority formulates its monetary and fiscal policies in such a way that the socialist pattern of society is established.
168 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION vi.
Maintenance of Economic Stability: The unplanned capitalist economy by its very nature is unstable.
It is subject to economic fluctuations.
The development planning has proved a powerful instrument for removing instability.
Planning authority takes the various economic decisions which are far-sighted, broad-based, well-coordinated and well planned.
Therefore, economic fluctuations are avoided and greater degree of economic stability is maintained.
vii.
It Provides Sufficient Economic and Social Service to the People.
Generally, in the under developed countries, there is shortage of funds and therefore, it is not possible to make the provision of sufficient economic and social services like education, medical, transportation, communication, banking, water, power supplies, etc.
The planning authority has sufficient resources to invest in these various social services which encourage economic development.
viii.
Achievement of Market Perfection.
Market imperfection is one of the major obstacles to economic development in the under developed countries.
Unless it is removed, rapid economic development cannot be achieved.
In a planned economy, there is proper allocation and optimum utilisation of natural and human resources, both the money and capital markets are properly organised and developed.
The productive resources are coordinated on the basis of the principle of maximum technical efficiency which help in removing market imperfection and vicious circle of poverty.
ix.
It Overcomes the Evil of Free Market Economy.
Only development planning can ensure fair and healthy competition and achieve the desired objectives, wisely, productivity and economically.
Planned economy prevents artificial scarcities, mitigates the evils of capitalism, avoids the harmful unfair and cut-threat competition, maintains industrial peace and puts to an end exploitation of the workers and consumers and thus promotes the general public welfare.
x.
It is Necessary to Solve the Problem of Capital Deficiency.
In the underdeveloped countries, the rate of savings and investment is very low due to various shortages and bottlenecks; therefore, rate of capital formation tends to be lower.
Development planning offers solution to the problem of capital deficiency, the planning authority has sufficient power to raise the rate of both voluntary and forced savings and raise the level of productive investment both in public and private sectors, through the greater 169 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION provision of economic and social overheads.
Under a planned economy it is quite easy to supplement the domestic resources by foreign aid and capital investment.
Thus, development planning is considered essential in the under-developed countries for raising the rate of savings, investment and capital formation.
Disadvantages of Planning Several anti-planners have put forth arguments against any type of development planning, particularly the central socialist planning, and these are: i.
That development planning and economic freedom cannot go side by side.
In development planning there is complete loss of economic freedom.
Production is not according to tastes and preferences of the people and thus, the consumer’s sovereignty is lost.
There is no freedom of occupation and independent moral judgment; therefore it is not practicable in democratic countries.
ii.
It is a sort of dictatorship: The decisions of the planning authority are imposed on the general public irrespective of their choices.
iii.
It reduces administrative efficiency under planning, the planners and the workers do not have as much interest and initiate as the individuals have under free markets economy.
Therefore, the efficiency falls due to various evils like red-tap, dishonesty, corruption, lack of responsibilities and incentives.
iv.
It is subject to various conflicts.
In a planned economy, there is always some sort of conflicts among the planners because of selfish motives.
Hence it becomes difficult to achieve fully the targets and objectives.
v. It puts an end to private sector and free market mechanism.
The entire economic system is controlled and regulated by the central planning authority which puts an end to private enterprises.
vi.
It is inflexible.
It means that the desired changes cannot be brought about easily in the plans.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What are the disadvantages of planning?
170 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of planning, characteristics, kinds, and pre-requisites of effective-planning.
We have also dealt on the advantages and disadvantages of planning, and most importantly, the meaning and concepts of planning.
5.0 SUMMARY Therefore, while formulating the plan, the administrative aspects, issues and implications of a programme should be carefully analysed and taken care of in the plan.
Nigeria has embarked upon the unique experiment of long scale democratic planning and the world is watching as well as waiting anxiously for their implementation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the advantages of planning?
2.
What are the pre-requisites for effective planning?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhudham.
(2006).
Public Administration New Delhi.
S.Chand and Company Ltd. Heilbroner, Robert L. (1977).
How to Make Intelligent Decision.
N.J.: Prentice Hall Inc. Millet, J.D.
(1954).
Management in the Public Service, New York: McGraw Hill Co. 171 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 CO-ORDINATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Co-Ordination 3.2 Need for Coordination 3.3 Types of Coordination 3.4 Techniques/Methods of Coordination 3.5 Principles of Coordination 3.6 Hindrances to Effective Coordination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A battle may be lost, how much strong the forces may be, if there is no coordination among the various wings, divisions and units of the army.
Efforts have to be synchronized if the object in view is to be achieved without much cost.
As in battle, so as in administration hence no organisation, how much competent its staff may be, can achieve the desired objective without co-ordination.
It is the first principle of management to ensure that the organisation works well, that no part of it repeats what the other part does, that no employee works at cross- purposes and that there is no conflict among various units.
This is therefore, technically called coordination.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the: • meaning of co-ordination • need for co-ordination • types of co-ordination • techniques of co-ordination • principles of co-ordination • hindrances to effective co-ordination.
172 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Coordination Negatively, coordination means the removal of conflicts and overlapping in administration, positively, it means to secure co- operation and teamwork amongst the numerous employees of an organisation.
Some of the definitions of coordination are as follows: Newman – Coordination is ‘the orderly synchronisation of efforts to provide the proper amount, timing and directing of execution resulting in harmonious and unified actions to a stated objectives’.
Terry – “Coordination is the adjustment of the parts to each other and of the movement and operation of parts in time so that each can make its maximum contribution to the product of the whole’.
D. White - : Coordination is a process causing disjunct elements to a concentration on a complex of forces and influence which cause the mutually independent elements to act together”.
Charles Worth – “Coordination is the integration of the several parts into an orderly whole to achieve the purpose of the undertaking”.
Seekler Hundson – Coordination as “the all important duty of interrelating the various parts of the work”.
Mooney – “Coordination is the first principle of organisation and includes within itself all other principles which are subordinate to it and through which it operates”.
In general, coordination means making all parts of an organisation work harmoniously, without conflicts and without cross-purposes, to achieve the defined goal.
It may, however, be mentioned that co-ordination is a means and not an end in itself.
In the words of Newman, “it is not a separate activity but a condition that should permeate all phases of administration”.
Distinction between Coordination and Cooperation Coordination should not be confused with cooperation though the latter is essential for the former.
In the words of terry, cooperation is “The collective action of one person with another or others towards a common goal”.
He illustrates the difference by relating an interesting story: “consider the story of the body who wished to take an early morning train and accordingly, set his watch ahead one half hour before going to 173 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION bed so that he would be sure to arise in plenty of time.
Placing the watch on the table alongside his bed, the boy retired early to get sufficient rest.
His father, knowing of his son’s desire to take the early train, went to his son’s bedroom and turned the lad’s watch up on half hour, believing this would give the boy extra time to get up and dressed.
Likewise, the mother just before retiring went in the lad’s bedroom and turned his watch forward one half hour so that he would not be rushed in the morning.
As a result the lad arose one and one half hour early instead of one half hour late thus losing an hour of needed sleep.
Cooperation among the actions of the son, father and mother, had been present but no coordination.” Coordination is therefore, the synchronisation of efforts for a common purpose, cooperation is collective action of one person with another.
Cooperation emphasizes collective action of members for certain common goals and any organisation is thus a corporative organisation.
However, it is not necessary that coordination also exists in such organisation.
Cooperation emphasizes collective action of members for certain common goals and any organisation is thus a corporative organisation.
However, it is not necessary that coordination should also exist in such organisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is coordination according to D. White, Charles Worth, and Mooney?
3.2 Need for Coordination Coordination is a first principle of organisation.
It is needed not only to secure team work and co-operation but also to prevent conflicts that may arise in the working of an organisation.
Such conflicts arise due to: i.
Ignorance of the employees or units of each others activities, ii.
a tendency among men in charge of particular functions and activities to regard their own desk as all-important, unmindful of the needs of other and make encroachment on others sphere of activities, and iii.
a growing tendency towards empire-building or greed for power among different units of an organisation.
Coordination is thus essential for organisational efficiency.
It may take two forms: i.
Coordination of various activities and ii.
Coordination of individuals 174 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the two types of coordination.
3.3 Types of Coordination Coordination can be of two types i.
Internal or functional which is concerned with the coordination of the activities of individuals working in an organisation and ii.
External or structural which is concerned with coordinating the activities of different organisational units.
Both the types of coordination are affected horizontally and perpendicularly.
Horizontally, coordination fosters inter-relationship between one employee and another, between one section and another, between one division and another and between one department and another.
Perpendicularly, coordination is established between one employee and his/her officer, between officer and his/her next superior and so on and between one section and a branch and a division and so on.
3.4 Techniques/Methods of Coordination Coordination may be achieved in two ways i.
Automatically:- This method of coordination requires that an executive in authority be made to know all activities and occurrences in the organisation and how to relate them into a coherent whole.
This is very possible in a small organisation but may be impossible in a large scale organisation due to the limit in span of attention or control.
ii.
Deliberate Coordination:- In large scale organisations, coordination is deliberately planned and achieved.
It can be achieved through two ways: a.
Compulsory Coordination:- It is achieved through the mechanism of the organisational hierarchy, the supervising common interest in meetings and later enforcing the agreed decision through a circular letter as an order.
b.
Voluntary Coordination: The coordination in any organisation can be secured voluntarily by mutual agreement and adjustment through various techniques.
Voluntary coordination can be achieved through the following ways:- 175 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION i. Consultation:- This is done by making reference, proper consultation and understanding with the individuals concerned to avoid conflict or duplication of efforts.
All proposals and policies which affect other departments are circulated to them for obtaining their consent before they are sent to the chief Executive for decisions.
This process of consultation may involve delays but is necessary for securing unity of action.
ii.
Conferences:- Inter-departmental and intra-departmental including non-official conferences are necessary when cooperation of many agencies are needed to achieve success.
The agenda of such conferences should be planned in such a way so as to evolve through discussion which will be followed by agreed solutions and actions.
To this end, freedom of discussion should exist when the higher officers and their subordinates meet around a table.
iii.
Organisational Devices: Coordination may be effected by appointing inter-departmental/intra-departmental committees, coordinators, planning commissions and boards.
These bodies are outside the organisations.
They ensure cooperation not necessarily by referring to a common boss, but by way of consultation and exchange of idea and thus show the technique of consultative rather than authoritarian coordination.
Organisational devices are better where the need for consultation and discussion among many agencies is of a standing and continuous nature.
An interdepartmental committee is useful if two or more departments have overlapping spheres of activity.
iv.
Standardisation of Procedures and Methods: It facilitates comparison and measurement of result.
Common budget and accounting procedures and procedure of procurement of supplies help in checking confusion, misappropriation and wastefulness.
It ensures that all employees in the organisation act in similar manner.
v. Decentralisation of Activities: - The functional unit is independent and the central authority coordinates them.
This method is common with business firms with a multiplicity of complex activities.
vi.
Coordination by Means of Ideas and Leadership: - Where the central purpose of the organisation is known to all the workers, it binds them together and subordinates their individual interest to the general interest of the organisation.
Stimulating leadership 176 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION can also foster enthusiasm among the employees for the common cause and spur them on to overcome probable difficulties.
Informal Methods of Coordination Besides the formal methods of coordination discussed in the preceding paragraphs, there are certain informal methods of co-ordination as well.
i.
Through personal contacts, free exchange of ideas frank and candid discussion and agreement by compromise is made possible.
ii.
Committees and conferences also provide opportunities for such informal consultations.
iii.
Dinners, lunches and tea and cocktail parties have also proved effective media of mass communication.
iv.
A disciplined party system is a very important medium of unofficial coordination.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the methods of coordination?
3.5 Principles of Coordination Mary Parker Follett who has sifted the principles from techniques has mentioned the following principles of coordination: i.
Direct contact: The principle of direct contact states that coordination can be achieved in better ways through inter- personal relationships.
Communication in oral form through personal contacts is more effective to convey and understand ideas, suggestions, views, feelings etc.
These help in removing misunderstanding between two persons or departments making their functioning harmonious.
ii.
Early Beginning: Coordination should start at the early possible stage, that is, at the stage of planning and policy making.
At a later stage.
iii.
when plans are executed into actions, coordination becomes difficult when the process has been initiated earlier.
iv.
Continuity: Coordination is a continuous process.
It should always be carried on.
177 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION v. Reciprocal relations: This principle states that all factors in a situation are reciprocally related.
The functioning of an individual is influenced by the functioning of others, and in turn, affects the functioning of others.
This requires integration of all efforts, actions and interest.
This also indicates that the method of achieving coordination is largely horizontal rather than vertical.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What are the principles of coordination according to Mary Parker Follett?
3.6 Hindrances to Effective Coordination The vast and expanding activities of the government, the thinning of the span of control and the lack of delegation on the part of high-ups in administration make effective coordination difficult.
There is also a limit to which an agency can achieve in coordination.
According to Gulick, some of the difficulties arise from: i.
The uncertainty of the future-as to the behaviour of individuals and of people, ii.
The lack of knowledge, experience, wisdom and character among leaders and their confused and conflicting ideas and objectives.
iii.
The lack of administrative skills and techniques, iv.
The vast number of variables involved and the incompleteness of human knowledge, particularly with regard to man and life.
v. The lack of orderly methods of developing, consideration, perfection and adoption of new ideas and programmes.
In addition to the above, Seckler- Hudson had put forth the following four points.
These are the i.
Size and complexity.
ii.
Personalities and political factors.
iii.
The lack of leaders with wisdom and knowledge pertaining to public administration and iv.
The accelerated expansion of public administration to international dimensions.
Whatever the hindrances, it is obvious that they must be removed in the over-all interest of the effective working of an organisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Mention 5 hindrances to effective coordination.
178 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we summed up by reminding ourselves that we have so far discussed the meaning of coordination, the need for coordination, types of coordination, techniques of coordination, principles and its hindrances towards an effective development planning.
Finally distinctions between coordination and co-operation were also illustratively discussed.
5.0 SUMMARY Thus coordination is a centripetal force in administration.
It can be achieved both through formal and informal methods.
The written and verbal communications, conferences round table meetings, institutional devices, etc.
Play as prominent a part in effecting coordination as informal methods like lunches and dinners and meetings in committees and conferences.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define coordination.
2.
Explain the need for coordination 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2002).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Millet, J.D.
(1954).
Management in the Public Service.
New York: McGraw Hill Co. Terry, G.R.
(1956).
Principles of Management.
Illinois: Irwin Inc. Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan.
(2006).
Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 179 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 DELEGATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Need for Delegation 3.2 Meaning of Delegation 3.3 Characteristics of Delegation 3.4 Hindrances in Delegation 3.5 General Principles of Delegation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Delegation of authority is a feature common to all types of large scale organisations.
The concept of unity of command envisages that every activity within the department must emanate from the leader or from the father but this is possible only in small scale organisations or in organisations where face-to-face relation is possible.
In large organisations, the need for delegation arises because of the limitations of span of control.
A formal structure in the form of a scalar is built up in which comes to life by the process of delegating authority.
Though legally, the whole authority rests with the head of an organisation, in practice, however, sufficient authority has to be delegated down the line to various employees for it is humanly impossible for the head to carry the whole burden of organisation on his shoulders.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to: • discuss the need for delegation • explain the meaning of delegation • list the characteristics of delegations • state the reasons for inadequate delegation • enumerate the principles of delegation.
180 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Need for Delegation Effective Leadership i.
It helps the chief executive to devote his/her time and energy to more important decisions of the organisation.
ii.
Work is done at the lower levels and only important business is passed on to the leader.
Effective leadership is made possible only through the process of delegation.
“One of the tragedies of business experience is the frequency with which men, are always efficient in anything that they personally can do, will finally be cursed and fail under the weight of accumulated duties that they do not know and cannot learn how to delegate.
“Delegation of authority is therefore, the first principle of good leadership.
iii.
Immense Educative Value: One of the duties of a manager is to build up his/her subordinates, to train them in the art of sharing responsibility and making decisions which is possible only through delegation.
Delegation of authority has therefore, much educative value.
The subordinates develop greater loyalty and a greater identification with the organisation if they are made partners to the exercise of authority.
This builds up their moral and gives them the incentive to hard work.
iv.
Flexibility in Rigidities: Delegation provides the necessary flexibility to the otherwise rigid procedures.
Delegation helps to adjust procedures according to the needs of situations.
Millet illustrates this point by an interesting story.
“The story goes that an officer was instructed to give an explanation of why a damaging fire had occurred on his post.
The officer is supposed to have ended his report with this sentence: the rules were fully obeyed and the building burned down.
No set of rules devised by man can ever be applicable to each individual future situation which may occur.
It is general purpose and intent which organised groups must be concerned to realise, and which leadership endeavours to promote by its willingness to delegate”.
v. Economy and Efficiency:- Proper delegation of authority minimises delay, makes service more effective, economical and efficient.
These are the virtues of division of labour and delegation of authority.
181 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain why delegation of authority is the first principle of good leadership.
3.1 Meaning of Delegation According to Mooney, delegation means conferring of specified authority by a higher to a lower authority.
It means that delegation is the devolution of authority by a superior person to his agent or subordinate subject to his supervision and control.
Legally, the delegated authority still belongs to the principal, but in practice, its exercise is allowed to the subordinate or agent.
Terry, however, does not agree with Mooney’s interpretation of delegation.
To him, ‘delegation means conferring authority from one executive organisation unit to another’.
Thus, delegation is not essentially devolution of power from a higher to a lower authority, and between equal authorities.
Delegation May Thus be Classified as: i.
Downward when the higher delegates to the lower as in the case of sales-manager delegating to salesmen, ii.
Upward when the lower delegates to the higher as in the case of shareholders delegating to their board of directors and iii.
Sideward when delegation is at equal levels as in the case of African tribal chiefs and their central tribal authority.
Described in terms of degree of authority delegated, delegation may be: i. full or partial ii.
Conditional or unconditional iii.
Formal or informal iv.
Direct or intermediate i. Delegation is full when complete powers are conferred on the agent for example, when diplomatic representative is sent abroad with full powers to negotiate.
It is partial when he/she is required to get advice and guidance on critical points from the delegating authority in his/her country.
ii.
Delegation is conditional when the action of a subordinate is subject to confirmation and revision by the superior, it is unconditional when subordinate is free to act without reservations.
182 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION iii.
Delegation is formal when embodied in written rules, by laws or orders.
It is intermediate when it is made through third person.
Intermediate delegation is rarely found.
Mooney gives two instances of such delegation.
They are the election of the president of USA by the people through Electoral College and the election of the pope by the congregation through Council of Cardinals.
It may, however be mentioned that delegation does not mean abdication of responsibility on the part of delegating authority.
It is only delegated and not surrendered.
Ultimately, it is the delegating authority which is overall responsible for the conduct of all those to whom it has delegated the authority.
In the words of Millet, “Delegation of authority means more than simple assigning duties to others in more or less detail.
The essence of delegation is to confer discretion (power) upon others to use their judgment in meeting specific problems within the frame work of their duties.
Management leadership must then accept the responsibility for how this discretion is exercised”.
Thus, delegation has a dual character in as much as it vests the subordinates with the authority to act in discretion and the delegating authority with the power to see that discretion is well exercised.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain in your own words the meaning of delegation.
3.2 Characteristics of Delegation The Following Characteristics of Delegation may be noted: i. Delegation is the authority to act in a certain way independently but within the limits prescribed by the delegation.
ii.
Delegation has a dual character.
As Terry has observed, “it is something like imparting knowledge you share with others who then possess the knowledge and you still retain the knowledge too”.
iii.
Authority once delegated can be enhanced, reduced or withdrawn according to the changing circumstances.
iv.
One cannot delegate the authority which himself does not possess.
However, he does not delegate the entire authority, because if he delegates all his authority, he cannot work.
v. Delegation may be specific or general.
It is specific when courses of action for specific objectives are specified, it is general when these are not specific, though objectives are specified.
183 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION vi.
Delegation is an art.
It has to be related with duties and responsibilities, personal factors in superior and subordinate, organisational objectives and policies and environment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the characteristics of delegation?
3.3 Hindrances in Delegation 1.
The Hindrances to delegation are of two types: a. Organisational hindrances b.
Personal Hindrance a. Organisational Hindrances are i.
Lack of established methods and procedures: delegation is made easier if procedures and rules are well established.
ii.
Lack of means of coordination.
iv.
Unstable and non-repetitive nature of work: stable and repetitive work affords a greater degree of delegation v. Size and location of an organisation: delegation becomes a necessity if organisation is geographically spread.
vi.
Lack of properly spelled out position in terms of duties and authority.
b.
Personal Factors Personal factors which cause failure to delegation are many and may be summed up as: egotism to keep power, to remain in limelight and to take credit for everything, fear of disloyalty on the part of subordinate, lack of confidence in the intelligence and technical competence of the associates, absence of emotional maturity in the chief, fear of accountability to high-ups, to the legislature or the people, etc.
Pfiffner gave the following human causes of failure to delegate: i.
Persons who rise to position of hierarchical leadership have more than normal egotism.
ii.
They are afraid that others will not make the proper decisions or carry them out in the desire manner.
184 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION iii.
They fear that disloyal or subversive power centres will develop among strong subordinates.
iv.
String, vigorous, over zealous and highly motivated persons became impatient with the slower peace and indecisiveness of subordinates.
v. In public sector administration, political consideration often make delegation difficult.
vi.
The cultural heritage of man has been one of authoritarian patriarchal leadership, thus the practice of delegation is partly dependent on cultural change.
vii.
That act of delegation requires emotional maturity which apparently is rare, even among successful persons.
viii.
The symbols of leadership (those personal qualities and traits which attract the attention of others) are inconsistent with the philosophy of delegation.
Those striving to succeed must make themselves prominent.
ix.
Persons who desire to delegate do not know how to delegate.
x.
They do not know how to delegate for at least two reasons: (a) The science of organisation and management is immature and (b) Their work experience has not taught them to delegate because most organisations fail to practice delegation.
With all above organisation and personal difficulties, hindering delegation, no one can deny that delegation is a must and that there is no way out except to remove, as far as possible these difficulties.
As far as the organisational factors are concerned much of the dilemma of delegation can be solved by establishing proper procedures and methods of work.
Each of the operating service should have an organisation manual as well as office procedure manual in which proper procedures and responsibility and the authority attached to each of the positions in the hierarchy should be fully described.
Delegation, shall then be more exact and specific.
Proper means or coordination and communications should also be established to facilitate delegation.
As far as personal factors are concerned, not only training of the subordinates but also of the top executive should be emphasized.
Subordinates should be trained in the act of properly using discretion within limit of the rules and the top executive in the habit of delegation.
185 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What causes the failure of adequate delegation according to Pfiffner?
3.4 General Principles of Delegation i. Delegation should be written and specific.
ii.
Authority and responsibility for each position in the management group should be spelled out and delegation should be made to a position rather than to an individual.
iii.
The authority to be delegated should be within the competence of subordinates to exercise safely.
iv.
Delegation should be properly planned and systematized.
v. Systematic reporting system should be established with those to whom the authority has been delegated to ascertain that authority is being used properly.
vi.
Policies, regulations and procedures should be well defined so as to give no misunderstanding to the employees using discretionary powers.
vii.
There should be free and open lines of communication between the delegations and delegates.
This brings the superior and subordinates closer and can help in solving many problems which come in the way of delegation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Mention some of the principles of delegation.
4.0 CONCLUSION So far we have discussed the need for delegation, the meaning and definitions of delegation.
We have also discussed the characteristics of delegation, the hindrances of delegation and the general principles of delegation.
Therefore, the essence of delegation as we understood from the conclusion of this unit is that delegation is to confer direction upon others to use their judgment in meeting specific problems within the framework of their duties.
186 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 5.0 SUMMARY To sum up in the words of White: “Circumstance of magnitude and volume, however, require some delegation of authority, and the settlement of much business at the point where it arises.
The convenience of citizens alone compels most matters to be handed outside Washington.
The avoidance of delay in administrative bottleneck requires decisions at a hundred or a thousand field officers rather than in a single headquarters establishment.
In some cases proper adjustment of policy and programme to local condition requires discretionary field decisions.
Certainly, the delegation of authority means greater energy, a higher sense of responsibility, and better morale among field agents.
They are not content to be mere messenger and reporter of their Washington superiors”.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is devolution of power?
Does this mean abdication of responsibility?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2006).
Rudiments of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Terry, G.R.
(1956).
Principles of Management.
Illionois: Irwin Inc. Vighnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan.
(2006).
Introduction to Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 187 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of communication 3.2 Types 3.3 Essentials of communication 3.4 Barriers in its way 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication has come to be recognised as an important principle of administration.
For the successful achievement of agency objectives, effective communication is really of vital importance.
Millet rightly described communication as the “blood stream of administrative organisation”.
Pfiffer also portrays it as ‘the heart of management’.
Truly speaking, the literature on management is replete with articles on communication.
In top democracies of the conferences, workshops and other training programmes are organised to develop communication skills.
It is in fact a crucial element in management.
Its study has become important because of the fact that public sector administration is involved in vital problems of human beings.
Communication is a two way traffic in organisation.
Not only the superior bosses communicate decisions and instructions, but the subordinates also communicate facts and information to the central or head office.
Thus, communicate is both upward and downward.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of communication • mention the types of communication • mention the types of communication • list the essentials of communication • recognise some barriers of communication.
188 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Communication Communication is two-way traffic.
It does not only mean the authority of communicating decisions or instructions to the subordinates.
The subordinates also have to communicate facts and information to the authority in the organisation.
Communication thus means inter-change of thoughts, partaking of ideas and a sense of participation and sharing.
In the words of Louis A. Allen, ‘communication is the sum of all the things one person does when he wants to create understanding in the mind of another.
It involves a systematic and continuous process of telling, listening and understanding’.
According to M.W.
Cunning, “The word communication describes the process of conveying messages (facts, ideas, attitudes and opinions) from one person to another so that they are understood’.
According to Tead, ‘the underlying aim of communication is a meeting of minds on common issues.
Thus, communication means interchange of thought, ideas and sense of participation and sharing between two or more people.
Generally, it is viewed as the use of symbols for transferring certain information, but the more important aspect of communication is the fact that communication is a personal process that involves the exchange of behavour.
Communication is successful when: 3.
The meaning is shared by all the parties involved, and 4.
The parties involved act in direction consistent with the shared meaning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define Communication.
3.2 Types of Communication i. Communication may be Internal, External and Interpersonal Internal communication deals with the relationship between the organisation and its employees.
External communication is concerned with the relations of the agency with the public and is called public relations.
Interpersonal communication means the relationships among the agency’s employees.
189 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION ii.
Communication may be Upward, Downward and Across Upward communication is attained by systematic, written and verbal reports of performance and progress, statistics and accounting reports concerning work, written and verbal request for guidance, suggestions and discussions.
This provision is made for the high ups to procure evidence about work problems.
Downward communication is achieved through devices through directives from written or verbal orders, staff conferences, budget sanctions, manuals and establishment authorization.
The higher level makes use of these devices both for command and control and to inform the lower echelons regarding its attitudes and ideas and to render advice, guidance and direction.
A cross communication is attained through exchange of written or verbal information and reports, formal and informal contacts, co-ordination committees and staff meetings.
Through this type of communication, different but related parts of organisation are geared together.
iii.
Formal and Informal Through formal communication, decisions and instructions can be transmitted to those for when they are meant.
Such formal communication is done through codes of conduct or manual of the organisation.
However formal channels of communication are not adequate enough to meet the need of human understanding of the problem involved.
Hence the need of informal communication arises.
It supplements the formal system of communication.
The interpersonal contacts and relationship constitute the media of informal communication.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain types of Communication.
3.3 Essentials of Communication According to Terry, eight factors are essential to make communication effective.
They are as follows: (i) Inform yourself fully (ii) Establish a mutual trust in each other (iii) Find a common ground of experience (iv) Use mutually known words 190 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (v) Have regard for context (vi) Secure and hold the receivers attention (vii) Employ examples and visual aids.
(viii) Practice delaying reactions.
According to Millet seven factors that make communication effective are: (i) it should be clear, (ii) Consistent with the expectation of the recipient, (iii) Adequate, (iv) Timely (v) Uniform (vi) Flexible (vii) Acceptable Richards and Nielander on the other hand opine that communication should reflect the policies, programmed and practice, of management.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What are the factors that make communication essential, according to Terry and Millet respectively?
3.4 Barriers in Its Way (i) Complexity of Language Communication suffers a setback due to tyranny of words which at best constitute poor means for the expression of ideas.
The Oxford Dictionary records an average of twenty-eight separate meanings for each of the 500 most used word in the English language.
Limit is the position in other language, intentional words hinder mutual understandings.
According to Terry, “intentional words do not refer to something than can be pointed out.
They neither always connote an identical meaning to different persons nor the same meaning to the same person at all times”.
(ii) Ideological Barriers Pfiffner is of the view that ideological barriers also impede communication.
He said, “Differences in background, education and expectation result in different social and political views.
These are probably the greatest handicaps to effective communication and probably the most difficult to 191 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION overcome”.
Lack of common experience and common background further adds to the problem and make the meetings of minds difficult, if not impossible.
(iii) Lack of Will Some administrators do not accept administration as a co-operative endeavour or a group effort.
They are not prepared to share their ideas with their subordinates.
In simple words they do not relish communication from below.
It develops sycophancy amongst the subordinates who report only that information to the superior which is palatable to him.
Such loyalty spoils the boss and consequently weakens his morale.
(iv) Lack of Recognised Means Lack of definite and recognised means of communication constitute a great barrier.
Formal channels are not adequate.
Hence informal channels are to be set up.
Appleby rightly opines that “a good deal of circumvention of formal procedures is essential to make the transaction of business possible”.
Pfiffner also holds the same view that, “The ability to short circuit formal channels is, thus, a necessary and valuable art”.
(v) Size and Distance The bigger an organisation and the larger the number of its employees, the greater the difficulty of communication.
Too many hierarchical levels also pose a problem.
In the words of Pfiffner, “Information must percolate through levels, each of which may include empire builders who consciously modify or subvert higher authority.
In addition, individuals interpret facts differently and tend unconsciously to color then in transmission” The problem of distance crops up if an agency has its field agencies scattered throughout the country.
The American management Association has suggested ten commandants of good communication.
These are: (i) Clarifying idea before communication, (ii) Understanding physical and human environment of communication, (iii) Purpose of communication.
(iv) Consulting others in planning communication, (v) Value of communication to the receiver, (vi) Follow-up action, (vii) Importance of communication 192 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (viii) Action congruent with communication, and (ix) Good listening SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What are the barriers of communication?
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is a process which involves the elements of sender (The person who intends to make contact), ideas (subject-mater of communication), encoding (language or symbols), channel (media agencies like telephone, telegrams, circular etc), and receiver (person to whom the message is sent), decoding (conversion of symbols received from the sender), and feed back (ensuring that the receiver has got the message and understood it properly.
5.0 SUMMARY Communication must be clearly understood, as a two-way process.
Two- way communication brings two minds together which is the basic core of any communication.
A communicator must be a good listener too.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT According to Terry, eight factors are essential for making communication effective, name these eight factors.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING EKhator, Victor Eghe (2006).
Rudiment of Public Administration.
Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. McFarland, D.E.
(1964).
Managing Principles and Practices.
New York: Macmillan Co. Terry, G.R.
(1956).
Principles of Management.
Illionois: Irwin Inc. Vishnoo, Bhagwan and Vidya, Bhushan.
(2006).
Introduction to Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 193 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 5 SUPERVISION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning 3.2 Phases of Supervision 3.3 Qualities of a Good Supervision 3.4 Duties of Supervisors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Supervision is one of the most important tasks of management.
One of the most distinguished trends in the study of management, today, is the attention being given to supervision as a prominent aspect of management.
Its importance in recent years is emphasised both inside and outside public service, particularly in Nigerian Civil Service.
It is therefore, beyond doubt that it is an important subject in the present context.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of supervision • discuss the phases of supervision • list the qualities of a good supervisor • enumerate the duties of a supervisor.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Supervision Supervision means to oversee or superintend.
It has been defined as the authoritative direction and superintending the work of others.
However, some writers feel that this is too authoritarian a definition of supervision.
Supervision is something more than the use of authority, it has educative aspect too.
The different aspects of supervision have been explained by Margaret William son in a graphic story.
“Some new group workers 194 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION were asked: What come to their minds when they heard the term supervision?
The workers replied somewhat as follows: Being safeguarded from making mistakes.
Being helped by a person who understands.
Satisfaction in having a point of reference.
Being made to feel inadequate and inferior because of the authority and power of the person over me.
Being pushed around”.
She defines supervision “as a process by which workers are helped by a designated staff member to learn according to their needs, to make the best use of their knowledge and skills and to improve their abilities so that they do their jobs more effectively and with increasing satisfaction to themselves and the agency”.
She has more a humanistic rather than a technical approach to the supervision, inspection and investigation.
Supervision should be distinguished from inspection and investigation though the latter are tools of the former.
Inspection is to check compliance with instructions, and investigation is to deter or direct wrong doing.
Hence, both are negative in character.
But supervision is more positive in character.
It is consultative and advisory in nature.
In fact, it has many ingredients.
In the words of Halsey, it is, “selecting the right person for and teaching him how to do it, measuring and rating performance to be sure that teaching has been fully effective, administering correction where this found necessary and transferring to more suitable work or dismissing those for whom this proves ineffective, commending whenever praise is merited and rewarding for good work, and finally, fitting a person harmoniously into the work group all done fairly, patiently and tactfully ligently, enthusiastically and completely”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Supervision is something more than the use of authority: Explain 3.2 Phases of Supervision There are three phases of supervisor’s job, such as: i.
Substantive or technical ii.
Institutional and iii.
Personal i.
Institutional Aspect: A Supervisor has to run the agency or unit under his charge according to the established rules and procedures and within the framework of policy.
He should ensure that the work is well done and on time.
He has the responsibility to see that all employees are regular and punctual in their duties and that there is proper conservation of equipment and supplies.
195 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION ii.
Personal Aspect: Authority alone cannot get work out of others; hence, it is the job of the supervisor to create interest and enthusiasm among the workers.
Real authority must flow from within.
As Miss Follett has put it, “Authority should arise within the unifying process.
As every living process is subject to its own authority evolved by, or involved in the process itself, so social control is generated by the process itself.
Or rather, the activity or self-creating coherence is the controlling authority”.
So an authority may arise from within an organisation, a supervisor must be humane, sympathetic, considerate and master of the art of human relations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Write about the phases of supervision.
3.2 Qualities of Good Supervisors Everybody cannot be a good supervisor.
Besides the fact that he should be fully equipped with the knowledge of rules and regulations of his agency, he must possess certain qualities of a good supervisor.
Prof. J.M.
Pfiffner lists eight such qualities.
i.
Command of Job Content – expect knowledge of the work to be supervised.
ii.
Personal Qualifications – co-operative spirit, evenness of temper, honesty, ability to attract, to motive, to enthuse and unite others.
iii.
Teaching Ability – ability to communicate with the workers and to make them understand management point of view.
iv.
General Out Look – he must love his job and inspire others v. Courage and Fortitude – ability to undertake responsibility and act decisively.
vi.
Ethical and Moral Considerations – freedom from vices having social disapproval.
vii.
Administrative Technology – capacity to organise, coordinate and direct.
viii.
Curiosity and Intellectual Ability – mental alertness and flexibility, responsiveness to new ideas and practices.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Explain why everybody cannot be a good supervisor.
196 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 3.4 Duties of a Supervisor It could be concisely expressed this aspect of supervision by stating eleven duties of a supervisor, and these are: i.
To understand the duties and responsibilities of his own position ii.
To plan the execution of the work iii.
To divide the work among the subordinate iv.
To improve work methods and procedures v. To improve his own knowledge as a technical expert vi.
To train the personnel vii.
To evaluate the performance of the employees.
viii.
To correct mistakes and solve employees problems ix.
To keep subordinates informed about policies and the changes to be made.
x.
To be cooperative with colleagues and seek advice and assistance when needed, and lastly, xi.
To deal with employees suggestions and complaints.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Enumerate the duties of a supervisor.
4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit, we have discussed the meaning and objective of supervision.
We did as well discuss the phrases in supervision, the qualities, and mostly, the duties of a supervisor.
5.0 SUMMARY Supervision means harnessing the productive energies of many persons into a common endeavour so that the desired output is realized to the fullest extent possible.
No such objective can be realized without full attention to the peculiar characteristics of the people who make up any organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the duties of a supervisor?
197 POL 123 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekhator, Victor Eghe (2006).
Rudiments of Public Administration, Kaduna: Joyce Graphic Printers and Publishers Co. Millet, J.D.
(1954).
Management in the Public Service.
New York: McGraw Hill Co. Vishnoo, Bhgwan and Vidya, Bhushan (2006).
Introduction to Public Administration.
New Delhi: S. Chand and Company Ltd. 198
