 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE: POS106 COURSE TITLE: ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION POS106 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Course Team Dr. James Bassey Ejue (Writer) - CRSCE, AKAMKPA NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii POS106 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-802-7 All Rights Reserved iii POS106 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………………….… 1 What You Will Learn in This Course……………………………….
1 Course Aims…………………………………………….................... 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………………… 2 Working through This Course…………………….………………… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………..………… 3 Study Units……………………………………………..…………… 3 Textbooks and References ……………………………….................. 4 Assignment File…………………………………………..………….
4 Assessment……………………………………………..…………… 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA)………………………………….. 5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………....... 5 Course Marking Scheme……………………………….…................ 6 Course Overview………………………………………..…............... 6 How to Get the Most from This Course……………………….…….
7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………................. 9 Summary…………………………………………………................. 9 iv  Introduction POS106, Road safety and Highway Traffic Administration is a one semester course.
It is compulsory for students of the Bachelor of Science (B.sc) in police science.
This course is suitable for undergraduates who seek to understand and obtain skills necessary for effective performance of the duties involved in road safety and highway traffic administration.
It comprises 21 units which present detailed aspects of maintaining road traffic and administering highway traffic administration.
It is an overview of motor traffic and highway traffic, safety administration and management, highway patrols traffic laws and regulations, motor traffic offences and dispositional methods, issues on the road and accidents.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you need to use and how you can work your way though these materials.
It also emphasises the necessity for tutor-marked assignments.
There are also periodic tutorial classes that are linked to this course.
What You Will Learn in This Course In this course, you will be acquainted with a wide aspects and issues involved in road safety and highway traffic administration that will assist you in enforcing law and order on the road.
Particularly, the course will differentiate between motor traffic and highway traffic, present vehicle checklist and what constitutes safety.
Also, traffic functions as well as highway patrol traffic laws and regulations will be high-lighted.
Further, in this course you will learn about motor traffic offences and dispositional methods, vehicles and personnel of motor traffic system, the law and traffic control.
The course will also expose you to standards and ethics of road use with particular reference to traffic lights, round about, over-taking rules and road signs.
Finally, the course will expose you to common causes of road accidents, prevention and control of road accidents and management of accident cases.
Course Aims The basic aim of this course is to meet your needs in the area of road safety and highways traffic administration.
So the course will expose you to a wide array of special knowledge and skills necessary for POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION effective service delivery.
In specific terms the aim is to provide you with key aspects that constitute road safety, traffic and patrol functions.
Also the course aims of making you knowledgeable in the laws and regulations that govern the use of roads, how to prevent and manage accidents as well as methods of prosecuting offenders.
Course Objectives The objectives intended to be achieved in this course are many.
You will discover that each unit has specific objectives which are stated at the beginning of the unit.
It is advisable for you to refer to the objectives during your study to check on the progress you are making.
To be sure that you have acquired what is required of you in each unit; always look at the unit objectives at completion of the unit.
During and at the successful completion of this course, you should be able to:  differentiate between motor traffic and highway traffic  mention items on a vehicle checklist  identify basic vehicle safety check  explain main aspects of safety  trace the history of highway traffic safety administration  dxplain safety administration and management  state traffic functions and patrol functions  explain highway patrols traffic laws and regulations  mention the procedures for removal of vehicles from the highway  enumerate the regulations on safe driving  state motor traffic offences and dispositional methods  apply miscellaneous motor traffic regulations  recite provisions relating to pedestrians and traffic other than motor traffic  explain the power and procedure for prosecution of offenders  describe types of roads  list personnel of motor traffic system  mention the law and traffic control conglomerate  illustrate standards and ethics on road usage  state courses of road accidents  explain measures to prevent, control and mage accident cases.
Working through This Course To complete this course you are required to read the study units, the recommended books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Most of the units contain self- ii POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION assessment exercises and at certain points in the course, you will be required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
There will be a final examination at the end of this course.
Stated below are the components of the course and what you are expected to do.
Course Materials Course Guide Modules and study units Recommended textbooks and other reference materials Assignment file Study Units There are twenty three units in this course.
The twenty three units are divided into six modules.
That is, each module contains four units, except module 4 that has 3 units.
They are arranged as follows: Module 1 Motor Traffic and Highway Traffic Administration Unit 1 Definition of Motor Traffic and Highway Traffic Unit 2 Vehicle Check-List Unit 3 Basic Vehicle Safety Check Unit 4 The Process of Vehicle Registration and Insurance Module 2 Road Safety Administration and Management Unit 1 Definition of Road Safety and Its Administration Unit 2 Dimensions of Road Safety Administration and Management in Nigeria Unit 3 The Traffic Function Unit 4 The Patrol Function Module 3 Highway Patrols: Traffic Laws and Regulations Unit 1 Driving Rules and Regulations Unit 2 Laws and Regulations, Special Provisions: Removal of Vehicles from the Highway, Special Trade License, Driving School and the Road Unit 3 Special Provisions Relating to the Driving of Vehicles Unit 4 Other Road Safety Precautions iii POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Module 4 Motor Traffic Offences and Disposition Methods Unit 1 Special Provisions Relating to Highways Unit 2 Miscellaneous Motor Traffic Laws and Regulations Unit 3 Motor Traffic Administration, Control, and Dispositional Machinery Module 5 Accidents: Management and Control Unit 1 Road Accidents and Common Causes Unit 2 Prevention and Control of Road Accidents Unit 3 Management of Accident Cases Unit 4 Challenges of Road Safety Textbooks and References Ademiluyi, I.
A.
(2007).
An Appraisal of the Role of the Federal Road Safety Commission in Ensuring a Sustainable Road Traffic Accident Reduction in Nigeria.
Nigerian Journal of Research and Production, 10 (2), 190-198 Bolade, T. & Ogunsanya, A.
(1991).
Accident Control And Safety Measures in Mass Transit Operations in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: The Federal Government Printer.
Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria, (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detail Works Ltd. Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Assignment File There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your course facilitator for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will counts towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignment will be found in the Assignment file itself, and also in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
There are many assignments for this course, with each unit having at least one.
These assignments are basically meant to assist you to understand the course and benefit from it.
iv POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Assessment Schedule Assessment in this course is in two categories.
The first is the tutor- marked assignments and the second is the written examination at the end of the course.
For you to do well in these assignments, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge, ideas and experiences acquired during the course.
The tutor-marked assignments must be submitted to your course facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your course facilitator for assessment will account for 30 per cent of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you are required to sit for a final examination of three hours duration.
This examination will account for the other 70 per cent of your total course marks.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are 24 tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You need to do all the assignments and submit to your facilitator.
The best three, that is, the three with the highest marks out of 24 assignments) will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards you total course mark.
This implies that the total marks for the best three (3) assignments will be 30% of your total course mark.
The assignments for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignments by reading the materials contained in your set books as well as study units.
However, it is also advisable that you carry out wide research by visiting the library and browsing the internet to achieve a very broad and indept knowledge of the subject matter.
On completion of each assignment, send it together with a TMA (Tutor- Marked Assignment) form to your course facilitator.
Be sure that each assignment gets to your course facilitator on or before the deadline given in the Assignment File.
If for any reason you can not complete your assignment before the date it is due, contact your course facilitator to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Please note that extensions can only be granted under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading There will be a three hour final examination for this course and it carries a value of 70% of the total course mark.
The examination will comprise questions drawn from the various practice exercises and tutor-marked v POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION assignments you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Start your revision as soon as you finish studying the last unit.
You may find it useful to review your self-assessment tests and tutor-marked assignments before the examination.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down Assessment Marks Assignments Best three marks of the 24 assignments @ 10% each, account for 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% course marks Course Overview The units, the number of weeks it would take you to complete them, and the assignments that follow them are outlined in the table below: Unit Title of Work Duration Assignments (Weeks) Module 1 1 Justifying Motor Traffic and 1 1 Highway Traffic Administration 2 Vehicle Check-List and Methods 1 2 of Enforcement 3 Basic Vehicle Safety Check 1 3 4 The Process of Vehicle 1 4 Registration and Insurance Module 2 1 Overview of Road Safety 1 5 Administration and Management 2 Aspects of Safety Management 1 6 3 The Traffic and Patrol Functions 1 7 4 Agencies and Functions Of Road 1 8 Safety Administration Module 3 1 Driving Rules And Regulations 1 9 2 Removal of Vehicles from the 1 10 vi POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Highway 3 Special Provision Relating To 1 11 The Driving Of Vehicles 4 How to Drive Safety 1 12 Module 4 1 Special Provisions Relating to 1 13 Highway 2 Miscellaneous Motor Traffic 1 14 Regulations 3 The Place of the Police 1 15 4 The Place of the Court 1 16 5 Standards and Ethics 1 17 Module 5 1 Accident Management and 1 18 Control Road Accidents and Common Causes 2 Prevention and Control of Road 1 19 Accidents 3 Management of Accident Cases 1 20 4 Challenges of Road Safety 1 21 How to Get the Most from This Course In distance learning, the study units replace the lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning: You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, at any time and place that suit you best.
In this case you are reading the lecture rather than listening to the lecturer.
Just as the lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are you text materials or set books.
Further, you are given exercises to do at appropriate points; just as a lecturer might give you class work.
All study units have a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Then you have some specific learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the units.
These objectives are meant to guide your study.
When you finish a unit, you have to go back to the objectives to see whether you have achieved them or not.
If you make this a habit, you will improve your knowledge and chances of doing well in the course.
vii POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This could be both form your set books and Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
Whenever you are confronted with a problem telephone your tutorial facilitator.
Remember that your tutorial facilitator’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutorial facilitator to provide it.
The following steps are a practical strategy for working through the course: 1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organised a study time-table.
Design a “Course Overview” to guide you and note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
You need to gather all the information into one place, may be in your diary or wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own time-table, do everything to stay faithful to it.
Most students fail because they get behind with their course work.
It you get into difficulty with your time-table, please let.
Your tutorial facilitator knows before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to unit I, and then read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need you set books and the units you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through it, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you are unsure about any objective, review the study material or consult your tutorial facilitator.
8.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit objective, you can then start on the next unit, keep to your time-table.
When an assignment is marked and returned, pay particular attention to your facilitator’s comment; consult your tutorial facilitator if you have any problem.
9.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to space your study so that you can keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutorial facilitator for marking, do not wait for its return before starting the next unit.
Keep to your time-table.
When the assignment is returned.
Pay particular attention to your tutorial facilitator’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
viii POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 11.
On completion of the last unit, reviews the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved each unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (Listed in the Course Guide) Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials.
Also, the name and phone number of your tutorial facilitator will be given to you as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
The job of your tutorial facilitator is to keep a close watch on your progress and if there are difficulties you encounter during the course, the facilitator will offer assistance.
Your facilitator will also mark and comment on your assignments.
You have to mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutorial facilitator well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
The assignments will be marked by your tutorial facilitator and returned to you as soon as possible.
Always contact your tutorial facilitator by telephone, e-mail or discussion board.
There are certain circumstances that may make it necessary for you to contact your tutorial facilitator.
Contract your tutorial facilitator if:  You do not understand any part of the study unit or the assigned readings.
 You have difficulties within the exercises.
 You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your facilitator’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
Ensure that you attend tutorials.
This is the only chance you have face to face contact with your tutorial facilitator and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
It is advisable for you to prepare a question list before attending tutorials.
You will learn quite a lot from participating in the discussions.
Summary This Course Guide has introduced you to the format and every other aspect of your course entitled: Road Safety and Higher traffic Administration.
We wish you good luck and success in your studies.
ix POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Course Code POS 106 Course Title Road Safety and Highway Traffic Administration Course Team Dr. James Bassey Ejue (Writer) - CRSCE, AKAMKPA NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA x POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.noun.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-802-7 All Rights Reserved xi POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Motor Traffic and Highway Traffic Administration ………………………………….….. 1 Unit 1 Definition of Motor Traffic and Highway Traffic….. 1 Unit 2 Vehicle Check-List………………………………….. 9 Unit 3 Basic Vehicle Safety Check ………………………… 16 Unit 4 The Process of and Insurance……………………….. 22 Module 2 Road Safety Administration and Management….. 28 Unit 1 Definition of road safety and its administration …... 28 Unit 2 Dimensions of Road Safety Administration and Management in Nigeria……………………….…..… 34 Unit 3 The Traffic Function…………………………….….. 38 Unit 4 The Patrol Function……………………………….… 47 Module 3 Highway Patrols: Traffic Laws and Regulations... 59 Unit 1 Driving Rules and Regulations…………………..….. 59 Unit 2 Laws and Regulations, Special Provisions: Removal of Vehicles from the Highway, Special Trade License, Driving School and The Road…….….
67 Unit 3 Special Provisions Relating to the Driving of Vehicles ……………………………….………..…..... 75 Unit 4 Other Road Safety Precautions……………….............. 82 Module 4 Motor Traffic Offences and Disposition Methods.... 90 Unit 1 Special Provisions Relating to Highways……………... 90 Unit 2 Miscellaneous Motor Traffic Laws and Regulations….
96 Unit 3 Motor Traffic Administration, Control, and Dispositional Machinery……………………..……….100 Module 5 Accidents: Management and Control……….……..107 Unit 1 Road Accidents and Common Causes……….………..107 Unit 2 Prevention and Control of Road Accidents……….......115 Unit 3 Management of Accident Cases …………………….. 120 Unit 4 Challenges of Road Safety…………………....……… 125 xii POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION TO MOTOR TRAFFIC AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC Unit 1 Motor Traffic and Highway Traffic Administration Unit 2 Vehicle Check-List Unit 3 Basic Vehicle Safety Check Unit 4 The Process of Vehicle Registration and Insurance UNIT 1 MOTOR TRAFFIC AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Right to Safety 3.2 The Right to be Informed 3.3 The Mission of Motor Traffic and Highway Traffic Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The transportation of people and goods has under-gone a great evolution.
It started from trekking along narrow paths, use of domestic animals, animal-drawn carts to automobiles.during which modern road construction began.
This is what you will be learning in this unit beginning with John Loudon McAdam who is credited with the invention of modern road construction when he introduced the use of well compacted, small stones in a soil foundation in the 18th century in Europe.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe a consumer’s right to safety  explain a consumer’s right to be informed  explain the mission of motor traffic and highway traffic administration.
1 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Right to Safety The term ‘consumer protection’ refers to the efforts of government, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), businesses and individuals to protect and enforce the rights of people who buy products and services.
In our present discourse, the products are motor vehicles and the services are insurance policies.
So, motor traffic and highway traffic administration has to ensure the motorists’ right to safety.
This is based on the principle that products offered for sale should not pose undue risk of physical harm to consumers and their families (Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009).
In this course the consumers under consideration are motorists and the producers are the manufacturers of motor vehicles.
We have a wide range of products that can cause injuries and they include defectively manufactured vehicles and tyres that have harmful side effects, and unsafe appliances.
However, our focus is on defective motor vehicles and human error.
In Nigeria, we have the Consumer Protection Agency (CPA); the National Agency for Food, Drugs Administration and Control (NAFDAC); Standard Organisation of Nigeria (SON); Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC); etc.
The CPA was established to protect the public from unreasonable risk of injury caused by consumer products as the commission develops uniform safety standards.
NAFDAC on the other hand, is charged with ensuring that processed foods, drugs, medical devices and cosmetics are safe and properly labeled, while SON is charged with the responsibility of setting quality and safety standards for all manufactured goods.
To ensure safety, Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) was established (with some allied agencies) to ensure motor-vehicle safety in Nigeria.
The FRSC set highway safety standards, educates the public and enforces safety rules and regulations.
In the United States of America (USA), the equivalent of FRSC is National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and it sets highway safety standards, investigates reported safety-related motor vehicle offences, and enforces laws regarding the correction of such errors (Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009).
NHTSA can require the recall of defective automobiles or automotive parts.
The overall purpose of road safety administration therefore, is to guarantee the motorist’s right to safety.
2 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Explain the term consumer protection as it relates to motorists.
3.2 The Right to be Informed Consumers, including consumers of motor vehicles and their parts, need sufficient information in order to choose wisely.
In the market place there are many different and complex products, and advertising is not informative enough for consumer purposes.
Therefore, consumers often lack sufficient product and service information to compare the quality of various products and to be assured of their reliability and safety.
Many motor vehicle problems that motorists encounter are caused by incorrect or fraudulent information.
For instance an unsuspecting motorist may go to purchase new tyres but ends up with rethreaded tyres that could lead to an accident.
That is why there is a consumer protection law requiring businesses to disclose necessary information on truthful labels with basic facts.
In-fact, the information disclosed about products such as tyres, brake pads, etc may be insufficient because firms rarely disclose information about the short-comings of their products.
In the advanced world like USA, there are private independent organisations that test products and report their findings to interested consumers.
It has been reported that the largest such organisation in USA is Consumers Union of United State, Inc and it publishes a non-profit Consumer Reports.
The importance of the right to be informed demands then consumer information, agencies of road safety administration should embark on consumer education programme.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Name two vehicle parts that motorists need to be informed about their reliability and safety before purchasing.
3.3 The Mission of Motor Traffic and Highway Traffic Administration Increasingly, rates of traffic accidents have been of much concern to both individuals and governments over the years.
In spite of accidents on our roads and the human and economic consequences, the motoring public are still compelled to endure as if nothing is wrong.
Worse still, it is common to find motorists driving with worn-out tyres, ineffective 3 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION break system, poor lighting, etc coupled with reckless driving.
This in part is due to lack of awareness.
To compound the problem, the condition of the road network is worsening by the day whereas the volume of vehicular traffic is increasing.
Also, for various reasons, drivers have been observed not to keep to their right lanes.
Consequently, many road crashes and collisions have been recorded.
Fatalities resulting from road accidents in Africa have reached frightening proportions.
For instance, Adedeji (1989) notes that the fatality rate per vehicle registered on African highways as at then ranged from eight to fifty times higher than what is registered in industrialised countries.
In addition, Adedeji estimated the economic cost of road accidents to be about two percent of the Gross National Product (GNP) in various developing countries.
It became apparent that there should be a well-devised and coordinated strategy to curb road accidents.
One of such strategies is the establishment of the Oyo Road Safety Corps whose focus was mostly on enlightenment.
In 1986, there was the first International Conference on Road Traffic Accidents in Developing countries which in its communiqué recommended, among others, that there should be a National Road Safety Commission capable of vigorously prosecuting a dynamic national road safety programme (David, 1999).
Three years later, 1989, the Federal Government of Nigeria established the Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) under Act 45 with the mandate of implementing road safety programmes and enforcing traffic laws and regulations.
Specifically, the primary objectives of the FRSC, just as any other agency of motor and highway traffic administration, include:  preventing or minimising accidents on the highways.
 clearing obstructions on any part of the highways  educating drivers, motorists and other members of the public.
 giving prompt attention and care to victims of accidents.
 conducting researches into causes of motor accident and methods of preventing them and putting into use the result of such researches.
 determining and enforcing speed limits for all categories of roads and vehicles.
 cooperating with bodies or agencies or groups engaged in road safety activities in the prevention of accidents on the highways.
The Act establishing the Federal Road Safety Commission also gives it the prerogative of making regulations in pursuance of any of the 4 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION functions assigned to it.
For effective discharge of its mandate, the commission has the power to:  Arrest any person suspected of committing or having committed an offence under the Act.
 Remove and detain, any vehicle which has been parked in a manner that causes an obstruction on a highway, provided that no vehicle shall be removed or detained where there is reasonable cause to believe that such action would cause damage to the vehicle but the owner or driver of the vehicle, shall pay a specified amount of money for every day or part thereof of such obstruction in addition to any other penalty which may have been prescribed under the Act  To endorse, after conviction, any driving license indicating the offence committed by its holder.
 To seize, when necessary, the driving license of any person suspected to have committed any offence under the Act and the documents or particulars in respect of vehicle by which the offence is suspected to have been committed.
 To impound a vehicle suspected to have been stolen where the driver of the vehicle fails to produce, on demand, and to the satisfaction of the members of the corps, the particulars of such vehicle.
 Tow away and park such impounded vehicles in the premises of Federal Road Safety Commission and promptly notify the police of the matter for further investigation.
 Implement highway regulations made by the Federal capital Territory, Abuja, in respect of the proof of ownership of a vehicle, the registration and licensing of the vehicles, the road worthiness of vehicles and such other matters pertaining to making the highways safe.
In carrying out its duties, the Federal Road Safety Commission also educates members of the public on the importance of discipline on the highway.
Pursuant to the need to make the highways safer for motorists and other road users, the commission recommends works and devices meant to eliminate or minimise accidents on the highways and advises the Federal Ministry of Works on the areas where such works and devices are required.
The Act establishing the FRSC also empowers it to design the driver’s license to be used by various categories of vehicle drivers and to determine requirements for eligibility.
The commission also designs vehicle plate identification numbers and as control the use of speed limiting devices and standardisation of highway traffic code.
5 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION As a matter of fact, the duty of making the roads safer includes the regulations of the use of siren, flashers and beacon lights on vehicles unless excused by law; e.g.
Ambulances when actually on rescue mission.
Specifically, according to David (1999) in the discharge of these enormous responsibilities, the FRSC can prosecute motorists who may have committed traffic offences.
Examples:  Obstructing the highways with a vehicle or any other object.
 Driving or riding any motor vehicle on the highways in excess of the prescribed speed limit.
 Failing to obey traffic lights, road signs or pavement marking; warning cones or reflective triangles or in the case of a breakdown, without reporting within reasonable time of the breakdown to the Federal Road Safety Commission so that necessary steps may be taken to effect the removal of the broken down vehicle from the highways.
 Being on road without light, signs or reflectors as required; contravention of the provisions of any orders, bye-laws, regulations or rates relating to either the route to be followed by vehicles generally or by vehicles of the class to which it belongs, or the roads which are to be used for traffic by such vehicles.
 Driving a motor vehicle recklessly or negligently or at a speed or a manner which is dangerous to the public.
 Driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle on a highway under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
 Operating a vehicle with a forged driving or insurance paper.
 Unauthorised removal of or tampering with road warning signs.
 Creating a road hazard without adequate warning signs.
 Removing a vehicle on which the sign DO NOT MOVE has been pasted by members of the corps or other duly authorises body.
 Failure to observe speed limit erected at road construction areas.
 In the case of slow moving vehicles, failure to move the extreme shoulder of the road where up to four vehicles are held up, unable to overtake.
 In the case of a vehicle carrying a load of gravel or other unstable material, failure to cover such material with tarpaulin or strong plastic.
 Failure to display number plates on vehicles.
 Loading a vehicle above the weight it is licensed to carry.
 In the case of construction companies, failure to provide adequate warning signs at construction areas by day or night.
 Driving a vehicle with a projecting load and without a red flag- warning attached to the end of the projecting load.
6 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  Driving a vehicle without a windscreen.
 Operating a commercial vehicle without a hackney permit.
The overall mission of the highway traffic administration is to make the roads safer and reduce accident rates.
Consequently, the FRSC engages in education/enlightenment, Persuasion, subtle force and full force.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Enumerate the functions of the Federal Road Safety Commission as provided in by statute.
4.0 CONCLUSION Government in every civilised society has the responsibility of protecting the lives and properties of the citizens.
The citizens on the other hand, have the responsibility of conforming to laid down rules and regulations that are meant to maintain sanity in the society.
As government puts in place motor and highway traffic administration, the citizens need to obey the rules and regulations provided by the administration.
Otherwise, the enforcement officers have to prosecute offenders in the court of law of competent jurisdiction.
5.0 SUMMARY You started this unit by briefly looking at the evolution of the transport system from ancient time to the modern.
Then you looked at the consumer’s right to safety and right to information as a basis for the establishment of motor traffic and highway traffic administration.
Finally, in this unit the primary mission and the other duties of Federal Road Safety Commission were examined.
In the next unit, you shall learn about the basic instruments a vehicle must possess.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How does consumer’s right to safety and to be informed apply to highway traffic administration?
2.
Explain any seven primary functions of the Federal Road Safety Commission as provided for in statute.
7 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adedeji, A.
(1989).
Foreword to a Compendium of Papers Presented at African Road Safety Congress.
David, M. A.
(1999).
F.R.S.C.and the Imperative of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria.
Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009.
8 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 VEHICLE CHECK-LISTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Items on the Check-list 3.2 Standard Approaches to Enforcement of Road Safety Regulations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt powers and duties of the Federal Road Safety Commission and justification for motor and highway traffic administration.
There are certain gadgets that are expected to be carried in every vehicle at all times to meet the requirements of the law (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008).
Such items include:  warning triangle,  fire extinguisher,  jack  spare tyre  first aid kit  wheel spanner  water,  Hydraulic  transmission fluid, torch light and  spare fan belt.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  mention items on a vehicle check-list  explain the need for the items on a vehicle check-list.
9 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Items on the Check-list A.
Warning Triangle Every vehicle must carry a pair of “Warning Triangle”.
The warning triangle also called C-caution is a reflector made of fibre glass.
A vehicle could suddenly break down along the road and other road users need to be warned that this is a stationary vehicle.
One warning triangle is placed in front of the vehicle and another behind it to warn other road users that there is a break down.
B.
Fire Extinguisher A vehicle is required to carry a Fire Extinguisher.
Often times, motorist experience avoidable fire accidents.
This may arise from damaged vehicles or other causes.
The situations can be saved with the use of fire extinguishers.
Basically, there are two types of fire extinguishers and each vehicle is required to carry at least one.
The two types of fire extinguisher are the dry powder and the liquid gas.
Each vehicle is expected to carry required number and sizes.
It should be noted, however, that a multiple purpose fire extinguisher is preferable.
The prescribed units and sizes are as follows: VEHICLE NO.
REQUIRED SIZE Articulated 2 units 9 kg Lorries 2 units 6 kg Luxury buses 2 units 6 kg Medium buses 1 unit 2 kg Light goods vans 1 unit 1 kg Taxis 1 unit 1 kg Cars 1 unit 1 kg C. First Aid Kit It is not uncommon to find a motorist or passengers in a vehicle getting injured during a journey.
This could happen where ready help cannot be obtained.
So, basic knowledge of First Aid is necessary for every driver and availability of a First Aid kit.
As prescribed in the Nigeria Highway Code (2008), a First Aid kit should contain the following items:  Pair of scissors  Safety pins  Iodine  Cotton wool 10 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  Handkerchiefs  Plaster/dressing for wounds  Splints  Bandage  Disposable gloves  Razor blades  Adhesive tapes  Aspirin /paracetamol/ panadol  Antibiotic ointment  Antiseptic  Petroleum jelly  Antibacterial soap  Latex gloves/facial masks D. Spare Tyre Every motorist must prepare for the unforeseen.
A tyre could get damaged by bad roads, get pierced and deflated by sharp objects like nails or leakages.
When this happens, a motorist could get stranded at odd times and places.
To avoid this, every vehicle must carry a spare tyre.
The air pressure in the spare tyre, just as in all tyres, should be at maximum stability and road-holding.
Under-inflated tyre can cause tyre burst and over-inflated tyre wear rapidly at the centre of thread.
This can cause damage to tyre casing.
E. Jack In the event of a deflated or flat tyre, a jack is needed to change the tyre.
So a jack is one of the gadgets that every vehicle must have.
The jack is to lift and suspend the vehicle to enable you change the tyre.
There are two types of jacks: the hydraulic and manual jack.
F. Wheel Spanner The Jack and wheel spanner go hand-in-hand.
While the jack lifts and suspends the vehicle, the wheel spanner is used to unscrew wheel knots and tighten them as the need arises.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List six items on the vehicle check-list which you expect to find in a vehicle.
11 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Standard Approaches to Enforcement of Road Safety Regulations The Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) Staff use public enlightenment and persuasion before proceeding to enforce regulations and punish offenders.
However, to enforce the various safety laws and regulations, they carry out highway patrol.
It should be noted that, when enforcing, the corps marshals operate on the legal maxim that “ignorance is not an excuse” (David, 1999).
Thus, it is not open to any erring driver to plead ‘I do not know’ or ‘I am ignorant’.
The patrols on the highways are focused on surveillance, rescue and enforcement.
According to David (1999), surveillance is carried out on the road also to identify pot holes or black sports and make recommendations to the appropriate government agency for rectification.
Then, of course, surveillance tends to check the excesses and corrupt practices of the commission’s personnel while on duty.
That is, policing the police man.
The rescue operations component refers to what the FRSC marshals do on duty when they arrive at an accident scene.
The accident victims with serious injuries are evacuated to the nearest hospital for medical attention while the ones with minor injuries are given First Aid.
For the enforcement aspect of the operations on the highway, the approaches vary in accordance with the nature of the traffic offence.
The penalties are clearly spelt out in the offence sheet which is given to the offender after being properly filled in by the road marshal.
The penalties in terms of fines are indicated on the offence sheet and they range from N2000 to N50, 000.
Usually a document (say, driver’s license) is seized from the offender until he/she pays the fine into the designated bank account before it is released.
However, they are some penalties for certain offences that are not stated but are determined by a court of law when the need arises.
This is for offences such as Mechanically Deficient Vehicle (MDV), Assaulting Marshal on Duty (AMD), Attempting to Corrupt Marshal (ATC), Other Violation/Offences (OVO), Reprobate Offender Alert Series (ROAS), etc.
For instance, MDV attracts a fine of N5, 000 while AMD attracts a fine of N10, 000.
To check the excesses of motorist, there are speed limits for all categories of vehicles and roads.
For instance, cars driving on built-up areas, the speed limit is 50 kilometres per hour (KM/H); 80 KM/H on highways; and 100 KM/H on expressways (see details in Module 3: unit 3).
It has been easier to enforce this on some properly registered 12 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION transport companies while the enforcement on the motoring public will come into effect as soon as the product is readily available.
To enforce the minimum vehicle safety standard, the National Vehicle Inspection Programme was introduced.
The FRSC regulates the National Vehicle Examination and Driver Testing Standard through the Department of Motor vehicle Administration in all the States of Nigeria including the Federal Capital Territory.
This Department is manned by Vehicle Inspection Officers (VIO).
So as a requirement to determine road worthiness, all categories of public and private motor vehicles as well as motor cycles are supposed to be subjected to technical inspection.
Vehicle inspection is now a regular and routine part of patrols and surveillance on highways and traffic systems in Nigeria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List three (3) approaches to enforcement of road safety regulations.
3.3 Contemporary Developments in Regulations and Enforcement David (1999) carefully chronicled contemporary developments in road safety in Nigeria.
Apart from rehabilitating bad roads and making flexible transport policies, other developments in regulations include the following: i.
Checking the influx of unroad-worthy vehicles into the country; ii.
Introducing integrated system management and implementation in urban areas to achieve effective traffic management, route selection and parking restrictions; iii.
Installation of traffic and direction signs in urban areas; and iv.
Establishing road accident prevention centres.
Furthermore, in 1995, a mutually benefiting and cordial relationship was established between the Vehicle Inspection Officers (VIO) and the Road Safety Management and Administration in the country through: i enforcement of the inspection of used and reconditioned vehicles imported into the country; ii.
harmonisation and standardisation of vehicle inspection methods to reduce the number and frequency of technically defective vehicles on the roads; iii.
strengthening of uniform licensing scheme which has resulted in the creation of a National Motor vehicle Data Bank; iv.
harmonisation of road traffic laws in the country; 13 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION v. massive public enlightenment through annual road safety campaign; vi.
establishing of State Motor Vehicle Administration (MVAD) under the Governor’s office; vii.
establishing of inter-agency cooperation involving FRSC, Nigeria Customs Service, Nigeria Police, Standard organisation of Nigeria and Vehicle Inspection Officers to enforce minimum safety standards in all categories of vehicles and motor-cycles, and viii.
enforcement of the use of crash helmet by motorcyclists, among others.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention five contemporary developments in traffic regulations.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have seen that for road safety to be achieved, the agencies charged with road safety administration have prescribed items that every vehicle should possess.
It is expected that if the agencies carry-out effective enforcement, cases of road accidents will be reduced and our roads will become safer.
Also, the standard approaches to enforcement of road safety regulations imply that there is a coordinated effort involving all relevant agencies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learned about the uses of the items on a vehicle check-list.
Safety regulations enforcers have to ensure that motorists have the complete items and in prescribed standards.
In the unit also, standard approaches to enforcement of road safety regulations were presented and discussed.
This was followed by the various aspects in which inter-agency cooperation can lead to effective road safety management and administration in Nigeria as well as contemporary developments in the sector.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention six items on a vehicle check-list and explain the need for each of them.
2.
List and discuss three standard approaches to enforcement of road safety regulations.
3.
Mention five aspects in which the cooperation between FRSC and VIO has led to effective road safety management and administration in Nigeria.
14 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David, M. A.
(1999).
FRSC and the Imperatives of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria.
Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
15 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 BASIC VEHICLE SAFETY CHECK CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Vehicle Safety Check 3.2 Special Focus on Tyre Check 3.3 Driving Requirement for a Tourist in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A vehicle needs and has basic safety check.
This is to ensure that at all times the vehicle is in good condition with a view to enhancing safety on the road.
The safety check, also known as “vehicle parade”, is in three stages.
Under normal circumstances, a motorist should carry out these checks on a daily basis.
However, many motorists have been known to neglect this thereby endangering themselves and other road users.
So road safety administration has to do something to enlighten the motoring public and enforce they check.
The basic vehicle safety check presented in this unit is contained in the Nigeria Highway Code (2008).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  carry out basic vehicle safety check  mention aspects of first, second and third vehicle parade  list seven driving requirements for a tourist in Nigeria  explain at least two things that should be checked on tyres.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Vehicle Safety Check The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) has provided for basic vehicle safety check, also known as vehicle parade, which must be conducted on a daily basis.
The purpose is to ensure that the vehicle is in good condition and by extension, to reduce the risk of break-down or accident on the road.
The vehicle parade is in three stages as follows: 16 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION First “Parade” This basically has to be conducted by the vehicle owner or driver before the vehicle is used daily.
The check will entail the acronym “WOFT”.
WOFT W = Water - check water level in the radiator O = Oil - check the whether the engine oil level is below or above gauge level using dip stick.
F = Fan belt - check fan belt for tension and cuts T = Tyre - check all tyres for cuts, punctures, depth of thread, pressure, alignment symptoms and wheel nuts.
Second “Parade” This should first be conducted by the vehicle owner or driver, then by agencies of road traffic safety.
Aspects of the check include: Lighting System Check head lamps, break lights, side lamps, traficators (signal indicators) and reverse lights.
Brakes and Clutches  Check the hydraulic level  Check the effectiveness of the brakes by doing the following: start the vehicle, drive off a little and step on the brake pedal to test the effectiveness.
 Check the tightness and effectiveness of the breaks and clutches.
 Engage all the gears, one at a time, while pressing down the clutch pedal (National Road Traffic Regulation, 2004).
Wipers  Ensure that the wind-screen wipers are functional.
 Check the wiper blades for effectiveness.
(National Road Traffic Regulation, 2004).
Steering Mechanism  Check level of Automatic Transmission Fluid (ATF), for power steering only.
 Check for clearance or “free play”.
(National road Traffic Regulation, 2004) 17 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Horns  Ensure that horns are in good working condition.
 Horns should be the appropriate ones for the vehicle type.
(National road Traffic Regulation, 2004) Spare Tyre  Check the spare tyre for cut, puncture, thread depth and pressure  Ensure that the jack, jack handles and wheel spanners are in the vehicle.
(National road Traffic Regulation, 2004) Reflective Triangle In case of a break-down, the reflective triangles are used to warn other road users.
So, ensure that a pair of reflective triangle is in the vehicle.
Fire Extinguisher Ensure that the vehicle has the correct type and size of fire extinguisher.
A multipurpose fire extinguisher is preferable.
Battery This should be conducted basically by vehicle owner or driver by checking level of electrolyte (battery liquid) and condition of battery terminals.
Third “Parade” This should be conducted by the vehicle owner or driver.
At the end of the day’s activities:  Check all items in the first and second parade.
 Record appropriately in the log book.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 How should one carry-out the first, second and third vehicle “parade”?
3.2 Special Focus on Tyre Check David (1999) avers that the causes of most traffic accidents in Africa range from environmental, mechanical, to human factors.
Among the mechanical factors are motor vehicle accidents that are attributable to 18 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION tyres (Hananiya, 1996).
The type of tyres a motorist has and the way they are made are critical factors for good traction, mileage and safety.
Hence highway traffic administration has a duty to ensure that tyres meet prescribed safety standards and also educate the motoring public on tyre conditions.
As presented in Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, the vehicle owner has to replace tyres when the thread is less than 1.5 millimeters deep or when thread wear indicators touch the road.
Vehicles that weigh more than 4,500 kilograms must replace their front tyres when thread is less than three millimeters deep.
Also, any tyre that has bumps, bulges, knots, exposed cords or tread and sidewall cuts deep enough to expose cords, has to be replaced.
On tyre size, any tyre on a vehicle must not be smaller than the vehicle manufacturer’s specified minimum size.
In the same vein, a tyre must not be so large that it touches the vehicle or affects its safe operation.
A vehicle has to use similar tyres on all four wheels.
In some countries, some combinations are illegal, such as having radial-ply tyres on the front and bias-ply or belted bias-ply on the rear; a mix of 50 or 60 series tyres on the front with any other mixture on the rear; and a combination of types or sizes on the same axle unless the types and sizes are equivalent by industry standards.
This does not apply to a single spare tyre used in an emergency only that the pressure of the spare tyre should be the same as the pressure of the tyre with the highest pressure.
In additions, it should be noted that some tyres have inscriptions indicating that their use is restricted.
Examples are tyres with the wording “not for highway use”, “farm use only”, “competition circuit only”, “NHS”, “TG”, “SL” or any other such words which suggest the tyre is not for use on the road.
Such tyres should not be used on vehicle for travels on roads.
In the temperate regions, snow tyres or all-weather tyres may be used because they give the best traction for vehicles.
Research has shown that studded tyres are more effective than other tyres under icy conditions, particularly on wet ice.
Thus those who live in Northern Ontario or Canada, can legally use studded tyres on their vehicles.
In all, winter tyres perform better than conventional all season tyres under all winter-time conditions.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 When should a vehicle tyre be replaced?
19 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Driving Requirements for a Tourist in Nigeria A tourist is a traveler who is visiting a place for pleasure.
Experience has shown that due to many factors, a tourist may constitute a hazard on the road.
It is imperative, therefore that some guide-lines be put in place for tourists in order to minimise or eliminate the chances of an accident occurring.
The traffic requirements for a tourist are as follows; the tourist should:  Be familiar with the Nigerian road network.
 Show evidence of being permitted to import a vehicle temporarily (if applicable) into Nigeria.
Such vehicle carries the number plate of its country of origin.
 Ensure that the vehicle is road worthy and has the following: Vehicle License Vehicle inspection tag Proof of ownership certificate Road worthiness certificate Road validity tag National vehicle identification Any other relevant vehicle documents  Ensure that such a vehicle carries the number plate of the country of its origin affixed at the appropriate spaces at the front and rear of the vehicle.
 Ensure that within 90 days of stay in Nigeria, the vehicle number plate is changed to Nigerian number plate.
 Ensure that both the international driving license of his/her country are available.
 Seek and obtain permit to drive in Nigeria within 15 days of arrival.
 Drive carefully and obey all rules and regulations.
 Seek and obtain the appropriate Nigerian National Driver’s License for the category of the vehicle being used within 30 days of stay.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention the driving requirements that are there for a tourist in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is said that “a stitch in time saves nine”.
Strict observance of basic vehicle safety check can forestall the break-down of vehicles and road accidents.
Since motorists tend to undermine the importance of this check, road safety administrations have a responsibility to check 20 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION offenders accordingly.
The observance of the rules on vehicle safety as well as other rules and regulations on motor traffic, apply to tourists.
In the light of the dictum that says “ignorance is not an excuse before the law”.
Public enlightenment becomes a sine qua none.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learned the basic vehicle safety check with focus on the aspects of the three stages of safety check known as first, second and third vehicle “parade”.
In addition, since research has shown that many road traffic crashes are linked to defective tyres, special focus was placed on tyres.
The unit also included the driving requirement for a tourist in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by the term “first, second and third vehicle “parade”?
2.
When should a tyre be changed and what is the safety rule on tyre size?
3.
Mention nine driving requirements for a tourist in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David, M. A.
(1999).
F.R.S.C and the Imperatives of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Hananiya, H. A.
(1996).
An address delivered at the occasion of the Third Edition of the ECOWAS Road Safety Campaign, December 10, Abuja, Nigeria.
Wikipedia, The free Encyclopedia.
Retrieved, 23/01/2010 21 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 THE PROCESS OF VEHICLE REGISTRATION AND INSURANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Registration Requirements 3.2 Various Identification Marks 3.3 Types of Vehicle Insurance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every vehicle and motorcycle that plies the road in Nigeria is required to be registered after purchase.
The purpose of registration is for easy identification and the need for vehicle data bank.
The registration itself is not an event but a process.
The process involves registration requirements and vehicle identification marks.
These are addressed in this unit as well as the various types of insurance policies available for vehicle owners.
The contents of this unit are adapted from the Niger Highway Code (2008).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  list the requirements for vehicle registration  differentiate between number plates  mention other identification particulars and their purposes  list and explain the scope of three insurance policies.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Registration Requirements For a vehicle to be registered at the licensing office, the owner has to carry out the following:  Obtain and complete form MVAOI or other appropriate form.
 Pay the prescribed fee.
 Submit certificate of payment or exemption from import duty by Customs and Excise.
22 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  Obtain valid insurance certificate  Obtain road worthiness certificate.
 Obtain and complete vehicle Verification Form from the Nigeria police.
3.2 Vehicle Identification Marks A.
Number Plate Number plate is a vehicle identification mark.
It is made to be reflective to improve safety at night.
The number plate has a colour code, which is used to distinguish the various categories of vehicles.
That is, commercial, temporary, private, diplomatic, government and armed forces/paramilitary categories.
The number plate also has security water marks used to deter forgery.
The first two and the last three characters in the number plate are alphabets while in the middle there are three numerals.
The number plate is alpha-numeric.
The last three alphabets represent the local government of the licensing office where the vehicle is registered.
The table below shows additional details of the various types of the number plates: TYPE BACKGROUND LETTERING Temporary Black White Private White Blue Commercial White Red Government White Green Armed White Black Forces/Paramilitary Diplomatic Red/Blue White B.
Temporary Number Plate This is obtained whenever the original number plate is lost.
The procedure for obtaining it is as follows:  The vehicle owner has to apply to the licensing authority with a sworn Affidavit and a police report.
 The vehicle owner may in the course of processing the number plate, write the number on a black background with white lettering, as an interim measure.
 Have as evidence (it could be official receipt) that a new number plate is being processed.
23 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION C. Vehicle Identification Tag This could be referred to as the third number plate and it has the same alpha-numeric.
It is an added security device to prevent illegal transfer of number plate.
It is affixed to the rear windscreen and it crumbles at any attempt to remove it.
D. Proof of Ownership Proof of ownership is a certificate designed to provide ultimate proof of ownership of a vehicle.
This certificate is filled with the information provided in Form MVA OI used in vehicle registration.
So in case of any doubt, the proof of ownership is produced and when there is transfer of ownership of the vehicle, the new owner obtains a new proof of ownership.
E. Vehicle License The vehicle license shows that the appropriate road tax has been paid.
It is pre-formatted in categories to reflect whether it is a truck, car, bus, etc.
it carries the description of the vehicle in terms of colour, engine and chassis number.
F. Road Worthiness Certificate It is necessary for Vehicle Inspection Officers (VIO) to carry-out regular inspection of vehicles to ascertain their road worthiness.
After inspection and the vehicle is found fit, the VIO issues a certificate of road worthiness which is supposed to be affixed to the certified vehicle.
The certificate is valid for a year and the process continues.
It should be noted that a vehicle that passes road worthiness test is supposed to also be issued a validity tag, which is pasted on the screen of the vehicle to save time during road check.
G. Special Number Plate Some number plates are referred to as special number plates.
Some people call them customised number plates because they are made and designed to fit the specification of the vehicle owner.
The person who wants a special number plate has to:  obtain and complete Form MVAOI  pay prescribed fee.
 obtain vehicle registration book.
 obtain current certificate of insurance.
 obtain road worthiness certificate.
24 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Types of Vehicle Insurance Insurance is an arrangement by which a company gives customers financial protection against loss or harm in return for payment of premium.
There are companies that provide insurance coverage for persons, properties, companies, etc in the event of loss or damage.
According to Aderinto, Akande, Anyanwuocha and Sani (1999:103): An insurance company is a financial institution, whose primary function is to receive premiums and enter into contract with individuals and organisations (the insured) with the purpose of indemnifying (pay compensation to) the insured if they suffer certain losses in future.
Microsoft Encarta Premium 2009 states that automobile insurance protects against damage to a policy holder’s car and most liabilities that could arise from operating that car.
In the United States (U.S) most states allow drivers to satisfy their financial responsibility for the cost of auto accidents by obtaining insurance in three categories of liability coverage: (1) for injury to any one person (2) for injury to two or more people (3) for damage to another person’s property.
Most U.S States require that drivers who purchase auto insurance buy no less than a specified minimum of coverage, such as $25,000 toward the injury of another individual, $50,000 toward the injury of multiple persons, and $10,000 toward the damage of another person’s property.
In Nigeria, the Road Traffic Act has not specified details in terms of amount of money to be insured towards the injury of another individual or damage of another person’s property.
Rather, under the list of documents that a driver of a vehicle should carry, the Road Traffic Act provided that a police officer may inspect: A.
Private motor vehicle: i.
Motor vehicle licence ii.
Driver’s driving licence iii.
Certificate of insurance B.
Commercial Motor Vehicle/Hackney Carriage: i.
Motor vehicle licence ii.
Driver’s driving licence iii.
Certificate of insurance iv.
Certificate of Road worthiness v. Hackney carriage licence 25 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Note: Motorcycles and similar motor vehicles are grouped under private vehicle.
The Act also provides in Chapter 548, Part v that, where a motor vehicle is found plying or being driven or used on any highway without the necessary particulars, a police officer may impound the vehicle and cause the vehicle to be removed to a removed vehicle park until the owner produces the necessary particulars or pays the appropriate charges in the event of no particulars.
However, this law has not been effective because of the ambiguity in it and ignorance of most law enforcement officers of the provisions.
Vehicle insurance policies assume the risk of financial loss arising from liability for bodily injury or property damage to third party caused by motor accidents.
In Nigeria there is a regulation that makes it compulsory for vehicle owners to obtain vehicle liability insurance policies before they can register their cars.
This is to assure that innocent victims of motor accidents will be compensated for personal injury and property damage.
One of the functions of an insurance company is pooling of risks.
The insured pay premiums which are pooled into a fund.
Compensations are paid to those who suffer losses from the fund.
Obviously, it is necessary for vehicle and motorcycle owners to insure their properties.
However, experience has shown that people tend to undermine the need for an insurance policy and neglect it.
Then in the event of a loss or damage to the vehicle or motorcycle that individual and by extension the nation suffer heavy economic losses.
So to avoid this, there is a regulation that requires every vehicle or motorcycle to be insured.
The following are the vehicle insurance policies available for motorists in Nigeria: (i) Third Party Motor Insurance: This policy covers damages to third parties arising from auto crashes.
With this policy, only the third party is indemnified in case of accident or any other damage.
(ii) Fire and Theft Insurance: With this Policy, the insured is indemnified against risks associated with damage to vehicle through fire and/or theft.
However, third party liability is not covered.
(iii) Comprehensive Insurance: This is perhaps the best vehicle insurance policy because it is omnibus.
It covers risks such as damage to the vehicle in the event of an accident, third party liability, fire, theft and in some cases, diminution in value of the vehicle.
This policy also covers non-accident damage, such as windscreen cracks caused by rocks.
26 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List three vehicle insurance policies that you have leant about.
4.0 CONCLUSION For a vehicle to be registered, there are requirements which must be met.
These requirements are to enact necessary information about the vehicle owner and the vehicle itself.
Such information is stored in the vehicle data bank.
Further, when a vehicle is properly registered it is assigned an identification mark that will establish the uniqueness of each vehicle as well as ownership.
These precautions would not be enough in the event that the vehicle is damaged, stolen or crashes and the occupants are injured.
That is where insurance policies come in to indemnify the insured in case of accident or loss.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dwelt on the six requirements for vehicle registration as well as various vehicle identification marks which include number plate, vehicle identification tag, proof of ownership, vehicle license and road worthiness certificate.
The unit was concluded by taking a look at the need for vehicle insurance and the three insurance policies available in Nigeria for vehicle owners.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Out-line six vehicle registration requirements.
2.
List five vehicle identification marks and explain their purposes.
3.
Mention three vehicle insurance policies and say why vehicle owners need each of them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aderinto, A.
A.
& et al.
(1999).
Exam Focus Economics for WASCE & SSCE.
Ibadan: University Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(1949).
Chapter 548.
Road Traffic Act.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009.
27 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 2 ROAD SAFETY ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Definition of Road Safety, Its Administration and Management Unit 2 Dimensions of Road Safety Administration and Management in Nigeria Unit 3 The Traffic Function Unit 4 The Patrol Function UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF ROAD SAFETY, ITS ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Clarification of the Concept of Safety Administration 3.2 History of Highway Traffic Safety Administration 3.3 Overview of Road Safety Management and Administration in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Problems and prospects always guide the formulation of public policy.
In bringing about a policy to set up agencies for road safety administration and management, government starts by looking at the problems then the prospects of such a policy.
In this context, the magnitude of road accidents with attendant heavy loss of lives and property led to the establishment of agencies of road safety administration and management with the prospects of having safer roads.
This unit will attempt to clarify what safety administration means, trace the history of highway traffic administration, and then look at road safety management and administration in Nigeria.
28 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define safety administration  trace the history of highway traffic safety administration  give an account of road safety administration and management in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Clarification of the Concept “Safety Administration” The Encyclopedia Americana (1978) defines safety as the condition of being free from the danger of harm.
It also added that as a legal concept, safety implies a state of relative security from accidental injury or death due to measures designed to guard against accidents.
There are laws made to encourage the maintenance of safety standards and they are often called safety laws.
With regards to road safety, Grolier Encyclopedia of Knowledge (2000) asserts that: Automotive safety is concerned with reducing the number of traffic accidents and lessening the severity of injuries when accidents do occur.
Areas of safety activity include the design of Road Highways, adjustments in laws pertaining to traffic and vehicles, systems of traffic control, programmes of driver education, and vehicle design.
The inclusion of vehicle design in the activities of automotive safety is very important because vehicle design has gradually improved automotive safety.
Though accident rate is still high, it is because of higher speeds and heavier vehicular traffic.
In 1966 the U.S congress passed a law that permitted the federal government to issue mandatory safety standards for cars, trucks, motorcycles, and other vehicles.
Since then, more than 50 safety standards have been imposed, regulating such items as safety windshields, brakes, tyres, and seat belts.
The result has been a reduction in traffic accidents and severity (Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009).
All of the activities described by the Grolier Encyclopedia of Knowledge constitute safety administration.
There are agencies at the federal, state and local government levels charged with the responsibility of safety administration.
29 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is automotive (traffic) safety concerned with?
3.2 History of Highway Traffic Safety Administration As reported in Microsoft Encarta Premium (2009), the history of highway traffic safety administration is traceable to 1940.
In 1940 the U.S.A implemented automobile design legislation, concerning sealed beam headlamps, which had recently been invented and were an important safety advance at that time.
This regulation was virtually unchanged for about 40 years and it set a pattern of using auto safety design legislation to stop innovation at a point in time.
Developments continued in highway traffic safety administration in some other countries.
Then in 1958, the U.N established the World Forum for Harmonisation of vehicle Regulations, which began to promulgate what would eventually become U.N’s Economic Commission for Europe or ECE Regulation on vehicle design, construction, and safety performance.
The U.S.A declined to join the forum or adopt its (or any other) vehicle safety regulations at that time.
However, vehicles that met ECE safety standards were legal import into the U.S.A.
The American public was not happy with this attitude.
So in 1965 and 1966, public pressure grew in the U.S to increase safety of cars.
This pressure culminated in the publishing of “Unsafe at Any Speed” by an activist lawyer, Ralph Nader and the National Academy of Sciences’ “Accident Death and Disease of modern society”.
In response to the public pressure, in 1966, the U.S congress held a series of highly publicised hearings regarding highway safety, passed legislation to make installation of seat belts mandatory, and enacted public law 89-563, public law 89-564, and public law 89-670 which created the U.S Department of Transportation on October 15, 1966.
These legislations created several allied agencies which eventually became the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), including the National Traffic Safety Agency, the National Highway Safety Agency, and the National Highway Safety Bureau.
As soon as the federal motor vehicle safety standards came into effect, vehicles meeting the ECE safety standards but not the U.S standards ceased to be legal import into the United States.
Though the legislation was in 1966, the NHTSA was officially established in 1970 by the Highway Safety Act of 1970.
In 1972, the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act expanded NHTSA’s 30 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION scope to include consumer information programmes.
The result was that automobiles became safer; the number of deaths on American Highways hovered around 40,000 annually, a lower death rate per mile traveled than in the 1960s (Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009).
More effort and innovations are still being introduced to ensure highway traffic safety.
In the U.S, NHTSA has presented a proposal to Mandate Electronic Stability Control on all passenger vehicles by the 2012 model year.
This technology had earlier been brought to public attention in 1997, with the Swedish moose test.
This is expected to make automobiles safer.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In which year would you say Highway Traffic Safety Administration started formally?
3.3 Overview of Road Safety Administration and Management in Nigeria Political independence brought about dramatic changes in income and life-style.
As a consequence, the volume of vehicular traffic increased with attendant increase in accidents.
It then became necessary for government to do something to improve safety on the road.
So in 1972, the federal government came out with the Nigeria High-way Code.
Government’s concern stemmed from the heavy losses resulting from traffic accidents.
In fact, Frobose (1989) asserts that: In the developing countries with high death rates, however, Accident research and road safety hardly seem to be relevant matters.
But since the end of the seventies the awareness of insufficient road safety and of high economic costs of traffic accidents have been increasing also in these countries.
This is noticeable from the fact that the developing countries ask the industrialised countries in increasing manner to assist them in measures for the improvement of road traffic safety.
David (1999), reports that traffic laws and regulations in the country were inherited from the colonial administration as a means of facilitating the safety and security of motorists and the general public on the road.
The first traffic law in Nigeria was the 1920 Road Traffic Ordinance of Lagos colony and Southern Protectorate which regulated the operations of vehicles until the country was demarcated into northern, western and eastern regions.
Then each region promulgated its own Traffic Regulations.
31 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Vehicle inspection was undertaken by the directorate of works while motor licensing was supervised by the motor licensing officer.
But when the work force of the Directorate of Works was depleted due to drafting for the 2nd World War, the Inspector General of Police was mandated to undertake the responsibilities of vehicle inspection as well as motor licensing until 1964.
Since the independence constitution of the country conferred powers on the Regional Governments to create their own Traffic Laws, the Northern Regional Government created its traffic regulation, assigning responsibilities of vehicle inspection to the Minister of Works with their own Central Motor Registry.
As the political structure of the country changed from regions to states, the states inherited traffic laws and regulations from the parent regions or states with some modifications.
So the country operated various traffic laws.
This led to conflicting standards in road traffic safety administration and management.
The result was ever increasing accident rates.
The need to harmonise safety standards and enforcement procedures became apparent.
So the Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) was created by Decree 45 of 1988 and it initiated programmes towards standardisation and harmonisation of traffic regulations in the country.
Today the country has the “Nigeria Highway Code”.
Nigeria now has the following schemes for road safety administration and management:  National Driver’s license scheme  National Vehicle license scheme  National Vehicle identification scheme  National Standard vehicle inspection scheme In the execution of the duty of road safety administration and management, there is inter-agency collaboration between the Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria Customs Service, Nigeria Police, Standard Organisation of Nigeria, Vehicle Inspection officers, etc.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Enumerate the schemes Nigeria presently has for road safety administration and management.
4.0 CONCLUSION From the various legislations and agencies for safety administration, you should expect safer roads and drastic reduction in road traffic accidents.
A cursory observation reveals that what obtains presently is national safety standards which vary from country to country because of 32 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION peculiarities of different countries.
However, it is hoped that very soon, a uniform world standard will emerge in road safety administration and management.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you defined safety administration which implies a state of relative security from accidental injury or death and measures designed to guard against accidents.
The historical development of highways traffic safety administration was discussed as well as an overview of road safety administration and management in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define the concept “safety administration” as it relates to highway traffic safety.
ii.
How did highway traffic safety administration come to be?
iii.
Give a brief account of road safety administration and management in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ababa, Ethiopia, 16th – 20th October.
David, M. A.
(1999).
F.R.S.C.
and the Imperatives of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
Encyclopedia Americana.
(1978).
International Edition.
Connecticut: Americana Corporation.
Frobose, H. J.
(1989).
Models for Self-Financing of Road Safety Work in Developing Countries.
Paper presented at the 2nd African Road Safety Congress, Addis.
Grolier Encyclopedia of Knowledge.
2000.
Vol.16.
U.S.A: Grolier Incorporated.
Microsoft Encarta Premium, 2009.
33 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 DIMENSIONS OF ROAD SAFETY ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Department of Transportation: The American Model 3.2 Importation and Safety Standards 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 60 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The operations of road safety administration and management are multi- dimensional.
However, the various components have to work together in a coordinated manner for effective service delivery.
Further, in every country of the world, there are laws establishing and regulating the various agencies involved in road safety administration and management.
These laws also clearly spell out the roles of each of the agencies.
In this unit, we will focus on the United States of America’s model of Department of Transportation and Importation and safety standards, and under take some comparative analysis.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  list 10 major divisions in the U.S department of transportation and their functions  explain the guidelines for importation of vehicles and safety standards.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Department of Transportation: The American Model In the Department of Transportation, an executive department of the U.S Federal government was created by law in October 1966 and officially established in April 1967.
It was a combination of transportation agencies or functions formerly dispersed among government 34 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION functionaries.
The purpose of the department is to promote and develop rapid, safe, efficient, and convenient transportation system in the United States.
It is administered by a Secretary (Minister) appointed by the President of the United States and approved by the United States Senate.
The department has ten major divisions namely:  The Federal Aviation Administration which regulates air traffic and commerce in the United States.
 The Federal Highway Administration which is responsible for highway construction, administration, and safety.
 The Federal Railroad Administration exists to consolidate government support of rail transportation activities, advise the secretary on matters relating to rail transportation, and administer the federally owned Alaska Railroad.
 The saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corp.
This oversees activities relating to the St. Lawrence Seaway.
 The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is assigned responsibilities to determine the causes of motor- vehicle accidents and make recommendations to promote highway safety.
 The Federal Transit Administration assists in the planning and development of improved mass transportation facilities, and equipment.
 The Maritime Administration which carries out programmes to aid in the development and operation of the U.S. merchant marine.
 The Research and Special Programmes Administration is responsible for rules governing pipeline safety and the safe transportation of hazardous materials, and it also conducts transportation research.
 The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration works to prevent accidents related to commercial motor vehicles, such as trucks and buses.
 The Bureau of Transportation statistics compiles and analyzes information about the nation’s transportation system.
(Adapted from Microsoft Encarta 2009).
In the Nigerian situation, the federal ministry of transport is divided into major divisions such as:  Nigerian civil aviation agency responsible for governing air transportation.
 Nigerian maritime authority which carries out programmes to aid in the development and operation of merchant marine activities.
35 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  Nigerian Railway Corporation which oversees rail transport activities.
 Federal Road Maintenance Agency (FERMA) which is responsible for the maintenance of federal roads.
 Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) which carries out activities to promote highway safety.
For effectiveness, the FRSC has the following directorates: i.
Directorate of Administration and Finance.
ii.
Directorate of Operations.
iii.
Directorate of Motor Vehicle Administration.
iv.
Directorate of Planning, Research and Statistics.
v. Directorate of Training.
vi.
Directorate of Logistics and Supply.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss major divisions and responsibilities in the U.S Department of Transportation?
3.2 Importation and Safety Standards The United States blocks the importation of vehicles other than those built in conformity with the U.S safety Regulation.
This denies consumers in America of certain vehicle models.
This gave rise to a grey market in the late 1970s; thus providing an alternatve method of acquiring vehicles only sold overseas.
The success of the grey market adversely affected the motor industry especially the business of Mercedes – Benz of North America Inc.
The reaction was to launch a successful congressional lobbying effort aimed at eliminating alternative channels for consumers.
Nonetheless, there was no evidence suggesting that grey- market vehicles were less safe than those built to comply with U.S. regulations.
But the ban on importation of foreign vehicles into the United States as a personal import subsists with few exceptions, Primarily Canadian cars with safety regulations substantially similar to the United States, and vehicles imported temporarily for display or research purposes.
In practice the grey market involved a few thousand luxury cars annually, faced virtual elimination in 1988.
In 1988, NHTSA exempted vehicles older than 25 years from the rules it administers, since they are presumed to be collector vehicles.
However, the ban on new vehicles considered safe in countries with lower vehicle- related death rates has led some to claim that the main effect of NHTSA’s regulatory activity is to protect the U.S market for a modified oligopoly consisting of three U.S–based automakers and the American 36 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION operations of foreign brand producers.
It has been suggested that the impetus for NHTSA’s seeming preoccupation with market control rather than vehicular safety performance is a result of overt market protections such as tariffs and local-content laws having become politically unpopular due to the increasing popularity of free trade.
This has driven U. S. industry to adopt less visible forms of trade restrictions in form of technical regulations different but demonstrably not superior to those outside the United States (Wikipedia, 2010) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How correct is the assertion that NHTSA was preoccupied with vehicle market control rather than vehicular safety?
4.0 CONCLUSION The U.S department of transportation is the Nigerian equivalent of ministry of transport.
As it can be seen from the American model, the department is divided into some major divisions for ease of administration and effectiveness in service delivery.
Of the various functions of the department, the one on importation and safety standards is worthy of emulation to check the influx of vehicles without safety gadgets into any country.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you looked at the administrative structure of the American department of transportation and saw that it is divided into ten major divisions.
You also examined the aspect of importation of vehicles and safety standards.
Here it was noted that the regulations took into consideration market protection and safety of persons and properties, typifying their interrelatedness.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain briefly the functions of any five major divisions of the U.S department of transportation.
2.
What are the guidelines for importation and safety standards for vehicles in the United States of America and Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Microsoft Corporation (2009).
Encarta premium.
Wikipidia, the Free Encycolpedia (2010) 37 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 THE TRAFFIC AND PATROL FUNCTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of a Patrol Officer 3.2 Functions of a Traffic Officer 3.3 Inter-Sectoral Cooperation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Patrol and traffic functions are among the most important duties of the police and other related agencies.
The idea of uniformed officers patrolling the streets goes back at least to the Roman States in 400 B.C (Inciardi, 2007).
This unit begins with a discussion of the various functions of a patrol officer, the structure and management of patrol and the types of patrol most frequently used.
You will also learn an important subset of patrol.which is the functions of traffic officer, including the responsibility of enforcing traffic laws against offences and inter-sectoral cooperation among related agencies in road safety administration and management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  mention the basic functions of a patrol officer  list the major responsibilities of a traffic officer  describe how relevant agencies in the sector can cooperate.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Functions of a Patrol Officer Patrol is one way of providing continuous police service and high- visibility law enforcement with the intent to prevent crimes and maintain law and order.
In addition, the patrol officer is expected to partner with the community to solve problems related to crime and disorder.
So the patrol officer needs to understand federal and state laws and local 38 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION government by-laws which they are sworn to uphold and use good judgment in enforcing them (Inciardi, 2007).
In modern times, human society has become more diverse particularly with the advent of information technology.
The result is that the patrol functions of the police have become increasingly complex.
Patrol officers’ specific responsibilities, according to Inciardi (2007), in most police departments are to enforce laws, investigate crimes, prevent criminal activities and provide day-to-day police service to the community.
Since patrol officers are protectors, they promote and preserve law and order, respond to requests for services and try to resolve conflicts between individuals and groups.
Also as law enforcers, patrol officers have a key duty of safe guarding constitutional guarantees and enforcing federal, state and local statutes.
So they not only encourage voluntary compliance with the law but also seek to reduce the opportunity for crimes to be committed.
The management of patrol involves overseeing three major spheres of activity, which often occur simultaneously.
These activities are:  responding to emergencies and call for service;  undertaking activities to apprehend perpetrators of crime; and  engaging in strategic problem-solving partnerships with the community to address long-standing or emerging problems of crimes and disorder.
Partnering with the community to solve crimes and disorder problems is reflective of Peel’s principles that the people are the police and the police are the people and an emphasis on crime prevention.
Partnering with the community is so important that Sweeney (2003a, P.106) noted that “more than any other feature, it is the emphasis on systematic problems solving with the community that differentiates the modern patrol from earlier forms of policing”.
Patrols are of different types.
The best known are:  general patrol  random/preventive patrol  directed patrol SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention four specific functions (responsibilities) of a patrol officer are.
39 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Functions of a Traffic Officer Traffic law enforcement provides the most frequent contact between the police and the public.
Inciardi (2007, P.199) has reported that in the United States the regulation of traffic and enforcement of related laws have existed for over a century.
He went further to mention that in 1901 Connecticut established the world’s first speed statute limiting horseless carriage speed to 12 m/ph in cities and 15 m/ph in rural areas.
The principal objectives of the traffic division are to obtain, through voluntary citizen compliance, the smoothest possible movement of vehicles and pedestrians in line with safety and to reduce or eliminate losses from crashes.
Due to the fact that officers are on the streets much of the time, they are often the first to know of problems in the transportation system and as such can provide information as well as advice on overall system planning.
Thus it can be subsumed that the functions of a traffic officer are to enforce traffic law, direct and control traffic, provide directions and assistance to motorists, investigate motor vehicle crashes, provide emergency assistance at the scene of crash, gather information related to traffic and write reports (Inciardi, 2007).
Enforcing Traffic Laws In the performance of their duties, traffic officers seek the compliance of motorists and pedestrians with traffic laws and ordinances, as well as the regulation on driver’s license, and may issue warnings and citations to violators.
According to Rao (2003, P. 223) “traffic law should be enforced at a substantial level.
The quantity and visibility of enforcement should be sufficient to deter drivers from committing offenses.
The approach to enforcement is as important as the visibility of enforcement.
Selective enforcement (the recommended approach) targets specific high-accident areas and accident-causing violations”.
Selective Traffic Enforcement Traffic violations are a daily occurrence and police departments/other relevant agencies cannot enforce all traffic regulations at all times.
It may be possible to achieve 100% enforcement; and it may be advisable to always try to do so.
Thorough investigations of crashes, summarisation and careful analysis of the records have shown that selective enforcement is very effective and it targets specific crashes and/or high-crash areas, such as excessive speed around a school yard or playground where children are present.
As Rao (2003, P.226) explains, “Selective Traffic Law Enforcement is part of a planned allocation of police personnel and equipment and is guided by a study of the kinds of violators and road conditions that contribute to collisions”.
Since this is 40 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION the case, accurate records are essential to the overall effectiveness of the selective enforcement programme.
There is logic in selective enforcement and it is also practical because most police departments have limited workforce and so they have to be deployed to check violations that contribute the most to crashes.
Research has shown a definite relationship between crashes and enforcement.
Analyses of crash reports have shown at top of the list year after year the same traffic violations contributing to crashes and the same group of drivers being involved.
The most common violations of traffic laws have been observed to be speeding, red light running, non-use of seatbelts, aggressive driving and road rage, and driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol (Inciadi, 2007).
Some of these will be discussed.
Unfortunately, there is a dearth of documented information on these violations in Nigeria.
For instance, the FRSC has no data on speeding offences because of lack of radar gun to keep track of speed rates.
In addition, motorists can hardly be charged with driving under the influence of alcohol because of lack of alcoholisers to measure blood alcohol level of an offending driver.
The lesson, however, is that Nigeria needs to borrow a leaf from America and begin to compile and make public statistics on traffic offences.
Speeding Almost every motorist indulges in speeding one time or the other.
That is why speeding has become an increasing problem for law enforcement especially so because there are more vehicles on the road and people seemed to be more in a hurry than ever before.
To check the problem of over-speeding drivers, some agencies are using portable Speed Monitoring Awareness Radar Trailers (SMARTs) parked alongside the road.
These trailers clock and digitally display motorists’ speeds beneath a posted speed-limit sign in an effort to gain voluntary compliance with speed laws and reduce crashes.
A problem related to speeding is red light running.
Red Light Running Red light running refers to the disobedience of traffic lights, that is when one crosses an inter-section or road junction when the red (stop) light is on.
Bolton (2002, P.114) notes that “red light running is the leading cause of urban crashes in the United States”.
Also, Helmick (2003, P.48) reported that “red light running is currently one of the most frequent and least punished traffic offenses.
Red light running was observed as frequently as once every five minutes in one intersection recently studied”.
41 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION One of the reasons for red light running is that many people are often in a hurry and may not want to wait for a minute at traffic light.
The other reason is that if a motorist is driving at a speed that is above regulated speed limit, it becomes difficult to stop for red lights.
In the USA, the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety’s Highway Loss Data Institute estimates more than 800 people die each year in crashes that involve red light running, and more than 200,000 are injured in such crashes (Highway Loss Data Institute).
In some cities, red light cameras are installed to help enforce traffic laws.
These cameras photograph red light runners, capturing the license plate for identification, and stamp the date, time of day, time elapsed since the light turned red and the vehicle speed.
Again, in the USA, Dewey-kollen (2003a, P.32) notes, “red light camera enforcement has been effective and beneficial in many communities across the country.
While the administrative and legal aspects of this automated enforcement program can be extensive, the recorded reductions in violations and crashes associated with red light photo enforcement make this program an important traffic safety tool”.
In spite of all efforts at public enlightenment by road safety administration, many motorists are still reluctant to use seat belts.
In the USA, Cox (2004) reports that the number one priority of the National highway Traffic Safety (NHTSA) for 2004 to 2005 is increasing seat belt use.
According to NHTSA studies, safety belts are 45 percent effective in preventing fatalities, 50 percent effective in preventing moderate-to-critical injuries, and 10 percent effective in preventing minor injuries.
It should also be noted that when safety belts are combined with air bags, injuries are reduced by 68 percent.
After seven years and 13 waves of seat belt mobilisation starting from the first national mobilisation (campaign) in 1997, seat belt use in the United States has increased from 71 percent to 79 percent.
Fifty million more Americans are now buckled up (Dewey-kollen, 2004).
According to Ashton (2004, P.66), “safety belts clearly save lives.
Each percentage point increase in safety belt usage translates into 250 lives spared”.
About the increase to 79 percent safety belt usage, Runge (2003b, P.12) says “this is a historic level of belt use, representing a 4 percent increase over 2002.
This difference will result in saving at least 1,000 lives each year we sustain the increase and preventing more than 16,000 serious injuries.
Also this will result in saving the U.S economy an estimated $3.2 billion, mostly in medical costs and lost productivity.” The need to use seat belts also extends to very young children.
Infants have car seats that can be belted and bigger children are supposed to use the regular seat belts in the back seat.
Good enough for the American 42 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION motoring public, Bolton (2003) reports that the use of safety belts for toddlers has increased to 94 percent, also up four percent from 2002.
However, there is still the concern that far too many children are still riding in the front seat of passenger vehicles.
In spite of public education campaigns to teach parents that children are safer in the back seat, 15 percent of infants under age one, 10 percent of children ages one to three and 29 percent of children ages four to seven are still riding in the front seat, according to NHTSA survey.
These data include both children who are being driven to school in private vehicles and those who commute in public vehicles.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention the most common violations of traffic laws mentioned in the literature.
3.3 Inter-Sectoral Cooperation Many agencies are involved in road safety management.
So in the execution of their duties, there is need to have a coordinated approach to road safety management.
This way, optimum use of synergy is guaranteed and there would not be any duplication of functions.
In Nigeria, Jack (1996) captures this need when he declared that accident preventive measures are multi-disciplinary and multi-sectorally handled.
Such accident preventive measures include enforcement of speed limits, enforcement of use of seatbelts, checking road worthiness of vehicles, enforcement of drivers’ license public enlightenment, etc That is, if we are to succeed in the war against accidents, there is need for the activities of all sectors to be harmonised or properly demarcated with the view of optimum performances.
Complementary roles should form the bed-rock of cooperation between sectors.
In Nigeria, the understanding of the need for inter-sectoral cooperation led to the organisation of a workshop on the National Vehicle Identification Scheme in 1996.
In attendance were the agencies involved in inter-sectoral cooperation in road safety management.
They include the Nigeria Police Force, the Road Traffic Officers, the State Chief Licensing Officers, the Nigeria Customs Service, the Nigeria Immigration Service and the Federal Road Safety Commission.
Arising from the workshop, it was agreed that the following key issues should be implemented as reported by David (1999).
 Improving the quality of the number plates to minimise the cases of fading.
 Persuading the private sector and philanthropic organisations to assist government in sponsoring public enlightenment activities at 43 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION the grassroots to ensure adequate understanding of the tremendous advantage of the computerised vehicle identification scheme.
 Evolving a uniform procedure for vehicle registration with clearly defined roles for Road Traffic Officers and Licensing Officers and circulating such resolution to all the states of the federation for compliance.
 Checking details about motor vehicles as claimed by applicants before administering the new number plates.
 Encouraging and sustaining joint vehicular and traffic management activities among law enforcement agencies.
 Inviting representatives of Local Government Areas to attend further workshops of this nature for grassroots effects.
 Providing the necessary legal backing to the harmonised Road Traffic Regulation to avoid unnecessary litigations on account of administering the uniform License Scheme.
 Establishing offices of Motor Vehicle Administration in the states and Local Government Areas for effective road traffic management.
 Ensuring that all drivers applying for driver’s license undergo appropriate driving test in order to disallow unskilled and unqualified drivers from the record of drivers in the country.
This was just an aspect of inter-sectoral cooperation and several other workshops/seminars held ever since.
Now several aspects of road safety administration have been harmonised with legal and institutional framework.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List five agencies that should be involved in inter-sectoral cooperation in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the discharge of the duty of having safe roads and minimising loss of lives and property, many agencies are involved.
As mentioned in the unit, the agencies are: the Nigeria Police Force which includes the Road Traffic Officers and Patrol Officers, the Licensing Officers, the Nigeria Customs Service, the Nigeria Immigration Service and the Federal Road Safety Commission.
Each agency has statutory functions while some over-lap.
The functions could be patrol or traffic with attendant collaterals.
There is need therefore, for inter-sectoral cooperation since the overall aim of road safety administration is to have safer roads.
44 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learned the functions of a patrol officer which involve over-seeing three major spheres of activities.
In addition you learned the functions of a traffic officer which include enforcement of traffic laws, directing and controlling traffic, providing emergency assistance at the scene of a crash, gathering of information related to traffic, and writing reports.
You also learned about inter-sectoral cooperation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention three basic functions of a patrol officer.
2.
List five major responsibilities of a traffic officer.
3.
In what way can relevant agencies in the road safety sector cooperate?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ashton, R. J.
(2004).
Saved by the Belt or Air Bag-Revisited.
The Police Chief, March, p.66.
Bolton, J.
(2002).
Red Light Running and Other Intersection Hazards.
The Police Chief, August, p.114.
Bolton, J.
(2003).
Good News from NHTSA: Seat Belt use is up.
The Police Chief, May, p. 70.
Cox, O.
(2004).
NHTSA’s Highway Safety Priorities.
The Police Chief, April, pp.
14-16 David, M. A.
(1999).
F.R.S.C and the Imperatives of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria.
Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
Dewey-kollen, J.
(2003a).
Photo Red Light Enforcement.
Law and Order, August, pp.
28-32.
Helmick, D. O.
(2003).
“Spike”.
CHP Addresses Two Highway Safety Problems: Running Red Lights and Senior Citizen Driving Safety.
The Police Chief July, pp.
44-50.
Inciardi, J.
A.
(2007).
Criminal Justice.
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. International City/County Management Association.
International City/County Management Association.
45 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Jack, Y. P. (1996).
New Vehicle Identification Scheme: The need for inter-sectoral Cooperation.
Paper presented at the workshop on the ‘New Vehicle Identification Scheme’, at Jos, Plateau State, Nigeria.
Rao, A.
(2003).
Transportation Services.
In W. A. Geller & D. W. Stephens (Eds.)
Local Government Police Management, pp.
221- 238.
Washington, DC.
Runge, J. W. (2003b).
Increasing Safety Belt Use: A National Priority.
The Police Chief.
December, p. 12.
Sweeney, T. J.
(2003).
Patrol.
In W. A. Geller & S. W. Stephens (Eds).
Washington, DC: Local Government Police Management, pp.
89- 133.
46 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 STANDARDS AND ETHICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Conventions Regarding Traffic Lights 3.2 Conventions at Round-About 3.3 Over-Taking Rules 3.4 Signs, Signals and Markings 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are some standards and ethics that have been adopted and observed across many countries of the world in a bid to improve road safety.
Motorists are expected to observe these standards and ethics just as agencies of road safety administration and management are expected to enforce compliance.
Some of these standards and ethics include conventions regarding traffic lights, conventions at roundabout, over- taking rules, signs, signals and markings.
These will be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the conventions regarding traffic lights and round-about  mention over-taking rules  differentiate road signs, and markings.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conventions Regarding Traffic Lights In Nigeria many towns and cities have traffic police men and women at road junctions who direct and control traffic.
However, advancement in technology has made this function easier with the introduction of traffic lights especially in the urban areas.
Traffic lights are basically of three colours: Read, amber and green.
47 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Red means STOP and wait behind the stop line on the carriageway.
Red and Amber mean STOP but be prepared to go when the Green shows.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Name the three colours of a traffic light and what they indicate.
3.2 Conventions at Round-About A round-about is a place where two or more roads meet, forming a circle such that all traffic must go in the same direction.
The conventions at round-about are as follows:  Movement of vehicles should be in an anti-clockwise manner.
 A motorist should watch-out for and give way to traffic already at the round-about,  A motorist should give way to traffic on the left unless road marking indicates otherwise.
 Vehicles should keep moving if the way is clear.
The conventions on how to negotiate a round-about are contained in Nigeria Highway Code (2008).
When turning right The motorist should approach the right-hand lane, keep to it at the round-about and leave by that lane.
The right turn indicator should be on while approaching the round-about and through-out.
When going straight The motorist should approach on the right-hand lane and keep to it throughout the round-about.
The right turn indicator should be on at the exit before the one to be taken.
In the event that the right lane is blocked, the round-about can be approached on the left lane and maintained.
When turning left The motorist should approach on the left-hand lane with the left turn indicator on.
This should be maintained until after negotiating the round-about.
48 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION When making U-turn The motorist should approach on the left-hand lane with the left turn indicator on.
This should be maintained, but before exit, the indicator should be changed to right.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is a round-about?
3.3 Over-Taking Rules The rules on over-taking have clearly stated that you should not over- take except when you are sure that it is safe for you and other road users.
Look properly to be sure that the road ahead and behind you is clear using the rear-view mirrors.
Then use the trafficator and move.
More care should be exercised in dusty and misty environment or bad weather because visibility could be poor and it would be more difficult to judge the speed and distance of on-coming vehicles.
Also, the following conventions must be observed: Clear view A motorist must remember that on fast lanes, vehicles behind may be quite fast.
The motorist should make sure that the lane he/she will be going into is clear and there is a good distance behind and in front before over-taking.
Cutting in Once a vehicle begins to over-take another, it has to do so quickly leaving plenty of distance.
Then move back to the right side lane of the road as soon as possible but without cutting in.
It is wrong for a vehicle to get too close to the one in front before cutting left to over-take.
The vehicle in front may have cause too to slow down suddenly.
On the Right According to the Nigeria Highway Code (2008), one should overtake only on the left except: (a) When the driver in front has signaled that he intends to turn left.
However, the driver who wants to over-take on the right should watch out in case the driver in front abruptly changes his mind or has wrongly left his signal on.
49 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION (b) When you want to turn to the right at a junction and have signaled to do so.
(c) When traffic is moving slowly in queues and vehicles in the left lane are moving slower than you are.
(d) In a one-way street as vehicles may pass on either side.
On being over-taken A motorist should not accelerate when being over-taken.
He or she should slow down if necessary to help and let the overtaking vehicle pass.
Parked vehicles On an ordinary two-lane road, one should give way to vehicles coming towards him or her before overtaking parked vehicles or other obstructions on the right side of the road.
Sometimes, two vehicles are nearly double-parked (an illegal act in itself) or it may be other impediments, such as road work, pot holes or mounds of garbage obstructing both sides of the road.
Drivers approaching such obstacles are usually unable to determine which of them should give way to the other or out-rightly unwilling to give way for the other.
The general rule is that the vehicle further from the stationary object should slow down or stop to allow the nearer vehicle to go first.
Common sense, however, should compel both drivers to show adequate caution and consideration for each other, to avoid collision.
Never should a driver compete for speed supremacy with other motorists.
Do not over-take when approaching  a pedestrian crossing, a bus stop, a road junction, a corner or bend, a narrow bridge and where the road is narrow.
 a level crossing, the crest of a hill, when to do so would force another vehicle to swerve or brake suddenly.
 such over-taking that would cause the vehicle to cross double solid white lines.
 the solid line of the centre lines nearer the over-taking vehicle.
 the ‘NO OVERTAKING’ sign.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 In one sentence, what is the summary of over-taking rules?
50 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.4 Signs, Signals and Markings There are conventional Road signs, signals and markings on the road that are meant to ensure traffic safety.
It is compulsory for drivers to have a good knowledge of these signs, signals and markings.
That is why all would-be drivers need at least basic education and have to attend a driving school.
The Nigeria Highway Code (2008, p. 62) has declared that “road signs, and markings together with signals by authorised traffic officers are to ensure a smooth and safe traffic flow”.
They are meant to be obeyed.
The signs The various traffic signs tell the motorist about traffic regulations, or traffic prohibitions, special hazards and other road conditions, construction areas, speed limits, etc.
The motorist should not only be familiar with each of the signs, he or she should recognise the special shapes and colours.
The various signs, signals and markings, as adopted from the Nigeria Highway Code (2008) are presented below: 51 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 52 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 53 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 54 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 55 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 56 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Road Markings: There are lines and symbols on the roads which are meant to show the alignment of the roads.
These lines and symbols should ideally be reflective so that motorists may clearly and safely follow the roads even at night.
Road markings also indicate the number of lanes on the road, the side where one may over-take the other vehicles, which lanes to use for turning, and where a motorist must stop for signs and other traffic signals (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008).
As explained in the Nigeria Highway Code, road markings are basically of four major types: Centre lines, edge lines, cross walks and pavement messages.
Centre lines: These are the lines at the centre of the road which are meant to separate traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
Where the lines are broken, it means there is no restriction on over-taking but where there are restrictions on over-taking, a solid line is painted alongside the broken line.
Over-taking is not advisable on the section of the road with the solid line.
Over-taking for traffic in both directions is strictly forbidden where the centre is marked by double solid lines.
Edge lines: These are sold lines along the side of the road.
They indicate where the edge is and can be used also as traffic guidance.
An edge line which slants towards the centre of the road fore-warns that the road is narrow ahead.
An edge line may be crossed only by traffic moving to and from the shoulder of the road.
Cross walk: White solid lines across the road are usually used to denote pedestrian cross walks commonly at intersections.
Vehicles must stop for pedestrians at crosswalks.
A solid white line across the road, usually at intersection, shows where vehicles MUST stop for a GIVE WAY sign, STOP sign or for red traffic light signal.
Pavement Messages: These are messages or symbols which are lettered or painted on the roads to warn of conditions ahead.
Diagonal lines: These are painted on the road for protection to separate traffic or to prevent traffic from turning left: Motorists should not drive on to these areas if they can avoid doing so.
Zebra lines: Zebra lines are also called zebra crossing.
They are used to indicate where pedestrians can cross the roads.
Motorists must stop for pedestrians that have stepped on the lines.
In traffic queues (or hold- up), leave pedestrian cross clear.
57 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 List three hand signals and three road markings that you know.
4.0 CONCLUSION Road safety administration and management is committed to ensuring safer roads.
This has culminated in the introduction of various road signs, hand signals and road markings.
However, it is another thing to have motorists understand and observe them.
So it is the duty of road traffic agencies to educate the public and enforce compliance with the signs, signals and marking.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learned about the conventions regarding traffic lights, at round-about and over-taking.
The various traffic signs which tell a motorist about traffic regulations, prohibitions, special hazards and other road conditions were also discussed.
In the unit also, there was focus on traffic control signals as well as road markings.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the significance of the three colours in a traffic light.
2.
At a round-about, which lane should a motorist use when going straight and when making a U-turn?
3.
What are the five general warnings to motorists on over-taking?
4.
Draw and label five of each of these signs: a. Prohibitory b.
Warning c. Mandatory d. Information 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks Ltd. 58 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 3 HIGHWAY PATROLS TRAFFIC LAWS AND REGULATIONS Unit 1 Driving Rules and Regulations Unit 2 Laws and Regulations, Special Provisions: Removal of Vehicles from the Highway, Special Trade License, Driving School and the Road Unit 3 Special Provisions Relating to the Driving of Vehicles Unit 4 Other Road Safety Precautions UNIT 1 DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Driving Rules and Regulations 3.2 Harmonised Rules and Regulations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Driving is an art, which has its own procedures.
The drivers, who carefully observe these procedures, rarely run into problems.
These procedures can be referred to as driving rules and regulations.
Such rules and regulations are contained in National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) and Nigeria Highway Code (2008).
To ensure good driving, every driver should know the rules and regulations of driving.
Many road accidents are avoidable, as many do occur because motorists do not observe the rules and regulations.
Perhaps drivers ignore the observance of the basic rules and regulations of driving due to ignorance, impatience or recklessness and often time, it leads to accidents.
So it becomes imperative for both drivers and road safety administrators to know the basic driving rules and regulations.
The drivers need this knowledge to increase their efficiency and the road safety administrators also need it to be able to educate the public, enforce them and reduce accidents on the roads.
In this unit, therefore, you shall learn some of these rules and regulations.
59 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the activities to be carried out before and during take-off  list the rules on breaking, reversing and making U-turns  list the rules that border on parking  summarise the harmonised safety administration rules and regulations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Driving Rules and Regulations (a) Before take-off  The driver should fasten the safety or seat belt.
 Ensure that the gear is in neutral before turning-on the ignition  Check the rear-view mirrors and fuel level  Have someone check your rear lights and trafficators.
(b) During take-off  Ensure that the road is clear  Clutch, engage gear and gradually move forward.
 Keep your eyes on the road while the vehicle moves on  Avoid the use of phone (c) Breaking Never get too close to the vehicle in front.
Do not break suddenly because it could lead to loss of control.
Break smoothly in a controlled manner, using plenty of time.
(d) Reversing Before reversing, the driver should make sure that the back of the vehicle is clear of people particularly children and physically challenged persons or other obstructions.
The driver should be especially careful about the ‘blind area’ behind, that is that part of the road that cannot be seen from the driving seat, either through the mirror or by looking backward.
If you cannot see behind you, get someone to guide you.
Also, it is wrong to reverse from a side road into a major road.
If it is at night, the driver should put-off headlight while reversing and may switch on HAZARD lights (be sure that the reverse lights are working).
60 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION It should be noted that the person reversing may be liable for any accident he/she causes.
(e) U-turns It may be necessary for a driver to make a U-turn at controlled intersections when he or she has the right of way to turn left, except if there is a road traffic signal indicating otherwise.
As a rule, a driver should not make a U-turn at or near the following places: (i) Crest or brow of a hill/knoll.
(ii) Bends or corners (iii) Where there is a sign ‘No-U-TURNS’ (iv) Busy streets, highways or expressways (v) Any place where other motorists cannot see the vehicle making a U-turn from at least 120 metres.
(f) Parking When a driver wishes to park, he or she must remember the look-signal- move routine.
After parking as close as possible to the edge of the road, the engine must be switched off and parking break or hand break put on.
At night, parked vehicles should switch off head lights and may leave parking lights only.
A vehicle should not be parked where there is a ‘No PARKING, sign.
In addition, parked vehicles should not constitute a danger to other road users.
It is dangerous parking if the vehicle is at or near:  Road junction  Bends or corners  Brow or crest of a hill/knoll  Narrow bridge  Level crossing  Bus stop  Pedestrian crossing  Entrances  The left hand side of the road at night (except in a one-way street) Further, to avoid blocking the view of other road users or make man- oeuvre difficult for them, motorists should not park:  On a narrow road  On flyovers, in tunnels or underpass (except where there is a parking sign) 61 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  On expressways (except on the hard shoulder when there is an emergency)  Alongside another parked vehicle  Opposite another parked vehicle if this would narrow the road to less than the width of two vehicles (avoid double parking)  Near road works.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 How many driving rules and regulation do you know so far?
3.2 Harmonised Safety Rules and Regulations Road safety administration in Nigeria, like anywhere else, has been guided by technical vehicles examination.
Since there are more than one agency charged with the responsibility of ensuring safety on our roads, the Road safety commission designed a coherent six-point test in the following areas (David, 1999):  Break system  Tyres, wheels and steering system  Driving shafts, suspension, mountings and control  Other safety requirements: seat belts, sitting arrangement, speed regulations, First Aid Kit, Emission Levels, etc.
 Warning and Emergency devices; Reflective triangle, Trafficators, Horns, Jack, Wheel Spanners and other tools.
The examination of the above is carried out in the Road Traffic Officers’ office throughout the federation.
However the procedure has been modified so that vehicle inspection can be done at petrol stations, repair garages and on the highways.
The purpose of this is to ensure that only vehicles which meet minimum safety standards are allowed to ply the roads and the overall intent is to reduce risks associated with mechanically defective vehicles on the highways.
The effort at enhancing road safety administration in Nigeria, according to David (1999) led to the standardisation and harmonisation of safety rules and regulations to guide all agencies charged with road safety administration.
The aspects of this standardisation and harmonisation are: National Driver’s License scheme National vehicle License scheme National vehicle identification scheme National vehicle inspection scheme 62 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION National Driver’s License Scheme This scheme was launched in 1990 as a single card computerised driver’s license indicating personal data on holder with personalised number code and other security features to forestall forgery.
The scheme also provided for the classification of drivers ranging from class A – J, as follows: a.
Motor cycle b.
Motor vehicle of less than 3 tones gross weight other than motor cycle, taxi, stage carriage or omnibus c. A motor vehicle of less than 3 tones gross weight, other than motor cycle d. Motor vehicle other than motor cycle, taxi, stage carriage or omnibus excluding an articulated vehicle or vehicle drawing trailer e. Motor vehicle other than a motor cycle or articulated vehicle f. Agricultural machines and tractors g. Articulated vehicles h. Earth moving vehicle.
i.
Special, for physically handicapped persons.
The other features of the new scheme include the colour codes differentiating motorcycles, private and commercial drivers.
This scheme has resulted in more efficient control and administration.
To accelerate processing and distribution, the National Driver’s license scheme is decentralised to all the states of the federation without compromising the quality of the security features.
National Vehicle License Scheme The National Vehicle License scheme is an improvement on what used to obtain.
There was introduction of reprinted license formats for different categories of vehicles with description parameters to indicate colour of vehicle and previous registration (if any).
Further, the payment receipts have counterfoil to enhance documentation and auditing.
This has led to improved revenue generation for the states.
It is under this scheme that the National Road Traffic Regulation (2004) made it illegal for anyone to change vehicle colour without authorisation.
This has enhanced security of vehicles and led to the recovery of many stolen vehicles.
63 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION National Vehicle Identification Scheme The National Vehicle Identification Scheme is directed at improved safety and easy identification of vehicles.
The scheme introduced uniform reflective number plates in Nigeria in 1993.
The number plates are alphanumeric (see Module 1, Unit 4).
Thousands of codes for licensing areas have been generated with each licensing area registering up to 2.5 million vehicles.
The reflective number plates are to improve safety during night time driving and they have colour codes distinguishing private, commercial, government and military/paramilitary vehicles.
Also, the number plates are of distinct sizes for motor cycles and motor vehicles with security water marks that make forgery difficult.
The number plates are centrally produced thereby providing data base for vehicle identification.
The scheme provided for accompanying documents issued with the number plates.
Such documents include the vehicle identification Tag, which has the same number printed on it and it is affixed on the windscreen.
The tag is not transferable and this makes illegal transfer of number plate from one vehicle to another difficult.
There is also the Proof of Ownership Certificate issued alongside number plates.
The certificate is printed with security features.
The purpose is to authenticate the ownership of a motor vehicle and transfer of ownership is only possible with the original Proof of Ownership Certificate.
In addition to the advantage of easy identification of vehicles, the vehicle identification scheme enhances proper planning because there is ready and reliable information on the volume of registered vehicles at any point in time.
National Vehicle Inspection Scheme The National Vehicle Inspection Scheme was introduced to ensure that only road-worthy vehicles are allowed to ply the road.
This involves routine inspection of all vehicles as well as post-accident inspection.
The Road safety commission has the responsibility to carry out this function but due to harmonisation, it is equally vested in Vehicle Inspection Officers (VIO), who provides Certificate of Road worthiness.
For purposes of standardisation of procedure, a vehicle inspection manual was designed to take into account minimum safety standards.
It also has the merit of rendering the Road worthiness certificate less vulnerable to abuse.
In addition, a Road Worthiness Validity Tag was introduced to enhance control and credibility in vehicle inspection 64 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION (David, 1999).
The tag number is recorded on the certificate and it is not transferable.
This scheme requires monthly update from the Road Traffic Department of the Road safety Commission and it has culminated in a data bank on vehicular registration and the number of vehicles in operation periodically.
The whole process is computerised and if properly administered, has the potential of improving the management of road traffic safety in Nigeria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention four harmonised schemes of safety rules and regulations.
4.0 CONCLUSION A set of driving rules and regulations has been put in place by the agencies charged with the responsibility of road safety administration and management.
The purpose of these rules and regulations are to enhance safety on the roads.
Even so, people still undermine their safety and security by not adhering to laid down rules and regulations.
It becomes necessary therefore, for road safety administrators to enforce these rules and regulations.
It is considered that if motorists observe these rules and regulations, the rate of accidents on the roads and highways, will be drastically reduced to the barest minimum.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you examined some driving rules and regulations including those that border on what a motorist must do before and during take-off, breaking, reversing, U-turns and parking.
In the discourse, you saw the essence of smooth road safety administration in Nigeria, with the road safety commission working hand-in-hand with other agencies of road safety.
You also learned about the standardised and harmonised safety rules and regulations, and the four schemes which apply to all states of Nigeria including the Federal Capital Territory, namely:  National Driver’s License Scheme  National Vehicle License Scheme  National Vehicle Identification Scheme  National Vehicle Inspection Scheme These schemes are enforced uniformly in the whole country as measures to improve road safety.
65 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain any five road safety rules and regulations indicating what a motorist is expected to do.
2.
Mention and discuss four harmonised schemes on road safety rules and regulations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David, M. A.
(1999).
FRSC and the Imperative of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria.
Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
66 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS, SPECIAL PROVISIONS: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM THE HIGHWAY, SPECIAL TRADE LICENSE, DRIVING SCHOOL AND THE ROAD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Procedure for Removal, Reclaiming and Failure to Reclaim a Vehicle 3.2 Special Trade License 3.3 Establishment and Registration of a Driving School 3.4 Types of Roads, Inter-Change and Road Junctions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are many laws regulating the administration of highway safety.
In this unit, you shall examine the laws and regulations that govern the removal of broken down vehicles from the highway and reclaiming of such vehicles, special trade license, establishment of driving school and the different types of roads.
In doing so, the objective has always been as to maintain sanity on the roads and prevent accidents.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  mention the procedure for removal and reclaiming a vehicle from the highway, and the penalties  describe what happens when a vehicle owner fails to reclaim a vehicle  explain the regulation on special trade license  apply the regulation on establishment and registration of a driving school  differentiate between the various types of roads.
67 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Procedure for Removal, Reclaiming and Failure to Reclaim a Vehicle Part ix of the National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) provides that where a vehicle is stationary as to constitute obstruction on a highway, the appropriate authority may cause the vehicle to be removed if: (i) There is a reasonable cause to believe that the presence of the vehicle on the highway contravenes any law; or (ii) The vehicle is in such a position or condition as to cause obstruction to other users of the highway or constitute danger to other users of the highways; or (iii) The vehicle has broken down and is abandoned by its owner for a very long time.
In removing such a vehicle, the appropriate authority may use such reasonable force as may be necessary to facilitate the removal.
When the removal has been effected, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall pay a sum of N100 and other prescribed penalty for every day the vehicle is in the custody of the appropriate authority, such as the Federal Road Safety commission.
Further, the Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) or any other appropriate authority has the duty to:  Provide and maintain places (Parks), where removed vehicles shall be kept;  Provide suitable facilities (including equipment and manpower) for the removal of vehicles from the highways;  Ensure the safety and security of the removed vehicles in their custody;  Keep a record of the particulars of each removed vehicle and its contents, specifying the date of its removal and the park in which it is kept.
Though the appropriate authority has the duty of ensuring the safety and security of removed vehicles, the authority shall not be under any duty to protect such vehicles from damage occasioned by sun, rain, wind or other physical or natural causes.
The National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) also clearly spelt out the procedure for reclaiming removed vehicles.
The owner of a removed 68 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION vehicle, who wants to recover it, shall furnish the officer in charge of the removed vehicles parked with:  a satisfactory evidence of his ownership of the removed vehicle;  evidence of compliance with relevant regulations; and  evidence of who the agent or driver is, proof that he is the authorised agent.
It should be noted that the officer in charge of removed vehicles park has the right to ask for proof of the identity of anyone coming to claim a removed vehicle.
When all the regulations have been complied with, the officer in charge of removed vehicles park shall issue a certificate of release of the vehicle to a genuine claimant upon payment of towing charges, where necessary.
Failure to reclaim removed vehicle: If the driver or owner of a vehicle fails to reclaim the vehicle within six months of its detention, the FRSC or any other appropriate authority may apply to the Court of competent jurisdiction for an order of forfeiture of the vehicle to the Commission or any other appropriate authority.
The commission or any other appropriate authority may thereafter dispose the vehicle by public auction and pay the proceeds into Government Treasury.
However, it should be noted that any person who claims to be entitled to the benefit of a charge or lien on a removed vehicle or its contents (say a bank or hire purchase firm) may protect such interest.
The person interested may at any time before the FRSC or any other appropriate authority applies to the High Court for forfeiture, apply to the court for an order protecting his interest in the vehicle or the contents.
The court may make such order vesting the vehicle or its contents in any persons on such terms as it deems fit.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State three reasons why a vehicle could be removed from the highway.
3.2 Special Trade License The administration of motor traffic in Nigeria also has rules and regulations governing auto dealers and the vehicles they sell.
These rules and regulations are as specified in Part III of the National Road Traffic Regulations (2004), known as Special Trade License.
69 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION A prospective motor dealer or motorcycle dealer needs to apply to the authority stating his/her vital data as required in Form MVA 10 and pay a prescribed fee.
When the authority is satisfied, a stamped license shall be issued indicating the type of trade license.
A dealer may obtain more than one type of license.
However, the license issued for any vehicle shall be under the following conditions:  When a vehicle has been off-loaded from a ship, lighter, train or other road vehicle and is being driven to the dealer’s place of business; or  When a vehicle is being tested after having been received, assembled or repaired at the dealer’s place of business, or  When a vehicle is being tested by or on behalf of an intending purchaser or of the owner in the case of a vehicle under repairs; or  When a new vehicle or one under repairs is being transferred by a dealer in the normal course of business; or  When a new vehicle or one which has been repaired is in the process of delivery to the purchaser.
A trade identification Number or Mark is usually issued alongside the trade license just as every vehicle has an identification number plate.
The trade identification number consists of the National flag symbol, name of authorised dealer, dealer’s code, state code, dealer’s number (which is alpha–numeric), individual vehicle code (alphanumeric) and the inscription “Federal Republic of Nigeria”.
The particulars of each trade license are entered in a special register kept by the issuing authority and the trade identification number plates are only issued to motor vehicle dealers and mechanic workshop operators.
The trade identification number plates issued to mechanic workshop operators should only be used on vehicles during road tests.
The regulations protect special trade license applicants.
Any person who applies for the license after meeting all the requirements and is refused a license, can appeal to any magistrate court.
The regulations also specify penalties for those who misuse the special trade license.
The special trade license does not authorise the following: i. carrying of fee-paying passengers or goods for reward; ii.
the carrying of any person not engaged in testing the vehicle or inspecting the vehicle with a view to purchasing it; iii.
the use of the vehicle between the hours of 6.pm and 6.am Any person using a trade license, who engages in any of the above, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of N10, 000 or 70 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION to imprisonment for a term of one year or both.
Also, it is an offence for anybody to operate as a motor vehicle dealer without obtaining the appropriate trade license.
Anybody found guilty of this offence is liable to a fine of N10, 000 or to imprisonment for a term of one year or both.
It should be noted that a trade license issued in any state shall be valid n any other state until the expiry date indicated on such a license.
Of course, a motor vehicle dealer is required to keep a record of journeys made by the vehicles operating under a trade license and the records should be open to the appropriate authority for inspection.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is a special trade license and to whom is it issued?
3.3 Establishment and Registration of a Driving School The Federal Road Safety Commission (FRSC) has the mandate to establish a model driving school in each state of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory.
The Commission also regulates the establishment and registration of private and Government owned driving schools and sets guidelines for them.
Any person who establishes a driving school needs to contact the FRSC for registration.
The registration form demands information such as name of school, address, phone number, name of proprietor, name of instructor, qualifications, facilities, courses offered, duration of training, equipment, etc.
When all the requirements have been met including the payment of the prescribed fee, the school shall be registered and a permit issued.
Pursuant to the duty of regulation, the FRSC should, from time to time, inspect all registered driving schools to ensure that standards specified by the Commission are not compromised.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Which authority regulates Driving Schools and how should a driving school be set up in Nigeria?
3.4 Types of Roads, inter-changes and Road Junctions The Nigeria Highway Code (2008:1) has defined a road as “a path established over land for the passage of vehicles, people, and animals.
It provides dependable pathway for moving people and goods from one place to another”.
The history of roads dates back to the period of foot paths until date when significant advances in technology have led to the construction of super-highways.
Since the volume of vehicular traffic 71 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION increases by the day, it is necessary to design different types of roads as a measure to facilitate easy movement and reduce accidents.
Types of Roads The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) Classified Nigerian roads as follows:  Private drive pathways  Two-lane highways  Dual carriage ways  Expressway  Pathways The private drive pathways are roads owned, maintained or controlled by an individual, agency or organisation; the two-lane highways are the common place single carriage ways.
Traffic on two-lane highways normally flows in opposite direction on single lane.
Two-lane highways can be found in rural, urban, intra or inter-city roads; the dual carriageway is a road with multiple lanes with traffic going in opposite directions.
Some dual carriageways are physically separated by non- passable dividers such as concrete barriers, others are not; The expressway is a specially designed highway which is divided in the middle with barriers that make traffic in opposite directions completely separated from each other.
Each of the separated sides has multiple lanes.
Interchange The Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary defines an interchange as a place where a main road joins a motor way or freeway, designed so that vehicles leaving or joining the road do not have to cross other lines of traffic.
The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) which has listed the various designs of interchanges sees an interchange as a special intersection designed to enable road users cross, enter or leave the expressway without interfering with the flow of traffic.
The four types of interchanges which draw their names from their shapes are as follows: (a) Clover leaf: The clover leaf interchange is designed to allow turning movement off or into the expressway from four directions using loop type connections.
One outstanding feature of clover leaf interchange is that it has no room for left turn.
It also eliminates traffic conflicts for all movements.
(b) Diamond: The diamond interchange has four ramps, which allow vehicles to enter or leave the main highway.
The major 72 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION difference between diamond and clover leaf interchanges is that the diamond allows left turns after leaving the expressway while clover leaf does not.
(c) Trumpet: The trumpet interchange provides access to the expressway at a T-intersection.
An intersection is a place where two or more roads, lanes, etc meet or cross each other.
(d) Directional: The directional interchange is designed in such a way that high volume of traffic could transfer off an interchange.
Road Junctions The Nigeria Highway code (2008) defines a junction as the place or point where two or more roads meet.
The Code also identifies four types of Road Junctions, namely:  T-Junction: The place, where two roads meet in the shape of letter T.  Y-Junction: The place, where two roads meet in the shape of letter Y.
 Cross Road: The place, where two roads meet and cross each other.
It may be in the form of a major road crossing a minor road; or two equal roads crossing each other.
 Round-about: The place, where two or more roads meet forming a circle that ensures that all traffic must go around in the same direction.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Name five types of roads and four types of interchanges that you know and illustrate with diagrams where appropriate.
4.0 CONCLUSION Broken down vehicles or abandoned vehicles on the road constitute a hazard.
To avoid this, rules and regulations exist to guide the process of removing such vehicles and reclaiming them.
Since the over-all purpose is to improve safety on the road, it is necessary, also, to make regulations on different items ranging from special trade license for 73 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION motor dealers to establishment and registration of driving school.
Finally, it may be concluded that several types of roads junctions are designed to improve safety on the road.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learned of the reasons and modus for removal of vehicles from the highway, the procedure for reclaiming same and what happens when a vehicle owner fails to reclaim the vehicle within a specified period.
In the unit, you also examined the process of issuing a special trade license and the conditions attached.
Then you looked at the regulations for the establishment and registration of a driving school as well as the various road designs.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Enumerate four duties of the Federal Road Safety Commission regarding removal of dangerously parked or abandoned vehicle and three conditions the owners shall meet before recovering the vehicle.
2.
Explain five conditions under which a special trade license may be issued and list three prohibitions on the use of such a license.
3.
What are you required to do if you want to establish a driving school?
3.
Differentiate between the five types of roads you know and the four types of interchanges.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
74 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 SPECIAL PROVISION RELATING TO THE DRIVING OF VEHICLES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Regulations on Minimum Age and Health Status of drivers 3.2 Regulations on Maximum Hours of Driving 3.3 Other Regulations on Driving 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Experience has shown that among the causes of road accidents is human error.
The human body is not a machine and should not be made to work as one.
Attempts have been made to regulate the conditions under which a person should drive.
This unit, therefore, will x-ray the regulations on age and health status of a driver, maximum hours of continuous driving and other regulations on driving.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  mention the appropriate age to commence driving  discuss body conditions under which one should not drive  explain regulations regarding physically challenged persons  state the maximum hours of continuous driving  list other regulations on driving.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Regulations on Age and Health Status of Drivers In Nigeria, no person below the age of 18 shall drive a motor vehicle.
That is why a driver’s license carries the holder’s date of birth.
On health status of the driver, consideration is given to the state of well- being of the body and actual sickness or impairment.
75 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Feeling of fatigue is a disqualification to drive.
Fatigue is a feeling of being extremely tired.
One may not drive when he or she suffers from fatigue.
So one should not drive when there is a feeling of exhaustion.
When the human body is experiencing stress, the ability to drive and coordinate properly will be affected, and there is a tendency of the weary driver to over-estimate his or her capabilities.
Another aspect of health status of a driver is vision.
Some people have visual impairments and cannot see properly yet they drive.
This could be very dangerous on the road.
Drivers are required to go for regular vision screening.
Should any driver fail a vision test, he or she is referred to an optometrist for correction, possibly for medically recommended glasses.
If one is to wear such glasses to drive, it has to be indicated on the driver’s license.
Some people have the eye defect of long sightedness while others have short sightedness.
Note that it is an offence to drive with defective vision (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008).
The other aspect of the health status of a driver borders on physically challenged persons.
It has been stated in the Nigeria Highway Code (2008) that the people who are physically challenged are part of the society and as such are entitled to same privileges while using the road.
It should also be added that they are not exempted from traffic rules and regulations.
The Nigeria Highway Code has provided the following additional safeguard for physically challenged drivers:  Road users who require special consideration as regards applications for driver’s licence or testing must notify appropriate authorities of their disabilities  A qualified doctor must certify the level of disability and suitability of the applicant to drive.
 Ensure the reconstruction of the vehicle to suit their conditions.
 Obtain appropriate physically challenged person’s identification stickers to be affixed conspicuously on the front and rear wind screen of the vehicle.
 Any of these disabilities (as the case may be) would be indicated on the holder’s class J driver’s license to alert other road users and law enforcement officers.
The Highway Code also prohibits the following: (i) Able bodied person using Disabled Persons Identification sticker unless when transporting a disabled person; (ii) creating or using a counterfeit of a disabled person identification sticker; (iii) making a false statement about a disability in order to obtain or assist someone else obtain disabled person identification stickers.
76 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Discuss a driver’s vision in relationship with driving regulations.
3.2 Regulations on Maximum Hours of Driving Some drivers drive very long distances without breaking for sufficient rest.
There is need to stop, come out and stretch the legs so as to improve blood circulation to the brain.
If this is not done, the driver may be fatigued and even fall asleep.
This could lead to serious road accidents.
To check this tendency, the National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) provides maximum hours of driving.
Specifically, the regulations states: 1.
No person shall drive, cause or permit any person employed by him to drive any vehicle:  For any continuous period of more than five and one half hours; or  For periods amounting in the aggregate to more than ten and one- half hours in any period of twenty-four hours commencing two hours after midnight, except that where it is necessary for a driver to conclude a long distance journey, the period may be extended to twelve and one-half hours in all; or  Where the driver has not at least eight consecutive hours for rest in any period of twenty-four hours calculated from the commencement of any period of driving.
2.
Where the duration of a journey exceeds five and a half hours, the driver shall have intervals of rest of not less than thirty minutes in every three hours of the said journey.
3.
For the purpose of this regulation, any two or more periods of driving time shall be deemed to be a continuous period unless separated by interval of not less than thirty minutes for the purpose of enabling the driver to obtain rest and refreshment; and any time spent by a driver on other work in connection with the vehicle or load carried thereby shall be reckoned as time spent in driving.
4.
Any person who acts in contravention of this regulation commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of N2, 000.
The implication of these regulations is that for effective road safety administration, drivers’ park with appropriate rest facilities, should be constructed at strategic points along the highways.
It is in recognition of 77 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION the need for rest that present day trucks have in-built sleeping compartments.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the maximum number of hours that a driver is permitted to undertake continuous driving and what are the consequences of violation?
3.3 Other Regulations on driving There are some accidents that occur on the road due to the disregard for appropriate distance between vehicles in traffic.
Some drivers drive what is referred to as “bumper to bumper”, so any sudden brake by the vehicle in front or brake failure of the vehicle behind, results in a collision.
It is therefore necessary to regulate the distance that should be kept between vehicles.
The safe rule, as contained in the Nigeria Highway Code (2008), is never to get closer than the overall stopping distance as shown in the table below.
Stopping Distance Speed Thinking Braking Overall Distance Distance Distance Stopping Distance Km/h metre metre 20 5 5 10 40 10 12 22 60 16 30 46 80 22 50 72 100 27 65 92 Source: Nigeria Highway Code (2008).
On wet and slippery roads, the gap should be much more.
A driver must slowdown if an over-taking vehicle fills the gap between him/her and the vehicle in front.
It is advisable however, for stopping distance to increase with wet and slippery road, poor brake system, worn-out tyres and fatigued drivers whose reacting time may be slow.
78 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Public enlightenment may be necessary to inculcate the simple practice of keeping a safe distance.
The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) stipulates the following basic rules: Two second Rule A driver should choose a stationary object in front of the vehicle ahead which could be near or above the road, like a road sign, tree, etc.
As soon as the vehicle ahead passes the object, the driver behind should recite slowly: “Staying too close or trailing for safety” If the driver behind reaches that same object before finishing the recitation, then he/she is following too closely.
The driver should slow down to increase the distance between the two vehicles.
Three second Rule Wise drivers follow the procedure as above and may add to the phrase thus: “Staying too close or trailing for safety.
Playing it safer” Four Second Rule When weather conditions are bad, it becomes necessary to have extra distance between vehicles.
So the driver behind a vehicle may adopt the four second rule by reciting: “Staying too close or trailing for safety, playing it Safer.
Safer and Saner” Should the driver pass the chosen object before he/she finishes the recitation, then there is need to slow down.
It should be noted that it takes approximately two seconds to recite any three word phrase.
It is unsafe to select very short words.
Also, the safe gap between a vehicle and the one in front depends on the relative speed between the two vehicles.
Driving Speed Limit There are approved speed limits for all categories of vehicles.
These speed limits are contained in the National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) and are as follows: 79 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Speed in km/h Built-up Highways Expressways Area Cars 50 80 100 Taxis and Buses 50 80 90 Tankers/Trailers 45 50 80 Source: National Road Traffic Regulations (2004).
It is not permissible to leave a vehicle unnecessarily on the highway.
In fact, the regulation states that a driver or person in charge of a vehicle shall not cause or permit the vehicle or trailer drawn thereby, to remain at rest on a road in such a position or condition or circumstance as likely to cause danger to other persons using the road.
The person who drives or causes a vehicle to be on the road in such a way that it contravenes the regulations, commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine of N1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to both such fine and imprisonment.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 In a tabular form, indicate the approved stopping distances for vehicles.
4.0 CONCLUSION It can be safely concluded that if under–aged drivers, who tend to be very reckless, are prevented from driving, our roads would be safer.
Also, the physically challenged are entitled to the use of the road and regulations to safe guard them.
It is necessary for drivers to observe the regulation on maximum hours of continuous driving to avoid fatigue and to reduce the risk of accidents on the road.
Finally, the regulations on stopping distance and speed limits for various categories of vehicles are all aimed at reducing accidents and making roads safer.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, your attention focused on special regulations relating to the driving of vehicles.
Such regulations include the minimum age of a driver which is 18 years, the health status of a driver which included factors such as vision, fatigue and physical challenges, the regulation on the maximum hours of driving which is 51/ hours and other regulations 2 such as stopping distance between vehicles and speed limit for various categories of vehicles.
80 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain five regulations on physically challenged persons who wish to drive.
2.
State and explain the four regulations on maximum hours of driving.
3.
If you were on public enlightenment campaign, present the simple way to keep a safe distance and draw a table indicating speed limits.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
81 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 OTHER ROAD SAFETY PRECAUTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Defensive Driving 3.2 Driving Under Special Conditions 3.3 Danger Labels 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are many road use activities that are aimed at reducing or eliminating the risk of accidents on the roads.
Our focus in this unit is on how to drive defensively, driving under special conditions as well as the ability to interpret danger labels.
To ensure good driving culture, every driver must exercise all precautions first by knowing the basic rules of driving.
The aspects of precautious driving that are outlined in this unit which you are about to learn, are derived from the Nigeria Highway Code (2008).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  mention the qualities of a defensive driver and conditions that affect defensive driving  explain how to drive under special conditions.
 nterpret danger labels 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Defensive Driving A driver must be able to identify dangerous situations before they happen and be able to respond quickly and effectively to prevent them.
This is called defensive or strategic driving.
Defensive Driving is based on three ideas which are visibility, space and communication.
Visibility is about seeing and being seen.
A driver should always be aware of the traffic in front, behind and beside him/her 82 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION (Wikipedia).
The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) says defensive driving means driving to save lives, money and time in spite of the conditions around you and the provocative actions of the other driver.
The road safety agencies which oversee the observation of regulations governing driving schools should ensure that components of defensive driving are emphasised.
Qualities of a Defensive Driver:  A defensive driver drives with the consciousness that he may be the only sane person on the road.
 He drives intelligently in order to arrive alive.
 A defensive driver is always cautious  A defensive driver knows and obeys all road traffic signs and symbols.
 A defensive driver develops the right attitude to driving.
The right attitude to driving includes patience, care, skill and consideration for other road users (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008).
The emphasis is that a defensive driver recognises hazards, understands the defense and acts correctly and in time.
Things a Defensive Driver must know: Most auto crashes are not mere accidents.
They occur due to error of judgment and negligent acts of drivers and other road users.
It should be recognised that any person on the road constitutes a potential hazard to other road users and vice versa.
This is so because most road users are not knowledgeable or are indifferent as to rules of the road.
Therefore, they are likely to make wrong decisions or take actions that may result in harm to others.
Factors which may affect Defensive Driving include:  Light conditions;  Road conditions;  Traffic conditions;  Weather conditions;  Vehicle conditions; and  Other driver conditions (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008).
These conditions have serious impact on defensive driving.
If a vehicle has poor lights, one headlight or using full beam, visibility is impaired; if the road has many pot holes and sharp bends, defensive driving will be affected; if traffic is dense, space may be compromised and impatient drivers may be prone to accidents; if the weather is bad visibility will 83 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION become poor; if the condition of the vehicle is not sound, it is hazardous as some functions may fail.
Such functions include brakes, horn, tirod ends, etc; and the other driver’s conditions like fatigue can render defensive driving perilous.
Things a Defensive Driver must do:  A defensive driver should never allow his/her safety depends on the response of other road users.
 Always anticipate wrong actions from the other road users.
 Be considerate, accommodative and share the road with other road users.
 Always drive at a speed that he or she is comfortable with (within speed limits).
 Avoid over-speeding, overloading, wrongful and dangerous overtaking.
 Be conscious of areas of safety.
 He or she should take note of blind spots and should not drive into the blind spots of others (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List five conditions that affect defensive driving.
3.2 Driving Under Special Conditions There are some special conditions that make driving hazardous.
The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) has highlighted some of the special conditions, namely:  Night driving  Driving in the rain  Driving in misty or foggy weather  Driving in a convoy Night Driving: This means driving when it is dark.
This should be discouraged because the road user may not be able to see far ahead.
In the event of an emergency, help may not be readily available; security is uncertain, and the driver may easily fall asleep.
As a precaution, journeys should be planned ahead to avoid night driving and the vehicle should at all times of the journey be in good condition.
84 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION What to do when night driving becomes inevitable:  The wipers should be put on  Speed should be reduced  Put on the demister (if necessary)  Let the headlights be put on  Dim the headlights so as to see and be seen  Let the hazard lights be on  If visibility becomes too poor, move off the road and park safely  Let the parking lights be on.
 There should be a safe distance to the vehicle in front.
Driving in a convoy: This means driving in a group of vehicles traveling together, often with an escort for protection.
What to do while driving in a convoy:  Drivers must obey the recommended speed limits.
 Drivers must observe common sense following distance.
 Drivers must not constitute hazards to other road users.
 Drivers should not get excited on being in a convoy.
 Drivers should be attentive and have total concentration (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention five conditions that constitute special driving conditions.
3.3 Danger Labels There are warning signs, also called danger labels for hazardous substances.
It is a regulation in many countries for vehicles carrying dangerous goods or substances to display hazard information panels.
Its purpose is to alert other road users that the particular vehicle is conveying dangerous consignment such as inflammable gas or other chemicals.
The Nigeria Highway Code, 2008 contains important information that helps to mitigate any eventualities especially information about the equipment needed to deal with any spillage or fire and the telephone number in an emergency situation.
85 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION The diamond symbols indicating other risks include: 86 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 87 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Explanation of symbols: The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) prescribes certain symbols for different classes of hazards and what each symbol represents.
Examples are as follows: No.
1 (Black bomb on orange background); liable to explosion.
No.
2A (Black flame on red background): inflammable liquid.
No.
2B (Black flame on ground of equidistant alternate and white vertical stripes): danger of fire, inflammable solids.
No.
2C (Black flame on white ground, lower triangle liable red): substance liable to spontaneous ignition.
No.
2D (Black flame on blue ground): danger of emission of inflammable gases on contact with water.
No.
3 (Flame over a circle, black on yellow ground): oxidising substances of organic peroxide.
No.
4 (St. Andrew’s cross on corn ear, black on white background); harmful substances, to be kept apart from foodstuffs in vehicle and at loading, unloading or trans-load points.
No.
5 (Liquid dripping from test-tube on to hand,black on white background, lower triangle liable black/white border); corrosive substance.
No.
6 (Stylised trefoil inscription RADIOACTIVE, a vertical stripe on the lower half, with following text contents activity symbol and inscription on black and white ground, red vertical stripe ): Radioactive substance.
No.
6B (like the foregoing but with two vertical stripes in the lower half and the following text content activity transport index symbol and inscription on black upper half of yellow ground, lower half of white ground with red vertical stripes): radioactive substance in packages of category II yellow to be kept away from packages containing developed radiographic or photographic plates or films.
In the event of damage to packages, danger of health to ingestion and inhalation or, contact with the spill content, or risk of external irradiation at a distance.
88 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION No.
7 (Open black umbrella on white ground): keep dry.
No.
8 (two black arrows on white ground with the label ‘this side up, to be affixed with red arrows pointing upwards on two opposite sides of the package): fragile content.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been noted that among the factors responsible for accidents on the roads, the human factor is every prominent.
So a lot of precautionary measures have been put in place to guide vehicle drivers and avoid accidents on our roads.
These precautions include environmental factors that may hamper accident-free driving and labels that have internationally been adopted to warn of the type of load in a vehicle and likely hazards.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, focus was on additional precautions on road use.
Such precautions include defensive driving with all the things a driver must know and do; driving under special conditions such as night driving, driving in the rain, driving in harmattan or foggy weather and driving in a convoy; and danger labels that indicate that a vehicle is carrying dangerous substances and the type.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss seven things a defensive driver must do.
2.
Why should driving in the night be discouraged?
3.
Pick any five danger labels and interpret their meanings.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Retrieved January, 2010).
89 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 4 MOTOR TRAFFIC OFFENCES AND DISPOSITION METHODS Unit1 Special Provisions Relating to the Highways Unit 2 Miscellaneous Motor Traffic Laws and Regulations Unit 3 Motor Traffic Administration, Control and Dispositional Machinery UNIT 1 SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE HIGHWAY CONTENTS 4.0 Introduction 5.0 Objectives 6.0 Main Content 3.1 Special Prohibitions and Regulations 3.2 Traffic Offences 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit you shall learn about motor traffic offences and how they are disposed off.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define and discuss special provisions relating to highways offences  mention some of the provision  list some of the traffic offences.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Special Prohibitions and Regulations Highway rules and regulations are either regulatory or prohibitory.
Prohibitions under the rules and regulations attract penalties and any 90 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION person on the highway who goes against these rules faces the law.
For example, the National Road Regulations (2004) in the various Parts proscribe: 91.
No person shall on any expressway permit: (a) the movement of cattle on live stock, other than that carried in a motor vehicle to designated points.
(b) the buying or selling of live stocks (c) the grazing of livestock, on or immediately adjacent to such expressway 92.
Tri-Cycles, motor-cycles under 500cc, invalid carriages, hand-pushed trucks, pedal cyclists and pedestrians with or without perambulators shall not be permitted on any expressway, except on trucks and path which have been provided for such use, and may not cross any expressway except at designated locations.
93.
Agricultural machines shall not be driven on any highway 94.
No person shall permit the loading or off-loading of any passenger(s) or goods from any motor vehicle except at designated locations.
95.
No person shall on any highway (or expressway) board or alight from any motor vehicle except at designated locations.
Provisions have been made to protect weight, length, speed of vehicles on our high ways.
U-turn and parking on high ways are prohibited, for example, the following dimensions and weight shall be the maximum permission for motor vehicles using any expressway.
Length - 18.228 metres Weight - 2,591 metres Height - 3,25 metres Single axle load - 10 tones Tandem axle load - 16 tones Provided that the appropriate authority may, when necessary, permit in writing the carriage by a motor vehicle or trailer of any specified freight or load, which by reason of the nature of the freight or load is incapable of being so placed on the vehicle as to conform to this regulation.
93.
Motor vehicles exceeding 9.144 metres in length shall be required to carry the following additional light (a) Two white lights, not exceeding six watts, which shall be placed on the rear at the extreme offside and near side and at highest point of the vehicle.
91 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION (b) Two red lights, not exceeding six watts which shall be placed on the rear at the extreme offside and nearside and the highest practicable point of the vehicle, so as to indicate to approaching drivers from the rear, the width and height of the vehicle.
98 (1) No vehicle shall have protruding or tailing loads and all loads shall be contained with the permissible overall dimensions of the vehicle in accordance with regulations 57 and 101.
(2) No motor vehicle shall have its load spilling such that it causes danger to other road users or litters the highway and all such load(s) shall be adequately covered 99 The minimum speed of any motor vehicle shall be 45 kilometres an hour and the maximum speed 100 kilometres an hour, except where otherwise indicated by a sign as prescribed in schedule A of the regulations 100 No motor vehicle shall stop on any express way except in the case of an emergency or when signaled to stop by any appropriate authority and no repairs or servicing of vehicles shall be carried out on any expressway or main carriage way of any expressway.
101 No motor vehicle may enter or leave an expressway, cross the central reserve or perform a U-turn except at locations designated for that purpose.
102 No motor vehicle shall be parked on the central reserve of any expressway, except in the case of an emergency; a vehicle may be parked on the hard shoulders.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you understand by prohibitions and how are they different from Regulations?
3.2 Traffic Offences On every road there are road users such as motorists, pedestrians, cyclists, motorcyclists, passengers and animals, it is expected that they use the roads in accordance with the rules and regulations.
Every road user should be disciplined, careful and considerate to others, to ensure safer roads, thereby, avoiding road crashes and or arrest and prosecution for an offence.
Traffic offence(s) constitute the breach of traffic laws made for the safe use of the highways throughout the country (FRSC, 2007).
92 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Motor Traffic Offences:  Being on any road without light or faulty lights, sign or reflector or wrongful use of signals.
 Obstructing any section of the road with vehicles or in any other way that may affect free flow of traffic.
 Using a restricted road when it is marked, “one way” or “no entry”  Not to obeying speed limit erected at road construction areas or any other road.
 Driving a vehicle without a valid vehicle licence or identification mark being displayed.
 Driving a vehicle without a valid learners’ permit, driver’s licence or any other permit required by law  Overtaking another vehicle wrongfully.
 Not to obeying traffic light signals  Disobey or disregard road signs or pavement markings  Driving a vehicle, a two or three wheel cycle on any road in a reckless or negligent manner that will be dangerous to other road users.
 Driving a vehicle or motorcycle with forged vehicle papers.
 Loading a vehicle above the weight or number of passengers required by law.
 Driving a vehicle with projected load.
 Obstructing a marshal in the performance of his duty.
 Using your GSM phone while driving  Driving under 18 years of age  It is also an offence against road traffic laws to:  Drive a motor or motor-cycle under the influence of drugs, or alcohol.
 Drive a vehicle or motorcycle or any mechanically propelled engine that would result in the damage to any public presence, street light, traffic lights, road signs etc.
 Engage in any act of commission or omission by motorists which may constitute hazard to other road users.
 Remove from a vehicle, the sign, “Do not move”  Use a road that is under construction.
 Fail to move over to the slow lane to free up traffic flow.
 Not to cover gravel or other unstable materials with tarpaulin or strong plastics to stop it spilling on the road.
 Not display number plates at the front and rear sides of the vehicle.
 Drive a vehicle with worn-out tyres or without spare tyre.
93 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  Drive a vehicle that is mechanically deficient.
 Drive a vehicle without fire extinguisher.
 Assault a marshal on duty.
 Corrupt a marshal on duty  For traffic offender to fail to report at designated stations.
 Drive a vehicle that emits excessive smoke  Drive a commercial vehicle without a passenger manifest  For commercial drivers not to have driver’s and conductors badge.
 For all vehicles not to be fitted with side and inner rear mirrors.
 Smoke or eat while driving  Drive a double-decker bus in Nigeria  Not to use your headlights during inclement weather.
 Fail to signal when changing lane, making a turn or pulling in front of another vehicle.
 Not to properly secure under-aged children in an approved child safety seat or booster seat.
 For any person to travel in the bed of a pick-up truck  For the driver and the front-seat passenger not to wear safety belts while driving.
This list is not exhaustive but only some examples.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State at least 10 traffic offences 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you learned that: i.
Traffic regulations are meant to safe – guard the road users ii.
The traffic offences are meant to punish those who violate the traffic regulations, 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the focus has been on road rules and regulations, and traffic offences.
It is prohibited to: 1. carry animal along the highway 2. carry passengers on the highways except at designated locations 3.
Off-load vehicles on highways except at designated locations.
94 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION The offences for which road users may be liable include:  Obstruction of the marshal,  Driving under the age 18 years,  Driving without requisite or relevant documents  Driving above the speed limit etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define traffic regulations.
2.
State four traffic offences.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
95 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 MISSCELLANEOUS MOTOR TRAFFIC LAWS AND REGULATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Marks on the Vehicles and Inspection 3.2 Reporting an Accident and Exemption 3.3 Provisions Relating to Drivers, Bicycle Riders, Pedestrians, Animals 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is not expedient to discuss every Traffic Law and Regulations as these are quite large.
However, some which are specifically referred to as miscellaneous motor traffic regulation need be highlighted because motorists have a tendency of glossing over them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define miscellaneous  list at least five miscellaneous motor traffic regulations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Marks on the Vehicles and Inspection The traffic regulations sometimes require that a motor vehicle or trailer shall have paint or mark words, letters, figures or symbols of identification which should be re-painted or other-wise marked from time to time.
Sometimes the responsibility is imposed on the owner of the vehicle or trailer to paint or mark the said words, letters, figures or symbols legibly and clearly distinguishable at all times.
These trade- marks are part of the miscellaneous motor traffic regulations.
You may have observed that in Nigeria, taxi cabs operating in different states have different colours.
Their plate numbers vary from state to state and from 96 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Local Government to local Government area.
The essence is to assist in checking defaulters and recapture in case of car theft, etc.
SELF–ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why should vehicles have different marks on them?
3.2 Reporting an Accident and Exemption According to the National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) Part 105, a traffic accident shall be reported to the police station and the commission’s office or any appropriate authority nearest to the scene of the accident.
It further states that: A road traffic accident shall be recorded as follows:  a minor accident where minor damage is caused to the highway and the vehicle and there is no injury to any person or persons.
 a serious accident where there is extensive damage to the highway and injury to person on the highway and  a fatal accident where the death of a person occurs regardless of damage to property.
In case of an accident, “it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to notify and invite the police and the vehicle inspection officer to take necessary measurements at the scene of an accident, record, analyse, and investigate and make a written report.
Some accidents may be caused by failure of brakes, engine manipulation i.e.
gear selection box; tyre puncture, over-speed and head- on coalition.
Vehicles owned by corporate bodies are always exempted from traffic search and checks.
In part two, the word vehicle includes carriages, wagons, carts, bicycles, handcarts, trucks, barrows and all other machines for the carriage of goods or persons.
The National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) under part 109 provides that vehicles and plants used in construction and engine are excluded from licensing.
The military vehicles too are exempted from search, obstruction and other requirements such as presentation of relevant particulars of the vehicles and drivers.
One thing is required of corporation vehicles, that is, maintenance so as to be fit in the use of the highways.
SELF–ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Differentiate between minor and serious accident.
97 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Provisions Relating to Drivers, Bicycle Riders, Pedestrians, Animals etc The National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) has spelt out provisions for drivers, bicycle riders, pedestrians, and animals on our roads.
1.
Bicycle riders: Part 108 of NRTR (2004) states that no person shall on any highway ride a bicycle not fitted with two efficient brakes, and efficient bell, horn and other appliance for giving audible warning of approach or ride a bicycle which is at least 0.228 metres of the lowest part of the rest mudguard is not painted white on the outside or ride a bicycle beside another except for purpose of over taking 2.
Or fasten an animal to a vehicle so as to obstruct, endanger or annoy any person lawfully using such highway or 3.
Leave any vehicle standing without having a proper person to hold the animal which may be attached to same or 4.
Propel ago – cart barrow, truck, hand-cart or similar vehicle otherwise than by holding the pole or shaft or 5.
Ride or drive any vehicle or drive at a speed more than 12.835 varying kilometers an hour any vehicle carrying a load which projects 0.914 meters or more beyond either end of such vehicle or 6.
Willfully or by negligence prevent, hinder, or interrupt the free passage of any person or vehicle or animal etc.
or 7. draw up any vehicle so as to obstruct free passage along a street 8.
Cross such highway within 91.442 metres of any type of pedestrian crossing except on such crossing or 9.
Loiter on any type of pedestrian crossing.
10.
Be involved in any form of street trading; 11.
No driver, person or group of persons shall cause any commercial vehicle to load, off-load any passenger(s) except at approved location; and 12.
Any person who wishes to designate his premises as motor-park shall apply to the appropriate authority, which shall approve as it deems fit and issue a requisite certificate upon payment of the prescribed fee.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 State one provision which is applicable to all the movable objects on the highway.
98 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you learned of miscellaneous motor traffic regulations such as marks on vehicles.
They are necessary for easy identification of ownership, and useful in reporting an accident on the highway.
References were made also to some provisions for bicycle riders, drivers, pedestrians and animals on the highway.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you learned of the expectations from all road users and essence of respecting the regulations, considering other road users, and fulfilling all the traffic regulations.
Reference were made to the provisions made by the National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) which if observed are capable of avoiding road accidents on our roads.
Reporting of any accident on the highway is not only the hallmark of self-discipline of all road users, but also a requirement.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss with two examples: a. Miscellaneous motor traffic regulations.
b.
Marks on vehicles and provisions for drivers, bicycle riders, pedestrians and animals.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
99 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 MOTOR TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION, CONTROL AND DISPOSITIONAL MACHINERY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Agencies Responsible for the Administration, Control and Disposition of Traffic Matters 3.2 Functions of the Principal Agencies Responsible for the Administration, Control and Disposition of Traffic Matters 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The tasks of Motor Traffic administration, control and disposition of traffic matters are enormous and inter-woven.
In performing these tasks, many agencies are involved with various responsibilities.
This is what you shall be learning in this unit with focus on the Federal Road Safety Corps; the Nigeria Police, The Traffic Warden Corps, miscellaneous Agencies and person(s) authorised and the Courts.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  enumerate the principal agencies responsible for the administration, control and disposition of Traffic matters  mention the functions of each principal agency.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Agencies Responsible for the Administration, Control and Disposition of Traffic Matters The principal agencies responsible for the administration, control and disposition of Traffic matters include: 100 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  The Federal Road Safety Corps  The Nigeria Police  The Traffic Warden Corps  Miscellaneous Agencies and person(s) authorised  The Courts 3.2 Functions of the Principal Agencies Responsible for the Administration, Control and Disposition of Traffic Matters 3.2.1 The Federal Road Safety Corp The Act establishing the Federal Road Safety Corps (FRSC) also provides its powers and functions as follows: (a) making the highways safe for motorists and other road users; (b) recommending works and devices designed to eliminate or minimise accidents on the highways and advising the Federal Ministry of Works and Housing on the localities, where such works and devices are required; (c) educating motorists and members of the public on the importance of discipline on the highways; and (d) designing the driver’s license to be used by various categories of vehicle operators; (e) determining, from time to time, the requirements to be satisfied by an applicant for a driver’s license; (f) designing vehicle plate identification numbers and controlling the use of speed limiting devices; and (g) the standardisation of highway traffic codes; (h) preventing or minimising accidents on the highway; (i) clearing obstructions on any part of the highways; (j) educating drivers, motorists and other members of the public generally on the proper use of the highways; (k) giving prompt attention and care to victims of accidents; (l) conducting researches into causes of motor accidents and methods of preventing them and putting into use the result of such researches; (m) determining and enforcing speed limits for all categories of roads and vehicles; (n) co-operating with bodies or agencies or groups engaged in road safety activities or in the prevention of accidents on the highways; 101 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION (o) making regulations in pursuance of any of the functions assigned to the Corps by or under this Act; (p) regulating the use of sirens, flashers and beacon lights on vehicles other than Ambulance and vehicles belonging to the Armed Forces, Nigeria Police, Fire Service and other Para-military Agencies; (q) performing such other functions as may, from time to time, be assigned to the Corps by the Commission.
3.2.2 The Nigeria Police A Motor Traffic Division (MTD) Among the administrative divisions of the Nigeria Police Force is a Motor Traffic Division (MTD) whose functions include: (a) the co-ordination of police traffic control duties in the area of responsibility of the motor traffic division; (b) the advising of local authorities on the setting up of physical aids to traffic control; (c) the preparation of the plans of scenes of motor traffic accidents and the testing for roadworthiness of motor vehicles involved in accidents; (d) subject to the approval of the Inspector General, the investigation and prosecution of motor traffic offences; and (e) the maintenance of motor vehicle traffic statistics.
(b) The Traffic Warden Corps.
The Traffic Warden Corps is an integral part of the Nigeria Police.
Traffic wardens shall be employed to discharge functions normally undertaken by the police in connection with the control and regulation of, or the enforcement of the law relating to road traffic and shall in that connection act under the direction of the police.
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, a traffic warden shall be required to deal, inter alia, with the following, that is to say:-  General control and direction of motor traffic on the highway;  Assisting pedestrians to cross the road; and  Controlling vehicles stopping or parking in unauthorised places.
(c) The Highway Patrol When the Nigeria civil war ended in 1970, it was followed by a period of oil boom and execution of government policies of reconciliation, 102 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION rehabilitation, reconstruction culminating in massive movement of people and goods across the Federation.
Highway armed robbery and other forms of violent crimes emerged and accident on roads also increased.
The Federal Government responded by setting up a Highway patrol within the Nigeria Police Force and charged it with two main duties.
i.
Control of traffic and dealing with incidents.
ii.
The eradication of Highway robbery, general crime prevention and other duties as detailed by the Inspector General.
The scope of controlling traffic and dealing with incidents were expressly defined as:  Controlling the highway to prevent accident, traffic offences and highway robbery.
 Dealing with accidents that have occurred, sketching, crowd and traffic control, statement recovery and general actions at scenes of accidents.
 Dealing with all illegal road blocks and preventing molestations of road users by highway robbers and other undesirable persons;  Enforcing traffic regulations by various means.
 Attending to injured persons at scenes of accidents, traffic or otherwise.
 Removal of corpses from scenes of accidents to the hospital and completion of coroners’ requirements for legal actions.
 Removal of broken down vehicles where such vehicles constitute a hazard or obstruction to road users;  Removal of urban break down vehicles to places of security being either a place supervised by the Nigeria Police or such as may be nominated by the vehicle owner.
 Removal of other obstructions on the highway.
 Assistance at scenes of accidents in releasing tapped injured person or dead bodies from the wreckage of the vehicles involved.
 Controlling or extinguishing of fires of accidents and elsewhere.
Subsequently, the Federal Government disbanded the Federal Highway Patrol and set up the Federal Road Safety Corp to assume its traffic duties and equipments the Federal Road safety Corps is the successor of the Federal Road Corps.
103 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.2.3 Miscellaneous Agencies There are other agencies that control traffic.
Examples are:  The Military Police  The Naval Police  The Air Force Police  State agencies set up by different states authority and vested with powers over traffic matters in the state and local government roads  The Nigeria Security Civil Defense Corps  Any authorised person(s) 3.2.3 (i) Power of Licensing Authority or Police Officers under the Road Traffic Act and Regulation Power to inspect vehicle A licensing authority or any police officer may inspect any motor vehicle or trailer with a view to ascertaining whether the provisions of the Road Traffic Act or of any regulation made or permit issued there under are being complied with.
Power to stop vehicle A police officer in uniform may stop any motor vehicle with a view to ascertaining whether such motor vehicle or any trailer driver thereby is being issued in contravention of the Act or any regulation made or permit or license issued thereunder.
Re-inspection of vehicles The owner or driver of any motor vehicle shall, on demand of any police officer or above the rank of Inspector, produce such vehicles or any trailer driving thereby at such time and place as the police officer may append and submit as per such inspection and test as may be required with a view to ascertain whether the provisions of the Act or of any regulation or permit or license thereunder are being complied with.
Production of license Every owner or person in charge of a vehicle shall at all times when such vehicle is being used on a highway, keep the current license for 104 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION such vehicle displayed and shall on demand, permit any police officer, licensing authority or person authorised in that behalf by the Licensing Authority or examine such license.
3.2.4 The Court Any person, who fails to comply with or acts in contravention of any condition attached to any license or permit issued under the Road Act and Regulations, is guilty of an offence.
Any person who commits a breach of or who commits an offence Against any regulation shall, where no special penalty is provided, be liable in respect of each offence to a fine of one hundred naira or in case of a second or subsequent offence to a fine of one hundred naira or to imprisonment of six months or to both.
Examples of such Traffic Offences are:  Offences by person traveling in or upon stage carriage  Special offences against special Regulations relating to driving of commercial vehicles.
 Special offences by person in charge of hackney and stage carriage.
Some offences attract small fines.
Examples are: (i) riding a bicycle not fitted with at least one efficient brake and an efficient bell, horn or other appliance for giving audible warning of approach.
(ii) willingly or by negligence prevent, hinder of interrupt the free passing of any person or vehicle or animal.
(iii) drive, propel or park any vehicle or animal on any footway or pavement preserved for the use of pedestrian.
Most traffic offences are simple offences, and are tried in the magistrate courts.
A few are misdemeanors or indictable offences that could be tried summarily.
Some states have created special courts to try traffic offences and have given such courts extraordinary power in some cases, the states have enhanced the punishment for offences and the courts enforce them by imposing primitive sanctions.
Some states have mobile courts which move from place to place to try offenders on the spot.
105 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION Due to the complexity involved in Motor Traffic administration, control and dispositional machinery, many agencies share the responsibilities.
To avoid conflict, the various roles of each agency are clearly stated in the Road Traffic Act and other laws on Traffic administration.
However, there are some roles that are common to two or more agencies all aimed at improving effectiveness.
Therefore, if each agency diligently carries out its responsibilities, roads will become safer.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learned the principal agencies responsible for the administration, control and disposition of Traffic matters.
These principal agencies include the Federal Road Safety Corps, the Nigeria Police, the Traffic Warden Corps Miscellaneous Agencies and Person(s) authorised and the Courts.
You also learned the functions of each of these principal agencies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List five principal agencies responsible for the administration, control and disposition of Traffic matters.
2.
Briefly discuss the functions of any three of these principal agencies.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(1949).
Chapter 548.
Road Traffic Act.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(1988).
Decree No.45, 1988.
106 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION MODULE 5 ACCIDENTS: MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL Unit 1 Road Accident and Common Causes Unit 2 Prevention and Control of Road Accidents Unit 3 Management of Accident Cases Unit 4 Challenges of Road Safety UNIT 1 ROAD ACCIDENT AND COMMON CAUSES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Some Causes of Road Traffic Accidents 3.2 Effects of Road Traffic Accidents 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Road accident is an unexpected traffic event, especially the one causing damage to the Highway, the vehicle and injuries to the occupant(s) of the vehicle and it is a very common phenomenon in modern society.
Obviously, the population expansion and urbanisation in Nigeria as well as economic boom have combined to bring about increased number of vehicles.
Hence the ever increasing traffic routes to satisfy the voracious appetite of national and cross-national transportation in the mobility of persons and goods.
This situation has really given rise to an equally unprecedented rate of road accidents in which a lot of lives are lost and property worth millions of Naira are damaged.
In this unit, you shall look at the human, mechanical and environmental factors that cause road traffic accidents.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  outline the causes of road traffic accidents  enumerate the effects of road traffic accidents.
107 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Causes of Road Traffic Accidents Researches on Road Traffic Accidents have shown that there are three major causes of road traffic and these are:  Human Factor  Mechanical factor  Environmental factor Human Factor This constitutes about 90% of road traffic crashes.
Out of this percentage, drivers make up 80%, (David, 1999).
Human factor can further be classified under the following: Drivers: (a) Overconfidence: Drivers often feel that they are masters of the vehicle and road.
Failure to ensure good working condition of a vehicle, as well as observing safe driving measures while on the road may result in road traffic crashes.
This lends credence to David (1999) observation that between the late Eighties and the early nineties there was the problem of Nigerian elites who were discovered to exhibit symptoms of road traffic accident immunity delusion.
This mentality found expression in arrogance and apathy to road traffic regulations.
(b) Speeding: Drivers believe that the faster they drive, the more they impress themselves and others.
Intolerance and aggression are common among drivers.
This negative character fosters a fierce competitiveness on the road, as each driver tries to display his superiority.
Over-speeding and dangerous driving negate the principles of safety.
They forget that anything can happen to the vehicle such as tyre burst, brake failure, or pedestrian carelessly running across the road.
More accidents and casualties arise from high speed than what obtains at low speed.
At 100km/ph, a vehicle moves at 28 metres per second.
Imagine where drivers would have only 1 second to veer off the road which is usually less than 12 meters wide.
Drivers should not forget that they cannot control the road, weather condition and the environment, they can control their speed.
(c) Lack of Concentration: Drivers often engage in things that distract their attention while driving.
Such things include discussing with passengers, answering phone calls, eating, gesticulating, changing radio station or cassette.
These 108 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION distractions lead to lack of concentration and may be very dangerous as it takes only a moment for crashes to occur.
There is probability that the vehicle in front may stop abruptly or a child may run into the road suddenly; hence anything can happen.
Drivers must be alert, always anticipate danger.
(d) Tiredness: Some drivers of vehicle often undertake long journeys with little or no rest at all.
This makes the driver feel tired and sleepy.
It is a frightening experience to be driven by a driver who sleeps while driving.
They may drive off the road; sudden awakening of the driver may also lead to crashes.
Some drivers are known to resort to the use of stimulants and drugs as a buffer for staying awake all night but end up suffering from drug- induced hallucinations which lead them into doing stunts of impossible maneuvres and dangerous overtaking on the Highways.
Some articulated drivers work an average of 9 to 12 hours per day.
This leads to fatigue.
(e) Driving under the influence of alcohol: Alcohol can cause over confidence, poor judgment, lack of coordination and recklessness.
It is one of the major causes of road traffic accidents.
This is the reason why special tests are conducted to detect those who have been drinking, prior to driving.
Behaviour modification by alcohol consumption No.
of bottles percentage of Behaviour Concentration of Blood 1 0.010.02 Slight behaviour 2 0.030.06 Feeling of warmth and mental relaxation 3 0.070.09 Exaggerated emotion and behaviour or noisy or gloomy 4 0.10.12 Clumsiness, unsteadiness in standing or working in uncoordinated movement 5 0.120.60 Gross intoxication Source: The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) section 1, p. 4.
(f) Driving under the influence of drugs: Drugs can interfere with the ability to drive, e.g.
sedative (i.e.
sleep inducing).
Some drivers take Coffee, Kola nut as stimulants to increase their alertness.
Others take Indian hemp, which is a street drug, and sometime cocaine.
Such stimulants or drugs may work for some time and then tiredness and sleep suddenly creep in during driving, resulting in road traffic accidents.
Some drivers have been known to use chewing sticks to keep their mouths active, 109 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION with the aim of being awake as though drugs are substitutes for rest.
No.
They are not.
(g) Poor Maintenance Culture: One other equally disturbing characteristic of the drivers is the poor maintenance culture.
This tends to leave vehicles in weak operational condition.
They often do not check their vehicles to ensure that they are in good condition for the road before setting out on a journey.
They are indifferent to tyre pressure, brake fluids, trafficator and brake lights, and even state of tyres; they observe defects or short fall, they “manage”.
The poor maintenance culture can lead to road traffic accident and related deaths.
(h) Indiscriminate Parking: Parking a vehicle in the middle of the road for the purpose of changing a tyre or because of engine problem is among causes of road traffic crashes.
This is especially so at night or round a sharp bend or close to the crest of a hill where the vehicle cannot be seen afar off by other road users.
Some drivers of broken down vehicles do not give adequate warning signs to approaching vehicles and as such, others run into them.
In some cases hazardous obstacles placed on the road as improvised ‘C’ Caution to warn or divert traffic, are left behind after the vehicles have moved away.
This endangers other road users and may result in crashes.
Section.
10 (3) (i) FRSC Act 2007, in NHC (2008).
(i) Dangerous Overtaking: This is responsible for about 45% of all crashes (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008).
Careless over taking and poor judgment combine to cause road traffic crashes: If in doubt about your judgment don’t overtake.
Section (4) (i) FRSC Act 2007.
(j) Absence of Traffic Officers: The absence of traffic wardens or other officers at some crucial junctions in urban areas is also responsible for accidents occurring in metropolitan areas.
(k) Commercial Motorcycles: The integration of the commercial motorcycles into the national transport system is a recent development.
The motorcyclists launched themselves into the transport business without adequate preparation, training or orientation.
The result has been high incidence of motorcycle accidents-related injuries and deaths.
This in turn has led to recent outcry against the motorcycle riders, and consequent restrictions imposed on them in some states.
Passengers: (a) Distraction: Passengers contribute to road traffic crashes by engaging the driver in discussions and arguments.
These tend to distract drivers, causing them to drive without concentration or due care and attention.
110 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION (b) Nonchalant Attitude: Passengers board buses, taxis and private vehicles without even taking a look at the tyres to see if they are worn out and without caring whether or not the vehicles are over- loaded.
Sometimes they encourage speeding, in anxiety to get to their destination quick.
When passengers are silent at reckless driving or overtaking at corners and other dangerous practices, they are indirectly condoning if not actually encouraging such acts.
You can report this to the driver’s employer or to the first traffic authorities you encounter on the road, or demand to be set down at the next convenient sport if the driver persists on driving recklessly.
Experience shows that crashes claim the lives of more passengers than drivers.
On the average, for eight passengers killed in motor accidents, only one driver dies.
Section IO, (3.i), FRSC Act, 2007.
(c) Pedestrians: Pedestrians contribute to road traffic accidents by not observing road traffic rules and regulations.
Some pedestrians walk or run across the road without looking and ensuring that the road is safe to do so.
Others do not wear reflective dresses or clothes at night so that drivers could easily see them.
This behaviour contributes to road traffic crashes.
Mechanical Factors: The abundance of mechanically defective vehicles do not help matters on road safety and accident prevention.
Irregular and poor maintenance of vehicle can lead to crashes.
This disrepair may manifest while the vehicle is in motion.
This constitutes about 10% of road crashes, stoppages of the vehicle, or development of other faults which exacerbates, especially when the vehicle is on high speed and lead to loss of control and accidents.
In essence, mechanical factors have to do with malfunctioning of the vehicle which eventually leads to loss of control of the vehicle and invariably to road traffic crashes.
Examples of factors contributing to this include the following:  Malfunction of engine  Poor steering mechanism  Tyres burst  Brake failure  Failed wipers during raining season  Spilled oil  Exhaust fumes or smokes leading to temporary road blindness.
 Faulty security gadgets  Defective lighting system  Defective Horn 111 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  Faulty wheel balancing and alignment  Absence of rear mirror  Leaking fuel that may result in fire outbreak  Lack of reflective triangle  Incompetent wheel nuts  Electrical fault  Inconsistency in vehicle load design  Lack of seat belt (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008) Environmental Factors: Generally, it is believed that bad road causes more crashes than good road.
However, it has been observed that with the construction of new roads, crashes are known to be on the increase implying that human rather than environmental factors are more to blame.
However, environmental factors which may lead to accidents include:  Improper or absence of road signs and road markings  Pot holes on roads  Bad roads (Narrow, rough, dusty and winding roads)  Bad weather e.g.
heavy rain  Harmattan haze  Hot sun on roads especially in desert/savannah area  Collapsed bridges  Slippery surface  Fallen trees on the road or other obstacles  River overflow  Animal and human movement or obstacles  Storm (Nigeria Highway Code, 2008) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Name the 3 major factors that cause road accidents.
3.2 Effects of Road Traffic Accidents According to David (1999), Traffic accidents are known to claim the lives of Road users.
Many Nigerian youths die in accidents leaving the country with decimated manpower resources.
Automobile conflagration may occur on collision destroying lives and properties worth billions of Naira.
The human and material losses sometimes induce survivors to resort to suicide as a mitigation of misfortunes.
Bodies of some victims of accidents are never found, others may be charred from third degree burns, crippled legs and blindness.
112 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Victims suffer severe psychological trauma as a result of road accidents.
Such trauma includes sleeping problems, headaches, distressing nightmares, and general health problems.
Report of the European Federation of Road Traffic Victims reveals that: A large proportion of the relatives of the dead and disabled victims, as well as the disabled themselves, suffer psychological disorders.
The worst situation is that of the relatives of the dead.
During the first 3 years, 72% lost interest in everyday activities such as professional work, house work, cooking or studies, 70% suffered loss of driving, 49% loss of self-confidence, 46% have anxiety attacks, 37 experience suicidal feelings, 64% suffer from depression, 27% phobias, 35% eating disorders, 78% anger, 71% resentment.
After 3 years these figures, on average decreased by only about 10 percentage points, indicating long term and in certain cases even permanent suffering in particular, suicidal feelings, decrease only from 37 to 26% leaving an enormous proportion of relatives in extreme distress.
Traffic accidents often set a chain-reaction of negative consequences which result in social catastrophe.
For instance, students drop-out in the event of the demise of a bread–winner, and are forced to channel their creative intellect into crimes and other negative activities.
In the traditional extended family system, there are possibilities of confusion, frustration and other emotional manifestations ranging from misplaced aggression to psychic disorders, when loved ones and bread winners die in a sudden motor accident.
This is more so when benefits of insurance are in their embryo and state security or welfare policy does not exist.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention two socio-economic effects of road accidents 4.0 CONCLUSION There is an increase in statistics of vehicular accidents in the course of national and trans-national transportation of persons and goods.
The increased number of vehicles on roads are causing unprecedented rate of road traffic accidents which inflict loss of lives and properties.
The causes of these accidents are mainly human, mechanical, and environmental.
113 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have dealt with the human, mechanical, and environmental factors as the common causes of road traffic accident and its attendant effects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the causes of road traffic accidents 2.
Enumerate the effects of road traffic accidents 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David, M. A.
(1999).
FRSC and the Imperative of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria.
Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code.
Abuja: Detailwoks.
114 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF ROAD ACCIDENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Road Safety Awareness in Nigeria 3.2 Measures to Prevent and Control Accidents 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learned about the causes, effects, management etc of road traffic accident cases.
In this unit you will be looking into the prevention and control measures and the state of road safety awareness in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe the effort on road safety awareness in Nigeria  state the hints on prevention of accidents generally  list the preventive and control measures of road traffic accidents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Road Safety Awareness in Nigeria There has been little concern about road safety matters and road traffic accident prevention strategies and remedies.
Since transportation is unarguably intertwined with economy, the incidences of road traffic accident were relative to the very few vehicles plying the equally scanty routes at independence.
As the nation and people become more affluent, more vehicles are found on the roads and there is a greater need of road safety awareness, growing sensitivity of policy and decision deceased the risk hazards associated with road traffic accidents.
Population expansion and urbanisation further led to increased economic activities which in turn led to a numerical addition to vehicular statistics 115 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION to meet up with the sharply rising demands of a developing economy.
In other words, more vehicles began to feature in the ever increasing traffic routes to satisfy the voracious appetite of national and cross- national transportation in the mobility of persons and goods.
What Kalinda (1989) said of Zambia equally applied to Nigeria particularly during the oil boom or during and immediately after the post-war Rehabilitation, Reconstruction, and Reconciliation.
Kalinda said that: Independence brought with it dramatic changes in income and life style among the black population.
With more Africans occupying senior positions in public and private sectors….There was a good supply of vehicle population on the market which could be bought at random with or without motoring safety experience.
This situation gave rise to an equally unprecedented rate of road accidents in which a lot of life was lost and property worth thousands of pounds was damaged.
According to David (1999), This development was responsible for the first volleys of traffic accidents, which began to claim the lives of most productive population.
The need had therefore, arisen for government to give the road its deserving attention.
By 1972 the Highway Code for Nigeria was ready for use as a guide for driving on the highways.
This was a response to the mass movement of people and materials immediately after the civil war.
The Government also created the Highway Patrol Unit, as an arm of the Nigeria Police Force to deal with armed robberies and accident on the highways and document the incidences as well as the number of persons injured or killed in such cases.
The Road Traffic Officer (RTO) and the Vehicle Inspection Officers (VIO) also served as checks against violations of traffic laws.
The operative mode of the Road Traffic Officers was determined by the various Traffic Laws of different states of the Federation, while the Board of Internal Revenue regulates the administration of vehicle and driver licensing.
Despite these combined efforts, the rate of road traffic accident continued to rise with even more casualties.
Even though it has become obvious that modern technology enhanced the quality of the vehicles and the roads on which vehicles are used, incidence of road accidents and number of persons killed or injured did not abate.
The rate of increase in the number of registered vehicles far outstrip the rate of improvement of roads and the demand of road users far exceeded the available vehicles.
Get-rich syndrome propelled drivers into excessive speed, and other vices.
116 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION The rate of accidents increased side by side with improved economy, more people acquiring more vehicles and increased provision of roads and more roads flyovers by government.
The factor of the speed-vehicle and the unscrupulous driver together combined to fuel road hazards and accidents.
3.2 Measures to Prevent and Control Accidents Odey, Oko and Otibu (2005), state the general guides for the prevention of accidents as follows: (1) We must adopt or acquire sufficient safety education to develop positive safety attitudes and habits.
Road safety education should be introduced in the primary schools curriculum to develop road safety awareness amongst the pupils.
In addition, Teachers’ Guide, poster, leaflets and an activity book should be published and distributed to all Head Teachers, information Technology and physical Education personnel, and the pupils of all primary schools.
The activities within the book will help the pupils to realise the ever growing dangers of the road and make use of the traffic signals.
Talks on road safety should be delivered to secondary schools and higher institutions in Nigeria.
During the presentation, the students should be exposed to topics like:  The road environment  Hazards on our roads  Factors contributing to road accident  Some basic statistics regarding fatalities of pedestrians (2) Planning or ordering the environment to make it accident free.
Government should construct and maintain good road network in the country.
Enough road signs should be provided at strategic points to inform road users of sharp bend, pedestrian crossing, T-junctions, roundabout, dangers, etc.
Animals are not left out; every community should be educated to always keep their animals away from highways.
Road safety campaign on pedestrian safety need to be carried out.
The main objectives of the campaign should be to:  reduce the annual road deaths to the barest minimum.
 increase level of awareness and understanding of traffic codes for pedestrians on the road.
 develop responsible attitude amongst pedestrians towards their own safety.
117 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Generally, to create a safer road environment, it is essential to carry out road safety education to increase awareness among all categories of road users.
(3) Regular maintenance and repairs of vehicles is a very important factor in the prevention of road accidents.
Minimum vehicle safety standards should not be compromised.
Vehicle owners should avoid buying non-genuine and substandard properties like used or second-hand tyres and other spare parts for their vehicles.
Good maintenance culture should be encouraged.
(4) Avoidance of haste, confusion and procrastination while on the highway.
Always drive at a speed limit which is reasonable, credible and acceptable by the FRSC and other road users.
Over- speeding and dangerous overtaking should be avoided.
Drivers should always endeavour to abide by traffic rules, give correct, prompt, adequate and clear signals without any procrastination (5) There should be a constant consciousness of hazardous situations like reckless driving by other drivers, bad road network, mechanically defective vehicles, impairment of visibility on the highways, etc.
It is reasonable to always be conscious of your area of safety.
(6) Avoid the use of mobile phone while driving.
(7) Make sure you use your seat belt.
(8) Avoid drink driving or driving under the influence of alcohol 4.0 CONCLUSION The prospect of road safety in Nigeria depends on the level of public awareness and observance of the prevention and control measures as well as its influence on the rate of road accidents.
Therefore, it is incumbent on government to increase its effort in public awareness campaign and enforcement of traffic rules and regulations throughout Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY The efforts on road safety awareness in Nigeria have been previewed in this unit.
You also examined the prevention and control measures of road traffic accidents.
118 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the effort on road safety awareness in Nigeria.
2.
State the general guide for the prevention of road traffic accident.
3.
List the preventive and control measures of road traffic accidents.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David, M. A.
(1999).
FRSC and the Imperative of Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria.
Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
The Nigeria Highway Code.Abuja: Detailwoks Ltd. Kalinda, B.
(1989).
Road Safety Perspective in Zambia.
Paper presented at the second African Road safety congress, Addis- Ababa, 16th – 20th October.
Odey, C. A.; et al (2005).
Health Education and National Development.
Calabar: Ultimate Index Book Publishers.
119 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 MANAGEMENT OF ACCIDENT CASES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 What to Do in Case of Accidents 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Road traffic accidents are not straight jacketed; they defy the barriers of social status and class difference and occur without regard to spatiotemporal dictates.
The question of what happens after accidents is very important.
Thus, you shall examine the management of road accident cases; outline the responsibilities of the road traffic officer, owners of vehicles, vehicle occupants and the First Aider among others.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  enumerate the role of the road traffic officer in case of accidents  mention what the owners of vehicles should do in event of accidents  outline what the vehicle occupiers should do in case of accidents  recount the responsibilities of the First Aider in case of accidents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What to Do in Case of Accidents 3.1.1 The Road Traffic Officer The National Road Traffic Regulations (2004) directs as follows: (1) A road traffic accident shall be reported to the police station and the FRSC office or any appropriate authority nearest to the scene of the accident.
(2) A road traffic accident shall be recorded as follows: (i) a minor accident, where minor damage is caused to the highway and the vehicle and there is no injury to any person or persons; 120 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION (ii) a serious accident, where there is extensive damage to the highway and injury to person on the highway; and (iii) a fatal accident, where the death of a person occurs regardless of damage to property.
(3) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to notify and invite the police and or the Vehicle Inspection Officer to take all necessary measurement at the scene of an accident, record, analyse and investigate and make a written report as specified in Form MVA 26 set out in schedule 4 of these regulations.
Provided that the information required to be written down is detailed, the officer carrying out the investigation may attach written details to the form MVA 26 which shall be duly signed by him and notify the Vehicle Inspection Officer to inspect the damaged vehicle.
The Vehicle Inspection Officer shall after the inspection submit a written report to the appropriate authority as in form MVA 27 of schedule 4.
(4) The appropriate authority shall inform the Vehicle Inspection Officer for inspection of the damaged vehicle(s).
(5) Where death occurs, a duly certified medical officer shall examine the body so as to determine the actual cause of death.
(6) Any such officer to whom an accident has been reported before commencing his investigation on arrival at the scene of the accident shall determine the seriousness of the accident and where necessary: (a) If there is an injured person, ensure that the person receives immediate medical attention; (b) Remove the dead, if any, and clear any obstruction from the highway without prejudice to the material evidence, and (c) Place warning signs at a distance of 200 metres before and after the accident scene and ensure traffic is controlled adequately.
3.1.2 Owners of Vehicles The Nigeria Highway Code (2008), Part Three, Section A, specifies vehicle owner’s responsibility in the event of road crash, as follows:  Stop at the scene of the crash  Check if you are hurt  Check if anybody is hurt  If not hurt, leave the epicenter of the crash to a safe location, summon courage and assist others.
 State the fact of the case if asked by law enforcement agents.
 Get skid marks, other identifications and photographs.
 Contact your insurer and lawyer  Report the crash at the nearest police station or FRSC office.
121 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 3.1.3 Vehicle Occupiers The Nigeria Highway Code (2008) has prescribed the following:  If not hurt vacate the hazardous location on the highway  Give all necessary information  If hurt but can talk, explain where it hurts to the First Aider  Cooperate with First Aider 3.1.4 First Aider Odey, Oko and Otibu (2005), defines First Aid as an immediate assistance rendered to a victim of an accident or sudden illness before medical attention is sought.
It involves careful application of accepted principles of treatment, using facilities available to the First Aider.
Proper handling of casualties and facilitate administration which reduces the chances of complications.
The Nigeria Highway Code (2008), Part Three Section A, Item (iv) states that:  Every road user is expected have basic knowledge of First Aid.
 First Aider must have First Aid kit and be able to improvise when necessary (i.e getting things from the immediate environment to replace the item needed.
E.g.
part of clothing for bandages, light woods for splints etc.
 Ensure that you are safe before proceeding on the First Aid.
That is, leave hazardous location, remove battery terminals, put on hand gloves.
 Follow the A, B, C categorisation of traffic crash victims strictly.
 Never assume the role of a doctor, evacuate victims to the Hospital  Make use of by-standers when necessary in transporting victims.
According to Odey, Oko and Otibu (2005), the aims and objectives of First Aid include to:  sustain or save life  prevent further injury or complication  relief pains  promote recovery  prevent shock  arrest bleeding  prevent infection of wounds (tetanus)  resuscitate breathing 122 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION  allay fear and anxiety of victim through reassurance  convey the victim to appropriate quarters e.g home or medical centre  assist the doctor by supplying details of accidents or illness.
 remove the victim from danger zone e.g from fire or middle of a highway.
The principles or Golden rules of First Aid in order of importance are: (a) Make sure further danger is diffused (b) Assess the case quickly and prioritise the ones to be attended to first.
The Nigeria Highway Code identified the following four categories of casualties: i.
Casualties with life threatening conditions such as cessation of breath, or circulation of blood and the unconscious.
ii.
Casualties with serious injuries, head and spinal cord injuries, and casualties with impelled objects.
iii.
Casualties with fractures, minor injuries, bruises and scaled.
iv.
The dead and dying casualties.
(c) Most casualties with life threatening conditions are mostly the unconscious, move them with great care.
Before moving them, watch out for spinal cord injuries.
Put the unconscious in a comfortable position (prone or recovery position) to ease respiration.
(d) If the victim has stopped breathing, administer artificial respiration (mouth to mouth or mouth to nose respiration) (e) Restore Function of the heart by instituting the principle of external cardiac massage (chest compression) if heart has stopped working.
(f) Stop the bleeding, if any (g) Reassure the victim to give confidence of recovery from whatever condition he may be in.
(h) Control the crowd, keep them away to assure adequate supply of fresh air and prevent them from inciting the casualties.
(i) Do not remove clothes unnecessarily but only those that discomfort him or e.g.
tie, shoes, belt etc.
(j) Do not give the casualty anything to eat or drink (k) Handle casualty properly in a case of suspected fracture of the spinal cord.
Do not lift casualty alone until there are enough helpers (four to six persons).
(l) Transport the casualty to the hospital or any nearby medical centre without delay.
123 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Qualities of Good First Aider A good First Aider is one who is:  knowledgeable and skillful in first aid  resourceful i.e.
can improvise needed First Aid materials as the situation warrant.
 willingly make his services available to casualty anytime  sympathetic but cheerful  tactful  patience  self-Confidence or bold to withstand horrible sight e.g.
blood  thoughtful and considerate when treating cases.
4.0 CONCLUSION Road traffic accidents cause death and injuries to people and they can be more serious if the victims are not handled with care.
Hence a strict adherence to guidelines proffered in this unit by specialised bodies and the general public would go a long way in ameliorating the effects of road traffic accidents in our society.
5.0 SUMMARY The management of road traffic accident cases has been discussed in detail in this unit.
This was done with particular emphasis on the responsibilities of the road traffic officer, owners of vehicles, vehicle occupiers and the First Aiders in events of road traffic accidents.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the roles of the road traffic officer in case of accidents?
2.
Mention what the owners of vehicles should do in event of accidents.
3.
Outline what the vehicle occupiers should do in case of accidents.
4.
Enumerate the responsibilities of the first aider in case of accidents.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Road Safety Commission, Nigeria (2008).
Nigeria Highway Code: Abuja: Detailwoks.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
Odey C. A. and other (2005).
Health Education and National Development.
Calabar: Ultimate Index Book Publishers.
124 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 CHALLENGES OF ROAD SAFETY CONTENTS 4.0 Introduction 5.0 Objectives 6.0 Main content 3.1 Road Safety Challenges in a Developing Economy 3.2 Problem of Road Safety in Nigeria 3.3 Prospects of Road Safety 3.4 Power and Procedure for Prosecuting Offenders 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Despite technological advancement and improved environment including good conditions, the rate of road traffic accidents continues to increase.
In this unit, we shall discuss the challenges of road safety in a developing economy as well as the power and procedure for prosecuting offenders.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify the challenges of road safety in a developing economy  recount the problems of road safety n Nigeria  outline the prospects of road safety in Nigeria  explain the power and procedure for prosecuting offenders.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Road Safety Challenges in a Developing Economy According to David (1999), the second African Road Safety Congress in Addis-Ababa, Ethiopia in 1989 revealed that the road safety situation in a Developing Economy (especially Africa) still poses a great concern as shown in the following comparative statistics: At the global level:  500,000 persons die and 10 to 15 million persons are injured every year in road accidents throughout the world and 125 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION approximately 30 percent of these fatalities and injuries are experienced in developing countries;  Analysis of accident occurrence between 1968 and 1990 showed an increase of 350 percent in Africa, compared to the reversing trend in industrialised countries where car ownership per 100 inhabitants has been estimated to be ten times higher on the average, than in our continent; a recent analysis of the Global Burden of Disease, in assessing Changes in ranking order of disease burden for 15 leading causes in the world, shows that road traffic accidents ranked No.9 in 1990 and will probably be No.
3 in the year 2020.
At the regional level: Research shows that road accidents are the second highest cause of death for the 5 to 44 years age group in Africa.
This should be seen in the light of the fact that approximately 50 percent of the African population is below the age of sixteen.
Pedestrians and young road users have been identified as highly vulnerable groups; At the national level:  accidents involving children under 15 years vary from 32 percent in Addis Ababa to 40 percent in Abidjan;  a comparison on fatality rates for selected countries reveals very little change;  statistics on the risk of exposure in terms of vehicle/km still elude the capture in African countries, in Kenya the total amount of daily travel rose from 4.7 million vehicle/km in 1976 to 1990.
The African Road Safety Congress stressed that road safety is a human right and that the best level of safety for all road users should be sought.
It also emphasised: (i) an enhanced; (ii) a clear indication of and the need for better design of studies and research.
To this end, the challenge facing the National Road Safety Council or other coordinating bodies is lack of competent support staff and experts to assess the relevance of existing road safety.
Programme implementation and continuity, funding and follow-up of the actions undertaken, as preclude further improvements are additional challenges.
There is need for increased funding, the initiation of the in-depth studies and action plans to improve Road Safety situation at national, sub- regional and regional levels.
The essence is exchange of experiences and results in order to gradually increase available relevant knowledge.
126 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION The success in developing and executing such a programme will require initiatives supported by co-ordination, harmonisation and co-operation among those involved in the process.
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD and co-operating partners, realise the need for making concerted efforts in combating the road safety problems in Africa.
Hence the African Road Safety Initiative.
The initiative was also approved by the African Group Members of the Preventive Routiere Internaionale (PRI) during the PRI’s seventh world congress on Road Safety held in Budapest (Hungary) in 1996.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 When and where did the 2nd African Road Safety Congress hold?
3.2 Problem of Road Safety in Nigeria According to David (1999), the overriding hindrances which militate against public policies especially road safety policies in a developing economy like Nigeria include: The problem of utilising available though inadequate fund to effect enforcement of traffic regulation over a vast road network (122,000 kilometers) remains a serious setback in the country’s road traffic management.
More so, 32,000 kilometers of the roads are managed by the states and Local Governments.
This divided attention creates room for unequal maintenance.
The problem of inadequate fund and poor technological background compound the ineffective communication system.
This hampers operatives of law enforcement agencies and traffic security.
Also the high cost of vehicle spare parts regularly gives room for the supply and consumption of substandard spare parts and accidents caused by mechanically defective vehicles.
In response to the declining economic fortunes, some vehicle owners or drivers mix diesel with kerosene, petrol and kerosene, diesel and petrol and use these mixtures to drive vehicles.
These exotic products have led to vehicle failure; sudden fire sparks in mobile vehicles, and accidents.
Law enforcement is compounded by the presence of touts in motor parks.
They tend to destroy the enabling environment for strict enforcement and compliance with traffic regulations.
127 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION The country also suffers the problem of multicultural geo-politics and this is often manifested in cultural prejudices which are also expressed in a deliberate apathy to law and order.
While certain cultures interpret and apply the laws appropriately, others are intent on breaking it under the pretext that the laws are made for man not vice versa.
As a result, some persons violate traffic laws with impunity.
The failure of rail transport system and limited access to air and water transport have led to increased vehicular traffic in Nigerian roads.
Yet roads are in poor condition and facing increased stress.
The result is deteriorating road surface and accidents as drivers meander making it a delight for marauders who stalk road users at night causing traffic accidents.
Executing road safety programmes in an environment with poor road network, inadequate road markings and relevant road safety facilities as well as containing the hostilities of drivers and others who are ill- informed about road safety practices are a great challenge to road safety practitioners.
So also is changing the negative attitudes of road users which they have formed over the years, such as beating traffic lights.
Another great challenge militating against road safety is coping without such supportive infrastructures as library, training facilities, and technical materials, adequate communication equipment, operational gadgets, and barracks-type accommodation to meet contemporary international road safety standards.
There is the need for a motivating remuneration and welfare for agencies responsible for Road safety and security.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention three problems of road safety in Nigeria.
3.3 Prospects of Road Safety The prospects of road safety in a developing economy like Nigeria can largely be enhanced through the collation and dissemination of information.
A collaboration effort of Non-governmental Organisations, and the private sector at national, sub-regional, and regional levels and exchange of information and ideas with the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) need be encouraged.
A working relationship with the International Road Research Documentation System (IRRDS) and the Pan African Documentation and Information System (PADIS) IS OF enormous benefit to Nigeria.
128 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION These systems afford exploration and exploitation of information on road safety matters which interested member countries can utilise fully.
Access to the international road research documentation and results of current researches and computer programmes would facilitate transfer of road transport technology and road engineering.
David (1999) avers that prospects of road safety in Nigeria can also be enhanced by the production of a manual on low cost engineering counter measures for the country to fight the accident problems.
This is by eliminating or reducing the effects of dangerous road location or intersections.
Enhanced and improved public awareness campaign shall no doubt ensure a prospective road safety legacy for the country.
Nigeria cannot afford to lag behind in the quest for viable road safety programmes that are consistent with and relevant to the development of a road transportation system.
As Bongoy has said during the 2nd African road safety congress: The economic history of today’s industrialised countries, testified invariably that transport and communications played and continue to play a primary role in these countries, by facilitating the convergence of supply and demand, propagating the benefits of between men, who as we know, are both development, etc.
The importance of the transport and communications sector in any development process is therefore, quite pertinent.
Nigeria stands a chance of brighter prospects in road safety matters if it can implement a strategic human resource development.
Education, training and further deployment of appropriate managerial skill, and research are required to address existing problems in the sector.
The continuous improvement and sustenance of integrated approaches involving inter-sectoral co-operation among other agencies involved in road safety administration and traffic management remains a primary factor in determining the prospects of road safety in Nigeria.
An inter- sectoral and multi-disciplinary integrated approaches to rescue operations for victims of road traffic accidents through properly constituted administrative structure at national level as in the instance of National Network of Emergency Rescue Service (NNERS) also need be evolved.
129 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Table I: Road Traffic Accident Trends in Nigeria (1975-2004) In a bid to achieve the much needed safety in national road traffic environment, David (1999) posits as follows:  Objective assessment of existing policies guiding the development of the transport sector in general and road safety in particular  Development of adequate methodology for systematic application of road safety education and enforcement strategies.
 Analysing current trends and accident causation processes, factors and their main determinants on which to direct the design and implementation of road safety measures.
 Identifying the strength and weakness of road safety in terms of content and effect of road safety programmes at the levels of road safety management and administration.
 Improving the institution set up for implementing road safety programmes at national, regional and sub-regional levels.
Identifying the regional priorities, counter measures and potential funding sources as well as the human resource dimension; background training in road safety towards promoting image and added value for participants (p. 122).
Nigerians should redefine and imbue fertile prospects for the imperatives of road traffic safety in a developing economy if the above programmes are to be properly reinforced.
A re-organisation of the commission and appeal for change of heart by the motoring public has also been suggested.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What do you understand by: i. IRRDS?
ii.
PADIS?
3.4 Power and Procedure for Prosecuting Offenders The National Road Traffic Regulation (2004) stipulates that: Any uniform and non-uniform special Marshall employed by the FRSC shall have power to issue a notice of offence to an offender who is reasonably believed to have committed any offence specified in these 130 POS106 ROAD SAFETY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION Regulations, and the offender shall pay the prescribed penalty to an appointed bank and present the original teller to the commission or be charged to court.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Justify the power to issue notice of offence to a traffic offender.
4.0 CONCLUSION As an institution charged with the responsibility for road safety and accident prevention, Federal Road Safety Commission implements policies which aim at delivering better road traffic prospects.
The understanding of the inherent problems faced in the development of road safety programme clearly indicates the need for in-depth for studies and research directed at a thorough re-organisation of the commission and a re-orientation of the motoring public.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you learned of the challenges of road safety in a developing economy at the global, regional and national levels.
You also considered the problems of road safety in Nigeria, the power and procedure for prosecuting offenders, and considered some recommendations for improvement.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the challenges of road safely in a developing economy?
2.
Recount the problems of road safety in Nigeria.
3.
Outline the prospects of road safety in Nigeria.
4.
Explain the power and procedures for prosecuting motor traffic offences and offenders.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David, M. A.
(1999).
FRSC and the Imperative Road Traffic Safety in Nigeria.
Jos: Chohu Business Enterprise.
The Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Road Traffic Regulations.
Lagos: Federal Government Press.
131
